WELLINGTON MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
2018 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances 
of the Town of Wellington, Colorado 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF WELLINGTON 
Mayor 
Troy Hamman 
____________ 
Mayor Pro Tem 
Dan Sattler 
____________ 
Board of Trustees 
John Evans 
John Jerome 
Wyatt Knutson 
Matt Michel 
Tim Whitehouse 
____________ 
Town Administrator/Clerk 
Ed Cannon 
____________ 
Town Attorney 
Brad March 
SUPPLEMENTATION 
Supplements to this Code provide periodic updating through the removal and replacement of pages. This inter-leaf supplementation system requires that each page which is to be removed and replaced is identified so that the updating may be accurately accomplished and historically maintained. 
Instructions for supplementation are provided for each supplement, identified by Supplement number, date and inclusive ordinance numbers. The Instructions for posting the removal and replacement of pages must be followed and accomplished in sequence, with the most recent supplementation posted last. 
When supplementation is completed and the removal and replacement of all pages are accomplished, the Instructions should be placed under the Supplementation tab, behind this page, with the most recent Instruction sheet on top. Previous Instructions should not be removed, so that the user may refer to this tab section to verify whether the code book is fully updated with all supplements included. 
The maintenance of a Municipal Code with all supplementation is an important activity which deserves close attention so that the value of the code is maintained as a fully comprehensive compilation of the legislative ordinances of the municipality. 
AMENDMENTS 
Amendments may be made to the Code by additions, revisions or deletions therefrom. Those changes may be made as follows: 
Additions: Additions may be made by ordinance to the Code as follows: 
The "Wellington Municipal Code" is amended by the addition thereto of a new Section 2-2-90, which is to read as follows: 
(Set out full section number, title and contents) 
or if the location of the new section number or numbers is undetermined, the Code may be amended as follows: 
The "Wellington Municipal Code" is amended by the addition of the following: 
(Set out section title and contents) 
Revisions: A revision of the Code may be accomplished as follows: 
Section 2-2-90 of the "Wellington Municipal Code" is repealed in its entirety and readopted to read as follows: 
(Set out section number, title and entire contents of the readopted code section) 
or as follows: 
Section 2-2-90 of the "Wellington Municipal Code" is amended to read as follows: 
(Set out section number, title and entire contents of the amended code section) 
Repeal: Sections, articles and chapters may be repealed as follows: 
Section 2-2-90 of the "Wellington Municipal Code" is repealed in its entirety. 
PREFACE 
The Town of Wellington, a statutory town, has published its Municipal Code in a format which features the following: 
The Table of Contents is the table containing each chapter and article title, with reference to page location. Preceding each chapter is a chapter table of contents, also identifying each article by the subject name provided. 
The three-place section numbering system places the chapter number first, followed by the article number and section number, separated by hyphens. Each section may be cited by the chapter, article and section number which are in sequence within each chapter. 
The open chapter and page numbering system creates reserved chapter and page numbers for expansion or revision of the code without undue complication when changes are made to the code by supplementation. 
The Disposition of Ordinances Table identifies the source for the contents of the code. This table provides ordinance numbers in chronological order and location by section number for the present code contents. Thus, if there is interest in determining whether an ordinance, or a portion thereof, is contained within the code, the Disposition of Ordinances Table will provide that information. 
The Table of Up-to-Date Pages lists all of the current pages through the most recent supplementation. 
The Index provides references by common and legal terminology to the appropriate code sections. Cross references are provided with the Index when appropriate. 
Supplements to the code provide regular updating of the code to maintain it as a current compilation of all the legislation which has general and continuing effect. Without regular supplementation, the code would soon lose its usefulness as a complete source of the general law of the municipality. Supplementation is accomplished by the periodic publication of additions and amendments to the code. 
Acknowledgments 
    This republication was under the direct supervision of Peggy Lamar, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Cynthia Sullivan, CMC, Deputy Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Wellington, Colorado. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Wellington, Colorado. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Wellington, Colorado. 2018. 
STATE OF COLORADO
TOWN OF WELLINGTON, COLORADO 
ORDINANCE NO. 11-2007 
    AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF WELLINGTON, ADOPTING BY REFERENCE AND ENACTING A NEW MUNICIPAL CODE FOR THE TOWN OF WELLINGTON; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
    Be It Ordained by the Board of Trustees of the Town of Wellington, Colorado: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled the Wellington Municipal Code published by Colorado Code Publishing Company, consisting of Chapters 1 through 18, with Appendix, Tables and Index, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before the adoption date of this Ordinance, which are inconsistent with the provisions of the Wellington Municipal Code, to the extent of such inconsistency, are hereby repealed. The repeal established in this Section 2 shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that had been previously repealed by any ordinance which is repealed by this Ordinance. 
    Section 3. The following codes were previously adopted by reference and incorporated in the Wellington Municipal Code. One (1) copy of each is on file in the Town Clerk's office: 
(1)  The Model Traffic Code for Colorado , 2003 edition, as published by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, EP 700, Denver Colorado 80222, as adopted and amended in Section 8-1-10 et seq.; 
(2)  The International Building Code , 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington DC 20001, as adopted and amended in Section 18-1-10 et seq.; 
(3)  The International Property Maintenance Code , 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington DC 20001, as adopted and amended in Section 18-9-10 et seq.; and 
(4)  The Uniform Fire Code , 1997 edition, including Appendix chapters and the Uniform Fire Code Standards, 1997 edition, as published by the International Fire Code Institute and the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, as adopted and amended in Section 18-7-10, et seq. 
    Section 4. The following codes are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the WELLINGTON Municipal Code. One (1) copy of each is on file in the Town Clerk's office: 
(1)  The International Residential Code , 2006 edition, published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington DC 20001, as adopted and amended in Section 18-2-10 et seq.; 
(2)  The International Mechanical Code , 2006 edition, published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington DC 20001, as adopted and amended in Section 18-4-10 et seq.; 
(3)  The International Plumbing Code , 2006 edition, published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington DC 20001, as adopted and amended in Section 18-3-10 et seq.; 
(4)  The Fuel Gas Code , 2006 edition, published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington DC 20001, as adopted and amended in Section 18-5-10 et seq.; 
(5)  The International Existing Building Code , 2006 edition, published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington DC 20001, as adopted and amended in Section 18-10-10 et seq.; and 
(6)  The Energy Efficiency Construction and Renovation Standards Code , 1977 edition, together with all appendices and tables thereto, as published by the State of Colorado, Office of State Planning and Budgeting, 1525 Sherman Street, Suite 617, Denver, CO 80203, as adopted and amended in Section 18-8-10, et seq. 
    Section 5. The penalties provided by the Municipal Code of the Town of Wellington are hereby adopted as follows: 
(1)  Sec. 1-4-20. General penalty for violation. (Article IV, General Penalty) 
(a)  Except as may otherwise be provided herein, any person convicted of a noncriminal violation, as designated in Section 10-1-40(c) of this Code, may be fined by an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) except as hereinafter provided in Section 1-4-30 below. In addition, such person shall pay all costs and expenses in the case, including attorney fees. 
(b)  Except as may otherwise be provided herein, any person convicted of a criminal violation, as designated in Section 10-1-40(d) of this Code, may be incarcerated for a period not to exceed one (1) year or fined by an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or both, except as hereinafter provided in Section 1-4-30 below. In addition, such person shall pay all costs and expenses in the case, including attorney fees. 
(c)  Any voluntary plea of guilty, no contest or nolo contendere to the original charge or to a lesser or substituted charge shall subject the person so pleading to all of the fines and/or penalties applicable to the charge for which the plea was entered. 
(d)  Where any violation is a continuing offense, each day that the violation continues shall be considered and held to be a separate and distinct offense. 
(2)  Sec. 1-4-30. Application of penalties to juveniles. (Article IV, General Penalty) 
    Every person who, at the time of commission of the offense, was at least ten (10) but not yet eighteen (18) years of age, and who is subsequently convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to, a violation of any provision of this Code classified as noncriminal pursuant to Section 10-1-40(c) herein, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation or count. Every such juvenile who is subsequently convicted of or pleads guilty, no contest or nolo contendere to a violation of any provision of this Code classified as criminal pursuant to Section 10-1-40(d) herein, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or count. Any voluntary plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the original charge or to a lesser or substituted charge shall subject the person so pleading to all fines and/or penalties applicable to the original charge. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit incarceration in an appropriate facility, at the time of charging, of a juvenile violating any section of this Code. 
(3)  Sec. 2-6-70. Remedies for violations. 
(a)  The Board of Trustees may censure any elected official who willfully violates any provision of this Article. Such censure shall be in accordance with applicable state law. 
(b)  The Board of Trustees may remove any person other than a Trustee from such person's appointed office or position of employment with a public body when such person willfully violates any provision of this Article. Such removal shall be in accordance with applicable state law. 
(c)  If a contract or sale is consummated contrary to the provisions of this Article, the Town may void the contract or sale. 
(d)  Any person affected by a Town transaction may commence a civil action in the District Court having jurisdiction for equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this Article upon showing a willful violation of any provision of this Article. Before filing such action, the person shall present the claim to the Board of Trustees and give the Board of Trustees an opportunity to act thereon. 
(4)  Sec. 4-4-250. Collection of use tax on construction and building materials. 
    The tax herein imposed on the privilege of storing, using or consuming in the Town any construction and building materials at retail, shall be collected, as follows: 
(1)  Said use tax shall be paid to the Town Administrator/Clerk and shall be collected at the time permits are issued for building and construction. The payment of said use tax shall be the responsibility of the person applying for and receiving the building permit. For the purpose of this Section, the value of the construction and building materials to be stored, used or consumed as a part of any project shall be deemed to be an amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the total valuation or gross cost of the building or construction project as is stated in the building permit issued. If the tax is paid in this way, no further sales or use tax information will be required for final inspection of the project by the Building Department. 
(2)  As an alternative to the estimation procedure for payment of the use tax described in Paragraph (a) above, the applicant, at the time of securing the building or construction permit, may register with the Town Administrator/Clerk to file use tax returns and reports and to report and pay the tax monthly on the first day of the month next succeeding storage, consumption or use within the Town; or if the project is to be completed within six (6) months of commencement, then six (6) months from commencement, but in no event more than eight (8) months subsequent to storage, use or consumption within the limits of the Town. Furthermore, if the applicant chooses to report and pay the tax in this way, a final return must be filed and approved and all use tax paid before building inspection is made or a certificate of occupancy issued. 
(3)  A building permit shall be applied for within thirty (30) days of storage, use or consumption within the limits of the Town, or, in lieu thereof, the owner or person whose custody the goods are, being severally liable therefor. 
(4)  Town use tax is due and payable at the time of the filing of the return; and if the tax is not paid when due, a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the amount due, plus interest at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum, will be added to the principal amount of the tax. All such use tax returns and reports shall be subscribed by the taxpayer or his or her agent, and shall contain a written declaration that is made under penalty of perjury. 
(5)  The Town Administrator/Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to devise, publish and make available use tax returns and reports in and upon such forms as may be necessary and appropriate for the complete reporting and collection of the Town use tax under the provisions of this Article. The Town Attorney is authorized hereby to institute such legal action, suits or proceedings for and on behalf of the Town in any court of competent jurisdiction against any person from whom a use tax is due and payable, to establish the amount due and for collection of delinquent tax and any applicable penalties and interest. 
(6)  The tax imposed by this Article, together with any penalties and interest thereon, shall be a first and prior lien upon all of the property, real and personal, of the person from whom the tax is due, subject only to any liens of the State or the United States which, under applicable law, would have priority. Said lien shall become effective upon filing a notice of the same with the County Clerk and Recorder of any county in which the delinquent taxpayer owns any property, shall constitute a lien upon the property in said county, and shall constitute notice to all persons of said lien. Furthermore, the unpaid tax shall be a personal liability of the person owing the tax and the Town may pursue its remedies by foreclosing its lien, by proceeding personally against the delinquent taxpayer, or both, in which latter event, the Town shall be entitled to any deficiency after sale of the property of the taxpayer, it being intended that remedies provided herein are cumulative. 
(7)  A copy of the notice of lien shall be mailed to the delinquent taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the delinquent taxpayer's last known address, by delivering it personally to the taxpayer, or by delivering it to any member of the taxpayer's household at the taxpayer's usual place of residence. In the event the delinquent taxpayer is a corporation, entity or partnership, said notice may be mailed to any officer or registered agent of said corporation, entity or partnership by certified mail, return receipt requested at the officer's or registered agent's last known address. The delinquent taxpayer shall thereafter have ten (10) days from delivery or placement in the mail within which to apply to the Board of Trustees for a hearing on the issue of the deficiency. Upon timely written receipt of such a request, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall place upon the agenda for the next succeeding regular meeting of the Board of Trustees a hearing upon said issue. It shall be the responsibility of the person requesting said hearing to obtain information from the Town Administrator/Clerk as to the time, date and place of said hearing. At said hearing, the delinquent taxpayer shall have the opportunity to present evidence disproving his or her liability for said tax or the amount thereof. The Board of Trustees may, upon receipt of such evidence, including evidence given by the Town Administrator/Clerk, decide in favor of the Town Administrator/Clerk or in favor of the delinquent taxpayer, or may modify the assessment of the Town Administrator/Clerk in accordance with its findings as to the amount due upon the tax. 
(8)  After the hearing provided in Paragraph (7) above, or subsequent to the expiration of the period of time in which the delinquent taxpayer may make demand therefor, the Town Administrator/Clerk may proceed to file an action in the court of appropriate jurisdiction to pursue the remedies herein provided. 
(5)  Sec. 4-5-80. Penalty clause. 
    If any officer, agent or manager of a telephone utility company which is subject to the provisions of this Article shall fail, neglect, refuse to make or file the annual statement of accounts provided in Section 4-5-30 above, said officer, agent, manager or person shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00); provided that each day after said statement becomes delinquent during which said officer, agent, manager or person shall so fail, neglect or refuse to make and file such statement shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(6)  Sec. 5-1-845. Assessment of monetary damages. 
    To the extent the Town chooses to assess damages pursuant to Subsection 5-1-810(c), the Town may assess against the Grantee monetary damages for material cable system upgrade delays of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. For all other Franchise violations, the Town may assess monetary damages of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day. To assess any amount of damages from the letter of credit, the Town shall follow the procedures for withdrawals from the letter of credit set forth in the letter of credit and in this Franchise. Such damages shall accrue beginning the day following the Grantee's receipt of notice required by Subsection 5-1-810(a) or at such later date if approved by the Town in its sole discretion, but may not be assessed until after the procedures in Section 5-1-810 have been completed. 
(7)  Sec. 6-1-170. Renewals. 
    Any licensee may make application for a new license for the succeeding year and pay the required fee therefor, on or before the expiration date of any license issued to the licensee for the current year. Whenever any application and license fee payment therefor is not received on or before January 15 for the current year, and the licensee continues to engage in the business or activity for which the license was issued, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the license fee shall be imposed and collected and an additional five percent (5%) of the original fee shall be added on the last day of each calendar month after the expiration date. In addition to the above penalty provision, it is unlawful for a licensee to continue to engage in any business or activity after his or her license therefor has expired. 
(8)  Sec. 6-4-90. Suspension; revocation; receivership. 
(a)  Upon the discovery of a violation of this Article in any mobile home park, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall give the operator thereof written notice of the violation. 
(b)  If, within ten (10) days of said notice, the violation has not been corrected, the Town Administrator/Clerk may temporarily suspend the operator's license. 
(c)  At the next regular meeting of the Board of Trustees, the suspension shall be terminated or shall be made a revocation of the operator's license. 
(d)  In the event the license is temporarily suspended by the Town Administrator/Clerk, the Town Attorney may immediately petition a court of competent jurisdiction for the appointment of a receiver who shall be empowered to do all things reasonable and necessary to operate a mobile home park, including but not limited to the collection of all revenues and the payment of expenses. 
(1)  In the event the temporary suspension is terminated, the receivership shall be terminated, and all properties in the control of the receiver shall be returned to the licensee, along with an accounting thereof. 
(2)  In the event the license is revoked, the receiver shall continue to operate the mobile home park until a new operator is licensed for the park or until the licensee's bond is forfeited and the mobile home park is closed. In either event, all properties in the control of the receiver shall be forfeited by the former licensee and the owner of the land upon which the mobile home park is located. 
(9)  Sec. 6-7-70. Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), together with costs of any suit. Each additional conviction for the same offense shall double the amount of fine paid for the prior conviction. 
(10)  Sec. 7-1-130. Assessment and Collection of Costs of Abatement. 
(a)  A person found by the Court to have caused a public nuisance or allowed the nuisance to be caused or to continue shall be liable for the costs specified in this Section. Such costs, including attorney's fees, may be collected by the Town in a civil action or assessed and filed as a lien against any property on which the abatement was performed as specified in this Section. 
(b)  If the cost of abatement has not been otherwise collected, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall prepare a statement stating the date of performance of the work, the nature of the work and demanding payment of the actual cost of abatement and collection plus five percent (5%) of the abatement costs for inspection and other incidental or additional administrative costs. The costs enumerated in this statement shall be a first and prior lien upon the property until paid, and shall have priority over all other liens, except general property taxes and prior special assessments, relating back to the date upon which the abatement was performed. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the statement to the owner of the premises at his or her last known address. Any such owner may file objections to such assessment within ten (10) days from the date said notice is sent; said objections shall be filed with the Town Administrator/Clerk. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall issue a notice to said owner, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the date the Board of Trustees will hold a public hearing to review the assessment. Failure of the owner to file objections shall result in said assessment becoming a permanent lien on the property. In the event the Board of Trustees determines the assessment to be proper, the Town Administrator/Clerk, on or before thirty (30) days after said assessment hearing, shall certify to the County Treasurer said assessment which is to be levied on said lot, parcel and tract, who shall collect the assessment, together with a ten-percent penalty for cost of collection, in the same manner as other taxes are collected. The laws of the State for assessment and collection of general taxes, including the laws for the sale and redemption of property for taxes, shall apply to the collection of such assessments. 
(11)  Sec. 7-4-690. Abatement procedures. 
(a)  Hearing and impoundment. Any person owning or having in his or her possession or under his or her control any animal or premises constituting a nuisance in violation of this Article may be summoned before the Municipal Court to show cause why such animal should not be confined, disposed of or removed, or the nuisance otherwise abated. Upon hearing and a finding that the animal or premises constitutes a public nuisance in violation of this Article, the Municipal Court shall order the animal in question either to be confined, to be disposed of or to be removed, or such other relief as the court deems appropriate. 
(b)  Cost of impoundment. Any person who owns any animal that has been adjudged a nuisance or has been taken into custody pursuant to this Article shall be responsible for the costs of disposal, removal or impoundment. 
(12)  Sec. 7-4-820. Impoundment of animals. 
    Whenever there is any violation of any provision of this Article, the Animal Control Officer, any police officer or any authorized agent of the Licensing Authority may impound any animal when such officer reasonably considers such impoundment to be in the best interest of the animal or of the public. It is lawful for an administrative officer or other authorized person to go upon private property for the purpose of catching any animal for impoundment and to use any means reasonably available to effect such impoundment. Impoundment shall be in the animal shelter designated from time to time by the Town. 
(1)  Notice to owner of impoundment. As soon as practicable after the date of impoundment, the Animal Control Officer or the authorized agent of the Licensing Authority shall cause to be posted in a conspicuous place in the Town for seventy-two (72) consecutive hours a notice of impoundment. The notice herein provided shall describe the animal, state the date of impoundment and set forth the location from which the animal was taken. 
(2)  Redemption of animal; impoundment charges. Any owner of an animal desiring to redeem such animal from the animal shelter shall pay a redemption fee as established by the animal shelter, unless an amount is established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs. In addition, if such dog or cat is unlicensed, the owner must license the dog or cat pursuant to the provisions of this Article prior to the animal's release. If such dog or cat is licensed but the license has been lost, the license tag must be replaced prior to the release of the dog or cat. 
(3)  Sale or other disposal of impounded animals. Any animal not reclaimed by the owner shall be held by the animal shelter for a minimum of five (5) days after acquisition by the animal shelter before it may become available for adoption or otherwise disposed of at the discretion of the animal shelter; except that an animal shelter supervisor may determine that an animal without identification, including but not limited to a microchip or collar, may be disposed of in three (3) days if the animal shelter supervisor determines that the animal shelter has no additional resources for such animal or determines that such animal is dangerous. For purposes of this Subsection, days means the days during which the animal shelter is open to the public. Animals which, in the opinion of a veterinarian or the animal shelter supervisor if a veterinarian is not available, are experiencing extreme pain or suffering, may be disposed of immediately by the animal shelter through euthanasia after the animal shelter has exhausted reasonable efforts to contact the owner; however, for animals with identification, the animal shelter shall exhaust reasonable efforts to contact the owner for up to twenty-four (24) hours. 
(4)  Liability for accident or subsequent disease from impoundment. The Town, its officers and employees, the animal shelter and its employees, the designated agent, any police officer or any other person enforcing the provisions of this Article shall not be held responsible for any accident or any subsequent disease in connection with the impoundment of an animal. 
(5)  Optional animal-at-large procedure. In lieu of impounding an animal found at large, any police officer or Animal Control Officer may issue to the owner of such animal a notice of Code violation. Such notice shall impose upon the owner a civil fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and order that such fine be paid to the Licensing Authority within seventy-two (72) hours in full satisfaction of the assessed penalty. In the event that such fine is not paid within the time period prescribed, a summons shall be issued in accordance with Section 7-4-700 of this Article. This optional procedure is available only for the first offense by an owner; second and subsequent offenses require a summons and court appearance. 
(13)  Sec. 7-4-830. Nuisance and animal-at-large violations. 
    Any person found guilty of permitting an animal to be at large, as defined in Section 7-4-160 above or a nuisance as defined in this Article shall be guilty of a petty offense and fined: 
(1)  Not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the first offense. Any person may enter a guilty plea and pay the minimum fine prior to arraignment in Municipal Court. 
(2)  Not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the second offense within a twelve-consecutive-month period. The Animal Control Officer may afford any person the opportunity to enter a guilty plea and pay the minimum fine. 
(3)  Not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for all offenses subsequent to the second offense within a twelve-consecutive-month period. 
(14)  Sec. 7-4-840. Vicious animal and dangerous dog violations. 
    Any person found guilty of keeping or maintaining a wild animal, dangerous animal or vicious animal, as defined in Section 7-4-10 above, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and: 
(1)  Shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and 
(2)  Shall be ordered to remove such animal from the Town within twenty-four (24) hours of such order, or within twenty-four (24) hours after the end of any required rabies observation period. Refusal to comply with this order may result in impoundment and disposal of the animal; and 
(3)  In addition to or in lieu of the foregoing, may be sentenced to up to ninety (90) days in jail. 
(15)  Sec. 7-4-850. Other violations. 
    Any person violating any other provision of this Article shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(16)  Sec. 8-1-60. Violation; penalty. 
    The following penalties, herewith set forth in full, shall apply to this Article: 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Article or the Model Traffic Code as adopted herein. 
(2)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision in this Article or the Model Traffic Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(17)  Sec. 8-4-20. Violation/unlawful parking of semi-vehicle. 
(a)  Except as set forth in this Article, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a semivehicle on either public or private property within the Town, to leave a semi-vehicle unattended within the Town or to allow a semi-vehicle to be parked on private property within the Town. 
(b)  Exceptions. The following shall serve as exceptions to the prohibitions set forth in this Article: 
(1)  A semi-vehicle parked or otherwise located on private property with authorization of the owner in the industrial (I) or light industrial (LI) zoning district. 
(2)  Properties which have applied for and been granted a permit allowing truck parking as a conditional use within zones other than residential zones where proper parking facilities exist for truck parking and access. 
(3)  Semi-vehicle loading/unloading to the extent the owner is able to establish that unloading is scheduled to occur at a business location within the Town within twelve (12) hours. 
(4)  Semi-vehicles temporarily inoperable. 
(5)  Semi-vehicles currently engaged in construction at sites located within the Town. 
(6)  Semi-vehicles owned by any governmental entity, including the State. 
(7)  A semi-vehicle issued a permit by the Town Administrator/Clerk authorizing the semi-vehicle to be located within the Town at a specific location for a period of not more than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(18)  Sec. 10-8-90. Illegal possession or consumption by an underage person. 
(a)  Any person under twenty-one (21) years of age who possesses or consumes ethyl alcohol anywhere in the State commits illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person. Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person is a strict liability offense. 
(b)  Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person is a Class 2 petty offense and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). The court, upon sentencing a defendant pursuant to this paragraph, may, in addition to any fine, order that the defendant perform up to twenty-four (24) hours of useful public service, subject to the conditions and restrictions of Section 18-1.3-507, C.R.S., and may further order that the defendant submit to and complete an alcohol education program or an alcohol treatment program at such defendant's own expense. The penalty assessment provisions of Section 18-1.3-503, C.R.S., shall not apply to any charge under this Section. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the offense described in Subsection (a) above that the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age under the following circumstances: 
(1)  While such person was legally upon private property with the knowledge and consent of the owner or legal possessor of such private property, and the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed with the consent of his or her parent or legal guardian who was present during such possession or consumption; 
(2)  When the existence of ethyl alcohol in a person's body was due solely to the ingestion of a confectionery which contained ethyl alcohol within the limits prescribed by Section 25-5-410(1)(i)(II), C.R.S., or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed or intended primarily for a purpose other than oral human ingestion, or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed or intended solely for medicinal or hygienic purposes, or solely from the ingestion of a beverage which contained less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of ethyl alcohol by weight. 
(d)  The possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol shall not constitute a violation of this Section if such possession or consumption takes place for religious purposes protected by the first amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(e)  Prima facie evidence of a violation of Subsection (a) above shall consist of: 
(1)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and possessed or consumed ethyl alcohol anywhere in this State; or 
(2)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with ethyl alcohol intoxication or impairment while present anywhere in this State. 
(f)  During any trial for a violation of Subsection (a) above, any bottle, can or any other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can or other container shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can or other container were composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can or other container as "beer," "ale," "malt beverage," "fermented malt beverage," "malt liquor," "wine," "champagne," "whiskey" or "whisky," "gin," "vodka," "tequila," "schnapps," "brandy," "cognac," "liqueur," "cordial," "alcohol" or "liquor" shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can or other container was composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. 
(g)  A parent or legal guardian of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age or any natural person who has the permission of such parent or legal guardian, may give or permit the possession and consumption of ethyl alcohol to or by a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years under the conditions described in Subsection (c)(1) above. This Subsection shall not be construed to permit any establishment which is or is required to be licensed pursuant to Articles 46, 47 or 48 of Title 12, C.R.S., or any members, employees or occupants of any such establishment to give, provide, make available or sell ethyl alcohol to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
    Section 6. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Town to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 7. Ordinances adopted after this Ordinance that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to those provisions of the Code. 
    Section 8. Pursuant to C.R.S. §31-16-105, This Ordinance shall not take effect until thirty (30) days after publication. 
INTRODUCED this 23rd day of October, 2007. 
TOWN OF WELLINGTON, COLORADO 
ATTEST: 
/s/ (signature) 
      Mayor   /s/ (signature) 
      Town Clerk   (SEAL) 
ADOPTED AND ORDERED PUBLISHED on this 27th day of November, 2007. 
TOWN OF WELLINGTON, COLORADO 
ATTEST: 
/s/ (signature) 
      Mayor   /s/ (signature) 
      Town Clerk   (SEAL) 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/ (signature) 
      Town Attorney   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 2-2018  1-23-18 Omitted 1 3-2018  1-23-18 Omitted 1 6-2018  4-11-18 Omitted 1 8-2018  5-22-18 Included 1 9-2018  5-22-18 Omitted 1 10-2018  7-24-18 Omitted 1 11-2018  7-24-18 Omitted 1 12-2018  9-11-18 Included 1 14-2018 11-27-18 Omitted 1 15-2018 11-27-18 Omitted 1 17-2018 12-11-18 Omitted 1 18-2018 12-11-18 Omitted 1 19-2018 12-11-18 Omitted 1  
CHAPTER 1 - General Provisions 
ARTICLE 1 - Code 

Sec. 1-1-10. - Adoption of Code. 
    The published code known as the Wellington Municipal Code, published by Colorado Code Publishing Company, of which one (1) copy is now on file in the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours, is enacted and adopted by reference as a primary code and incorporated herein as if set out at length. This primary code has been promulgated by the Town of Wellington, Colorado, as a codification of all the ordinances of the Town of Wellington of a general and permanent nature through Ordinance No. ___-2007, for the purpose of providing an up-to-date code of ordinances, properly organized and indexed, in published form for the use of the citizens and officers of the Town. (Prior code 1.01.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-1-20. - Title and scope. 
    This Code constitutes a compilation, revision and codification of all the ordinances of the Town of Wellington, Colorado, of a general and permanent nature, and shall be known as the Wellington Municipal Code. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-1-30. - Code supersedes prior ordinances. 
    This Code shall supersede all other municipal codes consisting of compilations of general and permanent ordinances and parts of ordinances passed by the Board of Trustees. (Prior code 1.01.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-1-40. - Adoption of codes by reference. 
    Codes may be adopted by reference, as provided by state law. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-1-50. - Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code. 
    All ordinances and parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of Trustees, and in force on the date of adoption of this Code and not contained in this Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of the adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. (Prior code 1.01.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-1-60. - Matters not affected by repeal. 
    The repeal of ordinances and parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature by Section 1-1-50 of this Code shall not affect any offense committed or act done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract, right or obligation established prior to the time when said ordinances and parts of ordinances are repealed. (Prior code 1.01.05) 
Sec. 1-1-70. - Ordinances saved from repeal. 
    The continuance in effect of temporary or special ordinances and parts of ordinances, although omitted from this Code, shall not be affected by such omission therefrom, and the adoption of this Code shall not repeal or amend any such ordinance or part of any such ordinance. Among the ordinances not repealed or amended by the adoption of this Code are ordinances: 
(1)  Creating, opening, dedicating, vacating or closing specific streets, alleys and other public ways. 
(2)  Naming or changing the names of specific streets and other public ways. 
(3)  Establishing the grades of specific streets and other public ways. 
(4)  Establishing the grades or lines of specific sidewalks. 
(5)  Authorizing or relating to specific issuances of general obligation bonds. 
(6)  Authorizing specific land uses. Land uses, approved but not implemented within one (1) year of the adoption of this Code, shall be deemed abandoned unless the landowner obtains additional time to act on such land se with approval from the Board of Trustees. 
(7)  Annexing territory to or excluding territory from the Town. Annexations approved by the Town but not recorded with the County Clerk and Recorder shall be deemed abandoned if not properly recorded in the records of the County Clerk and Recorder within one (1) year of the date of adoption of this Code unless the annexor or landowner obtains approval granting additional time for the recordation of such approved annexation plat from the Board of Trustees. 
(8)  Dedicating or accepting any specific plat or subdivision. Subdivision plats approved by the Board of Trustees but not recorded with the County Clerk and Recorder shall be deemed abandoned if not properly recorded in the records of the County Clerk and Recorder within one (1) year of the date of adoption of this Code unless the landowner obtains approval granting additional time for the recordation of such approved plat from the Board of Trustees. 
(9)  Calling or providing for a specific election. 
(10)  Authorizing specific contracts for purchase or for beneficial use of water by the Town. 
(11)  Approving or authorizing specific contracts with the State, with other governmental bodies or with others. 
(12)  Authorizing a specific lease, sale or purchase of property. 
(13)  Granting rights-of-way or other rights and privileges to specific railroad companies or other public carriers. 
(14)  Granting a specific gas company or other public utility the right or privilege of constructing lines in the streets and alleys or of otherwise using the streets and alleys. 
(15)  Granting a franchise to a specific public utility company or establishing rights for or otherwise regulating a specific public utility company. 
(16)  Appropriating money. 
(17)  Levying a temporary tax or fixing a temporary tax rate. 
(18)  Relating to salaries. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-1-80. - Changes in previously adopted ordinances. 
    In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Town for adoption and revision as part of this Code, certain grammatical changes and other changes were made in one (1) or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Trustees that all such changes be adopted as part of this Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such. (Prior code 1.03.01) 
ARTICLE 2 - Definitions and Usage 

Sec. 1-2-10. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the Town of Wellington or any codification of the same, shall be construed as defined in this Section, unless a different meaning is intended from the context or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
    Board of Trustees means the Board of Trustees of the Town of Wellington. 
    Code means the Wellington Municipal Code as published and subsequently amended, unless the context requires otherwise. 
    County means the County of Larimer, Colorado. 
    C.R.S. means the Colorado Revised Statutes, including all amendments thereto. 
    Day means the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following. 
    Daytime means the period of time between sunrise and sunset. 
    Employee means a person employed by the Town. 
    Enforcement officer means the person appointed by the Town to enforce Town codes, including this Code. 
    Fire Department means the Wellington Fire Protection District. 
    Law denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the State of Colorado, the ordinances of the Town and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
    May is permissive. 
    Misdemeanor means and is to be construed as meaning violation and is not intended to mean crime or criminal conduct. 
    Month means a calendar month. 
    Nighttime means the period of time between sunset and sunrise. 
    Oath shall be construed to include an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed. 
    Officer means an appointed or elected official of the Town, including the Town Administrator/Clerk, Town Treasurer, Town Attorney, Municipal Judge, Municipal Court Clerk, Mayor and any Trustee. 
    Ordinance means a law of the Town; provided that a temporary or special law, administrative action, order or directive may be in the form of a resolution. 
    Owner, applied to a building, land, motorized vehicle, animal or other real or personal property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or any other person with a possessory interest in the whole or a part of said building, real estate interest, motor vehicle, animal or other real or personal property. 
    Peace officer, for the purposes of enforcement within the Town, means any peace officer of the County Sheriff's Department or any peace officer employed by the Town as a law enforcement officer, but excluding the Enforcement Officer; however, the Enforcement Officer may issue summons and notices of violations and perform such other acts as authorized by this Code. 
    Person means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, firm, partnership, club, company, corporation, association, business, trust or organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them, and includes a person as defined by Section 2-4-401(8), C.R.S. 
    Personal property includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
    Police Department means members of the Larimer County Sheriff's Department or any employee of the Town appointed by the Board of Trustees to act as a peace officer. 
    Preceding and following mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property includes real, tangible and intangible personal property. 
    Public way includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway highway, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare. 
    Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall and must are both mandatory. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street running adjacent to a street, including sidewalks within the area between the curb line of the street and the adjacent property line, which walkway is intended for pedestrian travel. 
    State means the State of Colorado. 
    Street includes any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley or other public thoroughfare in the Town which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this State. 
    Tenant and occupant, applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies all or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Town means the Town of Wellington, Colorado, or the area within the territorial limits of the Town of Wellington, Colorado, and such territory outside of the Town over which the Town has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
    Written includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
    Year means a calendar year, unless otherwise expressed. (Prior code 1.05.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-2-20. - Relationship of definitions in Land Use Code to other codes. 
    Where a conflict occurs in which definition to use in the Land Use Code between definitions in this Code or in other codes adopted by reference, the most restrictive definition or the definition with the higher standards shall govern. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-2-30. - Computation of time. 
    The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; but if the time for an act to be done shall fall on Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, the act shall be done upon the next regular business day following such Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. (Prior code 1.05.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-2-40. - Title of office. 
    Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the Town, or any designated representative. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-2-50. - Usage of terms. 
    All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Prior code 1.05.02) 
Sec. 1-2-60. - Grammatical interpretation. 
    The following grammatical rules shall apply to this Code and to Town ordinances: 
(1)  Any gender includes the other genders. 
(2)  The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(4)  Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 3 - General 

Sec. 1-3-10. - Titles and headings not part of Code. 
    Chapter and article titles, headings, numbers and titles of sections and other divisions in this Code or in supplements made to this Code are inserted in this Code, may be inserted in supplements to this Code for the convenience of persons using this Code, and are not part of this Code. (Prior code 1.03.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-3-20. - Authorized acts. 
    When this Code requires an act to be done which may as well be done by an agent or representative as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed when done by an authorized agent or representative. (Prior code 1.05.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-3-30. - Prohibited acts. 
    Whenever in this Code or any Town ordinance any act or omission is made unlawful, it includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-3-40. - Purpose of Code. 
    The provisions of this Code, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objectives and to promote justice. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-3-50. - Repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-3-60. - Publication of ordinances. 
    All ordinances, as soon as possible after their passage, shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose and authenticated by the signature of the Mayor and Town Administrator/Clerk. All ordinances of a general or permanent nature, and those imposing any fine or forfeiture, shall be published in full or by title only, as provided by Section 31-16-105, C.R.S., in a newspaper published within the Town. Such ordinances shall not take effect until thirty (30) days after such publication, except for ordinances calling for special elections or necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health and safety and containing the reasons making the same necessary in a separate section. The excepted ordinances shall take effect upon their final passage and adoption and the approval and signature of the Mayor, if they are adopted by an affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-3-70. - Amendments to code. 
    Ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature, passed or adopted after the adoption of this Code, may be passed or adopted either in the form of amendments to this Code or without specific reference to this Code. However, in either case, all such ordinances and parts of ordinances shall be deemed amendments to this Code, and all of the substantive, permanent and general parts of said ordinances and changes made thereby in this Code shall be inserted and made in this Code as provided in Section 1-3-80 hereof. (Prior code 1.03.06) 
Sec. 1-3-80. - Supplementation of code. 
(a)  The Board of Trustees shall cause supplementation of this Code to be prepared and printed from time to time as it may see fit. All substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the Board of Trustees or adopted by initiative and referendum, and all amendments and changes in temporary and special ordinances or other measures included in this Code prior to the supplementation and since the previous supplementation, shall be included. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the Town Administrator/Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by the Town Administrator/Clerk, to keep up to date the one (1) certified copy of the book containing this Code required to be filed in the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk for the use of the public. 
(c)  The Board of Trustees may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof. (Prior code 1.03.07; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-3-90. - Certification of Code. 
    The Board of Trustees and Town Administrator/Clerk shall carefully examine at least one (1) copy of the Code adopted by the adopting ordinance to see that it is a true and correct copy of this Code. Similarly, after each supplement has been prepared, printed and inserted in this Code, the Board of Trustees and Town Administrator/Clerk shall carefully examine at least one (1) copy of this Code as supplemented. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall then insert a certificate in the front of said true and correct copy of this Code certifying substantially that the copy is a true and correct copy containing all permanent and general ordinances passed or adopted since the previous supplement. Both the Mayor and the Town Administrator/Clerk shall sign the certificate and the Town Administrator/Clerk shall seal it with the seal of the Town. The copy of this Code as originally adopted or amended, certified and sealed, shall constitute the permanent and general ordinances of the Town as of the date indicated in the certificate and shall be so accepted by the courts of law, administrative tribunals and all others concerned. (Prior code 1.03.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-3-100. - Copy of Code on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of this Code so certified and sealed most recently shall be kept in the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk at all times, and such Code may be inspected by any interested person at any time during regular office hours, but may not be removed from the Town Administrator/Clerk's office except upon proper order of a court of law. (Prior code 1.03.05; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-3-110. - Sale of Code books. 
    Copies of this Code book may be purchased from the Town Administrator/Clerk upon payment of a fee to be established by the Town to offset costs of Code book publication and printing. (Prior code 1.03.08; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-3-120. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this Code are declared to be severable, and if any chapter, section, subsection or provision hereof or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall be held unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of this Code shall continue in full force and effect, it being the legislative intent that this Code would have been adopted even if such unconstitutional matter had not been included therein. It is further declared that, if any provision or part of this Code, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the application thereof to other persons shall not be affected thereby. (Prior code 1.04.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-3-130. - Application of stringent standards. 
    When any requirements of this Code are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations resolutions or ordinances, the one which is most restrictive or which requires the higher standards shall apply. (Prior code 1.04.05; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 4 - General Penalty 

Sec. 1-4-10. - Violations. 
    It is a violation of this Code for any person to do any act which is forbidden or declared to be unlawful or to fail to do or perform any act required in this Code. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-4-20. - General penalty for violation. 
(a)  Except as may otherwise be provided herein, any person convicted of a noncriminal violation, as designated in Section 10-1-40(c) of this Code, may be fined by an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) except as hereinafter provided in Section 1-4-30 below. In addition, such person shall pay all costs and expenses in the case, including attorney fees. 
(b)  Except as may otherwise be provided herein, any person convicted of a criminal violation, as designated in Section 10-1-40(d) of this Code, may be incarcerated for a period not to exceed one (1) year or fined by an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or both, except as hereinafter provided in Section 1-4-30 below. In addition, such person shall pay all costs and expenses in the case, including attorney fees. 
(c)  Any voluntary plea of guilty, no contest or nolo contendere to the original charge or to a lesser or substituted charge shall subject the person so pleading to all of the fines and/or penalties applicable to the charge for which the plea was entered. 
(d)  Where any violation is a continuing offense, each day that the violation continues shall be considered and held to be a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-106; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-4-30. - Application of penalties to juveniles. 
    Every person who, at the time of commission of the offense, was at least ten (10) but not yet eighteen (18) years of age, and who is subsequently convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to, a violation of any provision of this Code classified as noncriminal pursuant to Section 10-1-40(c) herein, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation or count. Every such juvenile who is subsequently convicted of or pleads guilty, no contest or nolo contendere to a violation of any provision of this Code classified as criminal pursuant to Section 10-1-40(d) herein, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or count. Any voluntary plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the original charge or to a lesser or substituted charge shall subject the person so pleading to all fines and/or penalties applicable to the original charge. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit incarceration in an appropriate facility, at the time of charging, of a juvenile violating any section of this Code. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-107; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-4-40. - Altering or tampering with Code; penalty. 
    Any person who shall alter, change or amend this Code, except in the manner prescribed in this Article, or who shall alter or tamper with this Code in any manner so as to cause the ordinances of the Town to be misrepresented thereby, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in this Article. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-4-50. - Penalty for violations of ordinances adopted after adoption of Code. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of any ordinance of a permanent and general nature passed or adopted after adoption of this Code, either before or after it has been inserted in this Code by a supplement, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided by Section 1-4-20 unless another penalty is specifically provided for the violation. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 5 - Inspections 

Sec. 1-5-10. - Entry. 
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this Code or any ordinance, or whenever there is probable cause to believe that there exists an ordinance violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the Town, any public inspector of the Town may, upon presentation of proper credentials and upon obtaining permission of the occupant or if unoccupied, the owner, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the public inspector by ordinance. In the event the occupant, or if unoccupied, the owner, refuses entry to such building or premises, or the public inspector is unable to obtain permission of such occupant or owner to enter such building or premises, the public inspector is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-5-20. - Authority to enter premises under emergency. 
    Law enforcement officers certified with the State, members of the Fire Department, other fire departments operating under a mutual assistance agreement or automatic aid agreement with the Town, certified emergency medical technicians and paramedics during the course of employment with a governmental agency are hereby granted the authority to enter private residences within the Town without invitation from the occupant of the residence at any time such person has reasonable grounds to believe a medical emergency is in progress within the subject premises and the occupant of such premises is incapable of consenting to the entry because of such medical emergency. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 1-5-30. - Announcement of purpose and authority to enter premises. 
    Unauthorized entry pursuant to Section 1-5-20 shall be permissible only after the individuals seeking entry have announced both their purpose and authority in a loud and conspicuous voice and have waited a reasonable period of time for the occupant to respond before making entry. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 6 - Seal 

Sec. 1-6-10. - Corporate seal. 
    A seal shall be and is hereby declared to be the official Seal of the Town, the impression of which is as follows: in the center the word "Seal," surrounded by the words "Town of Wellington, Colorado," (Prior code 2.12.01 (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
CHAPTER 2 - Administration 
ARTICLE 1 - Elections 

Sec. 2-1-10. - Conduct of elections. 
    All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-1-20. - Write-in candidate affidavit. 
    No write-in vote for any municipal office shall be counted unless the candidate files an affidavit of intent with the Town Administrator/Clerk prior to twenty (20) days before the election, indicating that such person desires the office and is qualified to assume the duties of that office if elected. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-1-30. - Cancellation of election. 
(a)  If the only matter before the voters is the election of persons to office and if, at the close of business on the nineteenth day before the election, there are not more candidates than offices to be filled at such election, including candidates filing affidavits of intent as set forth in Section 2-1-20, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall certify such fact to the Board of Trustees; and the Board of Trustees shall hold a meeting and may cancel the election and by resolution declare the candidates elected. 
(b)  The Town Administrator/Clerk shall publish notice of such cancellation, if possible, in order to inform the electors of the Town, and notice of such cancellation shall be posted at each polling place and in not less than one (1) other public place. (Prior code 4.01.15; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 2 - Mayor and Board of Trustees 

Sec. 2-2-10. - Board of Trustees terms, vacancies, authority, qualifications. 
(a)  Terms. The term of office for all members of the Board of Trustees shall be four (4) years. All Trustees shall be elected in the Town at large. At the April 7, 1992 regular election, three (3) Trustees designated as Group A were elected for four-year terms which were to be completed in 1996; and one (1) or more Trustees, as may be required due to vacancies during the present term, were elected to fill the unexpired portion of four-year terms to be completed in 1994, being served by three (3) Trustees designated as Group B, were elected or appointed to fill terms to be completed in 1994. Thereafter, the two (2) groups of three (3) Trustees each, designated as Groups A and B, will stand for election on alternate even-numbered years. 
(b)  Authority. The Board of Trustees shall constitute the legislative body of the Town, shall have the power and authority, except as otherwise provided by statute, to exercise all power conferred upon or possessed by the Town, and shall have the power and authority to adopt such laws, ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise thereof. 
(c)  Qualifications. Each Trustee shall be a resident of the Town and a registered elector therein who has resided within the Town limits for a period of at least twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date of the election; provided, however, that in case of annexation, any person who has resided within the annexed territory or within the Town limits and the annexed territory for the time set forth in this Subsection shall be deemed to have met the residency requirements for the Town. Following April 20 2008, if any Trustee shall move from or become, during his or her term of office, a nonresident of the Town, the Trustee shall be deemed thereby to have vacated his or her office. 
(d)  Vacancies. In case of the death, resignation, vacation or removal of any of the Trustees during their term of office, the Board of Trustees, by a majority vote of all remaining members thereof, may select and appoint, from among the duly qualified electors of the Town, a suitable person to fill the vacancy. The person so appointed shall hold office until the next regular election and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. If the term of the person creating the vacancy was to extend beyond the next regular election, the person elected to fill the vacancy shall be elected for the unexpired term. Where vacancies exist in the offices of Trustee and successors are to be elected at the next election to fill the unexpired terms, the three (3) candidates for Trustee receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected to four-year terms, and the candidates receiving the next highest number of votes, in descending order, shall be elected to fill the unexpired terms. (Prior code 2.01.02; Ord. 1-1991 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-2-20. - Mayor. 
(a)  The Mayor shall be elected each four (4) years to serve a term of four (4) years, with a mayoral election being held in 2010. The Mayor shall meet the same qualifications as a Trustee and, in the event of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, such vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as a vacancy in the office of Trustee, as set forth in Section 2-2-10 above. 
(b)  The Mayor shall preside over all meetings of the Board of Trustees and shall perform such duties as may be required of the Mayor by statute or ordinance. Insofar as is required by statute and for all ceremonial purposes, the Mayor shall be the executive head of the Town. 
(c)  The Mayor shall execute and authenticate by his or her signature all bonds, warrants, contracts and instruments of and concerning the business of the Town, as the Trustees or any statutes or ordinances may require. 
(d)  Except as may be required by statute, the Mayor shall exercise only such powers as the Trustees shall specifically confer upon the Mayor. (Prior code 2.01.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-2-30. - Mayor Pro Tem. 
    At its first meeting following each biennial election, the Board of Trustees shall choose one (1) of the Trustees as Mayor Pro Tem. In the absence of the Mayor from any meeting of the Board of Trustees, during the absence of the Mayor from the Town or during the inability of the Mayor to act, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-2-40. - Acting Mayor. 
    In the event of the absence or disability of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem, the Trustees may designate another Trustee to serve as acting Mayor during such absence or disability. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-2-50. - Compensation. 
(a)  The Mayor shall receive the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month to be paid monthly at the first pay period of each month commencing May 1, 2016. 
(b)  Each Trustee shall each receive one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month to be paid monthly at the first pay period of each month commencing May 1, 2016. 
(c)  The compensation paid to the Mayor or any Trustee shall not be increased or diminished for the term of office for which he or she has been elected or appointed. Any Mayor or Trustee who has resigned or vacated an office prior to the end of his or her elective or appointed term shall not be eligible to election or reappointment to the same office during such term if the rate of compensation has been increased. (Prior code 2.01.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 4-2014 , § 1, 2-11-14) 
Sec. 2-2-60. - Regular meetings. 
    The Board of Trustees shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month at 7:30 p.m. and shall hold work sessions, at which no action shall be taken by the Board of Trustees unless properly posted in advance on the third Tuesday of each month, (subject to additional work sessions at which no formal board action be taken, which may be held immediately prior to any regularly scheduled meeting). If the date of my regularly scheduled meeting falls on a legal holiday, unless the board otherwise grants approvals or cancels the meeting, the meeting shall be held on the next succeeding day not a legal holiday. All regular meetings of the Board of Trustees will be held at the Leeper Center building or at an alternate location set by the Board of Trustees. (Prior code 2.01.03; Ord. 7-1990 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2018 , 2-13-18) 
Sec. 2-2-70. - Special meetings. 
(a)  The Mayor or a majority of the Board of Trustees may call a special meeting at any time upon giving at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the Board of Trustees and the public. Whenever a special meeting is called, a written summons or notice, signed by the Mayor or a majority of the Board of Trustees, shall be served upon each member of the Board of Trustees, either in person or by notice left at his or her place of residence. The notice shall state the date and hour of the meeting and the purpose for which the meeting is called. No other business shall be transacted, except such as is stated in the notice. Notice of the special meeting shall be posted at the Town Hall and at two (2) other conspicuous places within the Town. 
(b)  The Board of Trustees at any duly convened meeting may, by majority vote, call a special meeting for a future date. Notice of such meeting shall be given to any member of the Board of Trustees not in attendance. 
(c)  Should the Board of Trustees convene for a special meeting pursuant to a request of an interested party for the purpose of accommodating time constraints of said interested party, the Board of Trustees may, in its discretion, assess fees for the special meeting against the interested party in order to offset costs. The Board of Trustees shall by resolution adopt a schedule of fees which may be assessed for special meetings. Said fees shall reasonably compensate the staff of the Town and the Town Attorney for time spent in preparation for attendance at special meetings. (Prior code 2.01.03; Ord. 7-1990 §2; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-2-80. - Conduct of meetings; voting. 
(a)  A majority of the Board of Trustees shall constitute a quorum to do business at all meetings of the Board of Trustees, and each member, including the Mayor, shall vote upon every question put by the Chair unless allowed by the Board of Trustees to abstain. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Trustees and shall have the same voting powers as any member of the Board of Trustees. Upon the taking of any vote, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall record in the minutes the names of those voting and their votes. 
(b)  At the hour appointed for meeting, the members shall be called to order by the Mayor or, in his or her absence, by the Mayor Pro Tem, and the Town Administrator/Clerk shall proceed to call the roll, note the absentees and announce whether a quorum is present. If a quorum is present, the Board of Trustees shall proceed with the business before it, in the manner and order as established by the Board of Trustees. 
(c)  The Board of Trustees may, from time to time, establish rules and regulations by resolution to govern the preparation and distribution of the agenda for regular and special meetings, accompanying documentation for agenda items and the minutes of previous meetings. 
(d)  The business of the Board of Trustees shall be conducted in accordance with the prepared agenda which only may be altered by approval of the Board. Meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be conducted by the Mayor, according to Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, unless otherwise provided in this Code, state statute or other policies or procedures adopted by the Board of Trustees. (Prior code 2.01.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-2-90. - Boards and commissions. 
    Consistent with this Code, the Board of Trustees has created such boards and commissions as may now exist, and may create additional boards and commissions in the future. The Board of Trustees shall serve as the governing body, may appoint members to or, if so authorized, the Mayor (with such approval of the Board of Trustees as may be required by this Code) shall create and appoint members to such boards and commissions as may now or hereafter exist, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Wellington Board of Adjustment; 
(2)  Wellington Community Activities Commission; 
(3)  Wellington Housing Authority; 
(4)  Wellington Library Board; 
(5)  Wellington Liquor Licensing Authority; 
(6)  Wellington Planning Commission; 
(7)  Wellington Sewer Enterprise Board; and 
(8)  Wellington Water Enterprise Board. 
    Various boards of the Town, created by this Code or otherwise, have members which serve by virtue of being a Board of Trustees member; any member of the Board of Trustees serving on another board of the Town shall be deemed to resign from such board on the termination of such member's tenure on the Board of Trustees; such resignation by virtue of the Board of Trustees member's tenure ending shall not preclude the outgoing member's reappointment to the board. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 4-2012 , § 1, 4-24-12) 
ARTICLE 3 - Officers and Employees 

Sec. 2-3-10. - Appointed officers. 
(a)  The following officers of the Town shall be appointed by a majority vote of all the members of the Board of Trustees: 
(1)  Town Administrator/Clerk; 
(2)  Town Attorney; 
(3)  Town Treasurer; and 
(4)  Municipal Judge. 
(b)  Said officers shall hold their respective offices until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-3-20. - Town Administrator/Clerk. 
(a)  Appointment. The Board of Trustees, by majority approval, may appoint an Administrator or Town Clerk, and may combine the positions of Administrator or Clerk into a single position, the Town Administrator/Clerk. If the positions are not combined, the Town Administrator shall perform the functions to be filled by the Town Administrator/Clerk, or the Board of Trustees may by resolution define the responsibilities of the Town Clerk. If not defined by the Board of Trustees, the Town Administrator may delegate responsibilities of the Town Administrator/Clerk to the Town Clerk. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall: 
(1)  Hold office at the pleasure of a majority of the Board of Trustees. 
(2)  Be selected solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his or her training and experience. 
(3)  Have a Bachelor's degree in business or public administration or equivalent. 
(4)  Be compensated for his or her services as the Board of Trustees may determine or as may be stipulated by contract. 
(b)  Oath and bond. Before entering office, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall take an oath of office and be bonded in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) conditioned upon the faithful discharge of duties as Town Administrator/Clerk. 
(c)  Functions and duties. 
(1)  Administration. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall perform the following duties: 
a.  Manage, direct, control and supervise all departments, agencies and services of the Town. 
b.  Attend all Board of Trustees meetings and be permitted to participate in discussion of items before the Board of Trustees. 
c.  Attend all Planning Commission meetings and be permitted to participate in discussion of items before the Planning Commission. 
d.  Attend, when reasonably possible, the meetings of standing Board of Trustees committees and duly elected or appointed boards and commissions of the Town to provide staff support thereto. 
e.  Provide information to the Board of Trustees and make recommendations to the governing body as deemed necessary for the good and efficient operation of the Town and its services; 
f.  Initiate investigations and conduct inquiries related to citizen complaints concerning the conduct of employees or the quality of municipal services. 
g.  On behalf of the Mayor or Board of Trustees, speak before public and private groups to explain functions and operations of the Town's government. 
(2)  Clerical. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall perform the following duties: 
a.  Cause and have prepared the agenda for regular Board meetings and such other special meetings as may arise. 
b.  Keep and maintain minutes of the Board of Trustees and Planning Commission proceedings. 
c.  Coordinate all meetings for the Cable Commission, the Board of Adjustment and other Boards of the Town. 
d.  Keep and maintain all Town records. 
e.  Be responsible for all municipal elections. 
f.  Certify, by his or her signature, all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the Board of Trustees. 
g.  Develop and prepare such planning documents as the Board of Trustees or Planning Commission shall request. 
(3)  Finance. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall perform the following duties: 
a.  Countersign all checks and warrants drawn on the Town treasury. 
b.  Prepare and submit a recommended annual budget to the Board of Trustees. 
c.  Keep the Board of Trustees fully, completely and timely advised as to the financial condition of the Town. 
d.  Exercise general supervision and control over all Town purchases and expenditures in accordance with the budget and such policies as may be established by the Board of Trustees. 
e.  Serve as coordinator for the Town's economic development activities with related federal, state and local agencies and with private individuals, groups, businesses and foundations. 
f.  Recommend to the Board of Trustees a schedule of capital purchases. 
g.  Cause to have conducted such internal audits as required and necessary. 
h.  Maintain current knowledge of state and federal grant programs, advising the Board of Trustees and Mayor of the same; and to prepare, submit and monitor financial grants and applications. 
(4)  Personnel. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall perform the following duties: 
a.  Appoint and terminate employees necessary for the efficient performance of responsibilities listed in this Section. All employees shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Administrator/Clerk. 
b.  Subject to direction by ordinance or resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees, and subject to state statutes, supervise, direct and assign the duties of all appointive officers and employees in accordance with responsibilities listed in this Section. 
c.  Recommend to the Board of Trustees a schedule of salaries for all officers and employees. 
d.  Perform other such duties as the Board of Trustees may direct. 
(d)  Recognition of Town Administrator/Clerk as Town Clerk. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall be recognized as the Town Clerk in any legal reference to the Town Clerk position by state statutes, municipal ordinances or municipal resolutions. 
(e)  Administrative organization. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall propose a plan of administrative organization to the Board of Trustees within ninety (90) days after his or her appointment, which, if approved by the Board of Trustees, shall be adopted by resolution. The administrative plan shall provide for such departments and employees as may be deemed necessary for the efficient administration of the Town. All such employees shall be appointed by the Town Administrator/Clerk with approval of the Board of Trustees. 
(f)  Relationship of Board of Trustees to Town Administrator/Clerk: 
(1)  Not less than once a year, the Board of Trustees shall review the performance of the Town Administrator/Clerk in relation to duties outlined above and the attainment of Board goals and objectives. The Board of Trustees may increase the Town Administrator/Clerk's base salary or benefits. 
(2)  Except for the purposes of inquiry, the Mayor and the Board of Trustees shall deal with the Town Administrator/Clerk solely through the Board of Trustees, and neither the Mayor nor the Board of Trustees shall give direction to any subordinate of the Town Administrator/Clerk. 
(g)  Intent. Nothing in this Section shall impair the responsibility of the Board of Trustees for the overall operation of the Town government as required by state law. (Prior code 2.03; Ord. 9-1996 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 9-2017 , § 1, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 2-3-30. - Town Treasurer. 
(a)  Appointment. The Board of Trustees, at its first regular meeting after each biennial election, shall appoint a qualified Town Treasurer. In case a vacancy should occur in the office of Treasurer, the Board of Trustees shall appoint a Treasurer for the unexpired term. 
(b)  Oath and bond. Before entering upon the duties of the office, the Town Treasurer shall take an oath of office and shall be bonded in the amount of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), to be approved by the Board of Trustees, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties as Town Treasurer. On vacating the office, the Town Treasurer will turn over and deliver to any successor all Town monies, books, papers, property or things belonging in the Town Treasurer's charge. 
(c)  Duties. The Town Treasurer shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Pay from the treasury such sums of money as may be ordered by the Board of Trustees or employees in accordance with the Town's purchasing policy, and the warrants and checks therefor shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Town Administrator/Clerk and shall state for what purpose the money is appropriated. 
(2)  Keep the account of each fund separate and distinct from all others, charging such fund with all payments and crediting all monies received on account thereof; and upon all warrants and checks payable out of any particular fund, there shall be legibly written the name of the fund out of which same is payable. 
(3)  Annually by March 1 after the close of the fiscal year, make out and file with the Town Administrator/Clerk a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures of the Town and all transactions as Town Treasurer during the preceding fiscal year, and shall show in such account the state of the treasury at the close of the fiscal year. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall immediately cause such account to be published in the Town or posted if no newspaper exists in the Town as provided in Section 31-20-304, C.R.S. 
(4)  If there are no funds in the Town Treasurer's hands for the payment of any Town warrant or check presented for such payment, register such warrants and checks in a book to be kept for that purpose, endorse upon such warrants and checks so presented the time and date of such registry and, whenever such warrant or check is paid, enter the payment and the amount of interest allowed or paid on such warrant or check in the registry. 
(5)  Solicit bids for the annual independent audit of Town accounts to be approved by the Board of Trustees, and coordinate and respond to all requests by the auditor during the course of the audit. 
(6)  Perform all other duties, keep all records and make all reports that are required by other provisions of this Code or by state law. (Ord. 7-1997 §1, Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 9-2017 , § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 2-3-40. - Town Attorney. 
(a)  Appointment. The Board of Trustees at its first regular meeting after each biennial election shall appoint a qualified attorney at law as the Town Attorney and shall fix the Town Attorney's compensation. In case a vacancy should occur in the office of the Town Attorney, the Board of Trustees shall appoint a Town Attorney for the unexpired term. 
(b)  Duties. The duties of the Town Attorney shall be as follows: 
(1)  Act as legal advisor to, and be attorney and counsel for, the Board of Trustees and be responsible solely to the Board of Trustees. 
(2)  Advise any officer or department head of the Town in matters relating to his or her official duties when so requested by the Board of Trustees; and file with the Town Administrator/Clerk a copy of all written opinions given by the Town Attorney. 
(3)  Prosecute ordinance violations, conduct cases in Municipal Court and file with the Town Administrator/Clerk copies of such records and files relating thereto. 
(4)  Prepare or review all ordinances, contracts, bonds and other written instruments which are submitted to the Town Attorney by the Board of Trustees; and promptly give his or her opinion as to the legal consequences thereof. 
(5)  Call to the attention of the Board of Trustees all matters of law and changes or developments therein, affecting the Town. 
(6)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed for the Town Attorney by the Board of Trustees. (Prior code 2.06.01, 2.06.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-3-50. - Removal of Town officers. 
    By a majority vote of all members of the Board of Trustees, the Mayor, Town Administrator/Clerk, Town Treasurer, any member of the Board of Trustees or any other officer of the Town may be removed from office. No such removal shall be made without a charge in writing and an opportunity of hearing being given unless the officer against whom the charge is made has moved out of the limits of the Town. When any elected officer ceases to reside within the limits of the Town, the elected officer may be removed from office pursuant to this Section. Appointed officers or employees of the Town need not reside within the limits of the Town. A Municipal Judge may be removed during his or her term of office only for cause, as set forth in Section 13-10-105(2), C.R.S. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-3-60. - Social Security. 
    In the opinion of the Board of Trustees, the extension of the social security system to employees and officers of the Town will be of great benefit not only to the employees and officers by providing that said employees and officers may participate in the provision of the old age and survivors insurance system, but also to the Town by the efficiency of its government. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 4 - Municipal Court 

Sec. 2-4-10. - Municipal Court created. 
    A qualified Municipal Court of record in and for the Town is hereby created and established pursuant to and governed by the provisions of Article 10, Title 13, C.R.S. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-111) 
Sec. 2-4-20. - Original jurisdiction. 
    The Municipal Court shall have original jurisdiction of all civil and criminal cases arising under this Code and other ordinances of the Town, with power to punish violations thereof by imposing fines and penalties as authorized by this Code or any ordinance, and to assess and collect civil penalties, order and enforce by contempt abatement of nuisances, and perform other responsibilities prescribed by this Code and other ordinances of the Town. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-111; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-4-30. - Municipal Judge appointment, removal. 
(a)  The Municipal Court shall be presided over by a Municipal Judge who shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees for a specified term of not less than two (2) years and who may be reappointed for a subsequent term. Any vacancy in the office of the Municipal Judge shall be filled by appointment of the Board of Trustees for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(b)  The Board of Trustees may appoint such additional Municipal Judges or assistant judges as may be necessary to act in case of temporary absence, sickness, disqualification or other inability of the presiding Municipal Judge to act. 
(c)  In the event that more than one (1) Municipal Judge is appointed, the Board of Trustees shall designate a presiding Municipal Judge, who shall serve in this capacity during the term for which the Municipal Judge was appointed. 
(d)  The Municipal Judge may be removed only for cause as set forth in Section 13-10-105(2), C.R.S., or for the following reasons: 
(1)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(2)  Subject to a disability which interferes with the Municipal Judge's performance of duties. 
(3)  Willful or persistent failure to perform the Municipal Judge's duties. 
(4)  Habitual intemperance. (Prior code 5.01.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-4-40. - Qualifications of Municipal Judge. 
    The Municipal Court shall be presided over by a Municipal Judge who has been admitted to, and is currently licensed in the practice of law in the State. (Prior code 5.01.04; Ord. 7-1991 §2; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-4-50. - Compensation of Municipal Judge. 
    The Board of Trustees shall provide by ordinance or resolution for the salary of the Municipal Judge. Such salary shall be a fixed annual compensation and payable on a monthly or other periodic basis. (Prior code 5.01.05; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-4-60. - Oath of office. 
    Before entering upon the duties of office, the Municipal Judge shall take an oath of affirmation to support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State and the laws of the Town, and to faithfully perform the duties of such office. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-4-70. - Municipal Court Clerk. 
(a)  The Board of Trustees shall establish the position of and appoint at the same time as the Municipal Judge's appointment, a Municipal Court Clerk, except that the Municipal Judge shall serve as ex officio Municipal Court Clerk in the Municipal Court Clerk's absence or if the business of the Court is insufficient to warrant a separate full-time or part-time Municipal Court Clerk. 
(b)  The Municipal Court Clerk shall be appointed by the presiding Municipal Judge and shall have such duties as are delegated by law, court rule or the presiding Municipal Judge. 
(c)  The Board of Trustees shall provide for the salary of the Municipal Court Clerk in the same manner as specified in Section 2-4-50 above; except that if the Municipal Judge serves as ex officio Clerk, no additional compensation shall be paid. (Prior code 5.01.06; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-4-80. - Bond. 
(a)  The Municipal Court Clerk shall give a performance bond in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), or such other amount as may be set by ordinance by the Board of Trustees. 
(b)  The performance bond shall be approved by the Board of Trustees and be conditioned upon the faithful accounting for and payment of all funds deposited with or received by the Court. (Prior code 5.01.07; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-4-90. - Court facilities and supplies. 
    The Board of Trustees shall furnish the Municipal Court with suitable courtroom facilities and sufficient funds for the acquisition of all necessary books, supplies and furniture for the proper conduct of business of the Court. (Prior code 5.01.08) 
Sec. 2-4-100. - Sessions generally. 
(a)  Regular sessions of the Municipal Court for the trial of cases shall be held on the first Wednesday of every month at 7:00 p.m., unless otherwise established by the Municipal Judge. The Municipal Judge may hold special sessions of court at any time, including Sundays, holidays and evenings. All sessions shall be open to the public. 
(b)  Where the nature of the case is such that it would be in the best interest of justice to exclude persons not directly connected with the proceedings, the Municipal Judge may order that the courtroom be cleared. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-4-110. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  In addition to other powers, the Municipal Judge shall have full power and authority to make and adopt rules and regulations for conducting the business of the Municipal Court under the procedures consistent with the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure promulgated by the Colorado Supreme Court and Title 13, C.R.S. 
(b)  Code and ordinance violations for which imprisonment is not a possible penalty and that are not criminal under counterpart state law are civil; however, the Municipal Judge shall follow the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure in all such cases unless the Rules are clearly inapplicable. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-111; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-4-120. - Contempt power. 
(a)  When the Court finds any person to be in contempt, the Court may vindicate its dignity by imposing on the contemnor a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and imprisonment not to exceed a term of ten (10) days. 
(b)  In cases of indirect contempt, the alleged contemnor shall have all the rights, privileges, safeguards and protections of a defendant in a petty offense case, including but not limited to a formal written complaint, arraignment and trial by jury. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-4-130. - Initiation of proceedings. 
(a)  A proceeding in the Municipal Court is initiated by the filing of a complaint or the service of a summons and complaint; by any means provided in this Code, state statutes or the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure; or in any other manner that provides due process of law. 
(b)  A parking ticket is a form of summons and complaint. 
(c)  In a Municipal Court action it is sufficient in a complaint or summons and complaint to charge a violation of this Code or any ordinance of the Town alleged to have been violated by referring to the section describing such violation, without referring to any subsection under the section violated. 
(d)  A peace officer may serve any process issued by the Municipal Court anywhere within the County. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-201; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-4-140. - Summons. 
    A summons is issued by the Municipal Court Clerk following the filing of a sworn complaint when it appears from the complaint that there is probable cause to believe that a violation has been committed and that the defendant committed it. The summons need only contain the name of the defendant and the date, time and place of appearance of the defendant. A copy of the complaint shall be served therewith, and a copy of the summons and the complaint shall be supplied to the prosecutor. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-202) 
Sec. 2-4-150. - Warrant. 
    In lieu of a summons, a warrant may be issued at the discretion of the Court following the filing of a sworn complaint. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-203) 
Sec. 2-4-160. - Summons and complaint. 
    A summons and complaint may be issued by the Enforcement Officer for violation of Chapter 7 of this Code, or by a peace officer for any offense constituting a violation which was committed in his or her presence or, if not committed in his or her presence, when he or she has reasonable grounds for believing that the offense was committed in fact and that the offense was committed by the person charged. A copy of the summons and complaint so issued shall be filed immediately with the Court before which appearance is required. A second copy shall be supplied to the prosecutor if so requested. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-204; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-4-170. - Contents of summons and complaint. 
(a)  The complaint shall contain the name of the defendant; the date and approximate location of the offense; identification of the offense charged, citing the Code or ordinance section alleged to have been violated; and a brief statement or description of the offense charged, which statement or description shall be sufficient if it states the type of offense to which the Code or ordinance relates. The summons and complaint shall contain all the foregoing, information and shall also direct the defendant to appear before a specified court at a stated date, time and place or in the office of the Municipal Court Clerk or Violations Bureau as provided in Subsection (b) below. 
(b)  The summons or summons and complaint shall direct the defendant to appear before a specified court at a stated date, time and place, or to appear or to respond at the office of the Municipal Court Clerk or Violations Bureau of a specified court at a stated date and time or within a stated period of time after service of said summons or summons and complaint. 
(c)  The Court may permit a complaint or summons and complaint to be amended as to form or substance at any time prior to trial; the Court may permit it to be amended as to form at any time before the verdict or finding if no additional or different offense is charged and if substantial rights of the defendant are not prejudiced. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-205; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-4-180. - Presumption of innocence. 
    Every person is presumed innocent until proven guilty. No person shall be convicted of any offense unless his or her guilt thereof is proved beyond a reasonable doubt. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-207) 
Sec. 2-4-190. - Fines and penalties. 
(a)  In sentencing or fining a violator, the Municipal Judge shall not exceed the fine limitations established by provisions of this Code or other ordinance. The Municipal Judge may suspend the sentence or fine of any violator and place him or her on probation for a period not to exceed one (1) year. 
(b)  The Municipal Judge is empowered to assess costs against any defendant who, after trial, is found guilty of a code violation. Court costs and jury fees shall be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. In addition to court costs assessed under this Section, the Municipal Court may assess any reasonable costs incurred by the Town, including but not limited to dog impound fees. 
(c)  Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years convicted of violating any provisions of this Code or any Town ordinance shall be subject to the appropriate penalty therefor; however, a minor shall not be incarcerated for such violation. Nothing in this provision shall prevent the Municipal Court from incarcerating a minor for contempt of court, nor shall it prevent a minor being placed in the custody of the Larimer County Youth Services Bureau or other juvenile authority. (Prior code 5.01.11; Ord. 11-1997 §1; Ord. 5-2001 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-4-200. - Trial by jury or Court. 
    Trial shall be to the Court, unless the defendant is entitled to a jury trial under the Constitution, general laws of the State or this Code, in which case the defendant shall have a jury trial if, within ten (10) days after arraignment or entry of a plea, the defendant filed with the Court a written jury demand and at the same time tenders to that Court an amount established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs, unless the fee is waived by the Judge because of the indigence of the defendant. The written demand for jury shall state the number of jurors requested. If the action is dismissed or the defendant is acquitted of the charge or, if the defendant, having paid the jury fee, files with the Court at least ten (10) days before the scheduled trial date a written waiver of jury trial, the jury fee shall be refunded. If the defendant fails to file with the Court the written jury demand as provided above, the defendant waives the right to a jury trial. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-208; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-4-210. - Dismissal. 
    If there is unnecessary delay in the trial of a defendant, the Court may dismiss the case. If the trial of a defendant is delayed more than ninety (90) days after arraignment of the defendant, or unless the defendant files a proper waiver of speedy trial or the delay is occasioned by the action or request of the defendant, the Court may dismiss the case and the defendant shall not thereafter be tried for the same offense. However, if on the day of a trial set within the last ten (10) days of the above time limit, a necessity for a continuance arises which the Court in exercise of sound judicial discretion determines would warrant an additional delay, one (1) continuance, not exceeding thirty (30) days, may be allowed, after which the dismissal shall be entered as above provided if trial is not held within the additional time allowed. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-209; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-4-220. - Assignment of counsel. 
(a)  If the defendant appears in court without counsel, the Court shall advise the defendant of the right to retain counsel. In an appropriate case, if, upon the defendant's affidavit or sworn testimony and other investigation, the Court finds that the defendant is financially unable to obtain counsel, an attorney shall be assigned to represent the defendant at every stage of the trial court proceedings. No lawyer need be appointed for a defendant who, after being advised, with full knowledge of the right to counsel, elects to proceed without counsel. 
(b)  Whenever two (2) or more defendants have been jointly charged or have been joined for trial and are represented by the same retained or assigned counsel or by retained or assigned counsel who are associated in the practice of law, the Court shall promptly inquire with respect to such joint representation and shall personally advise each defendant of the right to the effective assistance of counsel, including separate representation. Unless it appears that there is good cause to believe no conflict of interest is likely to arise, the Court shall take such measures as may be appropriate to protect each defendant's right to counsel. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-301) 
Sec. 2-4-230. - Election by prosecutor. 
    Except as otherwise provided, in any prosecution for criminal violations, the prosecuting attorney may, at any time during the prosecution, state in writing whether or not he or she will seek incarceration as part of the penalty upon conviction of a crime for which the defendant has been charged. If the prosecuting attorney does not seek incarceration as part of such penalty, legal representation and supporting services need not thereafter be provided by the defendant at Town expense, and no such defendant shall be incarcerated if found guilty of the charges against him or her, but the defendant shall be subject to all alternatives available to the Court by state law, including Section 18-1.3-702, C.R.S., and to alternatives available to each municipality under its municipal code for failure to pay fines and costs. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-302) 
Sec. 2-4-240. - Juvenile facility. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Municipal Court has the authority to order a child under eighteen (18) years of age confined in a juvenile detention facility operated or contracted by the Department of Institutions for failure to comply with a lawful order of the Court, including an order to pay a fine. If a juvenile facility is not available, the child may be confined in an adult facility so long as the child is separated from adult offenders. Any confinement of a child for contempt of Municipal Court shall not exceed forty-eight (48) hours. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-303) 
Sec. 2-4-250. - Appeals. 
    Appeals from the Municipal Court shall be in accordance with Rule 37 of the Colorado Rules of Criminal Procedure and Section 13-6-310, C.R.S. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-401) 
ARTICLE 5 - Police Department 

Sec. 2-5-10. - Contract for services with Sheriff's Department. 
    Officers and deputies of the County Sheriff's Department are hereby empowered to exercise all authority and powers of duly commissioned police officers of the Town for as long as the County Sheriff is under contractual obligation to provide police services, which include enforcement of certain municipal ordinances of the Town. (Prior code 2.11.06; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-5-20. - Incarceration of persons convicted of ordinance violations. 
    Wherever in this Code it is provided that a person convicted of a violation of a Town ordinance or this Code shall be punished by imprisonment, such imprisonment shall be in the County jail, or other place provided by the Town for the incarceration of such offenders. In lieu of such incarceration, the Municipal Judge may sentence an offender to the custody of the County Community Corrections Department, or such other agency with. which the Town may contract for correctional services. (Prior code 2.11.07; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 6 - Code of Ethics 

Sec. 2-6-10. - Title, citation and effective date. 
    This Article is intended to supplement the Colorado Constitution and state law and constitutes the code of ethics governing the conduct of elected and appointed officials and employees of the Town with respect to real or apparent conflicts of interest in the performance of their official activities on behalf of the Town and its citizens. This Article may be cited herein as the Code of Ethics. (Ord. 10-1987 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-6-20. - Purpose. 
(a)  The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the government structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that public officials and employees maintain a standard of conduct that will inspire public confidence in the integrity of the government. 
(b)  The public judges its government by the way public officials and employees conduct themselves in the posts to which they are elected or appointed. The people have a right to expect that every public official and employee will conduct himself or herself in a manner that will tend to preserve public confidence in and respect for the government he or she represents. 
(c)  The Board of Trustees determines that ethical standards among its members, appointed officers and employees, as well as the members of the various boards and commissions of the Town, are essential to the public affairs of the Town. The Board of Trustees intends to prohibit the appearance of impropriety as well as actual conflicts of interest. The purpose of this Code of Ethics is to establish guidelines for standards of conduct for all officials and employees of the Town by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the Town; by directing disclosure by such officials and employees of private, financial or other substantial interests in matters affecting the Town; and by imposing sanctions upon public officers or employees who violate the provisions of this Code of Ethics. This Code of Ethics is hereby declared to be in the best interest of the Town. (Ord. 10-1987 §2) 
Sec. 2-6-30. - Scope of coverage. 
    The provisions of this Code of Ethics shall be applicable to all members of the Board of Trustees, all advisory boards and commissions and all officers and employees of the Town. (Ord. 10-1987 §3) 
Sec. 2-6-40. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this Article are hereby defined as follows: 
    Financial interest means any interest which shall yield, directly or indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit to the official or employee or to any other person employing or retaining the services of the official or employee. 
    Official or employee means any person elected or appointed to, or employed or retained by, any public office or public body of the Town, whether paid or unpaid, and whether part-time or full-time. 
    Official action means any legislative, administrative or appointive act of any official; or employee of the Town or any agency, board, committee or commission thereof. 
    Personal interest means any interest arising from blood or marriage relationships or from close business or political association, whether or not any financial interest is involved. 
    Public body means any agency, board, body, commission, committee, department or office of the Town. 
    Relative means any person related to a public officer or employee by blood or marriage, in any of the following degrees: parent, spouse, child, brother, sister, parent-in-law, nephew, niece, aunt, uncle, first cousin, grandparent, grandchild and child-in-law. A divorce or separation between spouses shall not be deemed to terminate relationships described herein. 
    Substantial interest means any situation, including without limitation a financial or personal interest in the outcome of a decision in which, considering all of the circumstances, a reasonably prudent person observing the situation would expect a marked tendency to make a decision other than an objective decision. In those instances where there is a disagreement pertaining to a substantial interest, the Board of Trustees shall determine the matter, with its decision being final. 
    Transaction means any contract, any sale or lease of an interest in land, material, supplies or services, or any granting of a development right, license, permit or application. (Ord. 10-1987 §4; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-6-50. - Conflicts of interest. 
    The following are determined to be conflicts of interest which are prohibited by this Code of Ethics: 
(1)  Financial or personal. interest. No official or employee, either on his or her own behalf or on behalf of any other person shall have a financial interest or personal interest in any business or transaction with any public body. 
(2)  Incompatible employment. No official or employee shall engage in private employment with, or render services for, any private person who has business transactions with any public body. 
(3)  Representation of private persons. No official or employee shall appear on behalf of any private person, other than himself or herself, before any public body. 
(4)  Gifts and favors. No official or employee shall accept any gift, whether in the form of money, thing, favor, loan or promise, that would not be offered or given if the official or employee were not an official or employee. (Article XXIX of the Colorado Constitution) 
(5)  Confidential information. No official or employee shall, without prior formal authorization of the public body having jurisdiction, disclose any confidential information concerning any other official or employee, any other person or any property or governmental affairs of the Town. Whether or not it shall involve disclosure, no official or employee shall use or permit the use of any such confidential information to advance the financial or personal interest of himself or herself or any other person. 
(6)  Nepotism. It is determined that the appointment or employment of a relative creates a situation of substantial interest on the part of an elected or appointed official or an employee of a public body. Therefore, no elected or appointed official or an employee of a public body shall appoint or vote for appointment of any relative to any office or position of employment, or participate in discussion or voting on matters pertaining to administrative policies, duties, salaries, equipment purchases, expenditures, revenues or other matters affecting the public body of which the relative is a member or is employed, except as provided by Section 2-6-60 of this Article. 
(7)  Multiple membership on board or commissions. The fact that an official or employee or a relative of an official or employee serves the Town through membership on one (1) or more advisory boards, commissions or other public bodies shall not in and of itself constitute a conflict of interest on nonadministrative matters to be considered by the official or employee. In those instances where there is a disagreement pertaining to a possible conflict of interest due to multiple memberships in public bodies, the Board of Trustees shall determine the matter, with its decision being final. (Ord. 10-1987 §5; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-6-60. - Disclosure and disqualification. 
(a)  Whenever an official or employee is required to deliberate and vote on any matter in which he or she has a substantial interest, the official or employee shall give notice of said interest to the public body as reasonably possible after the interest has arisen. The interested official or employee shall thereafter: 
(1)  Refrain from voting upon or otherwise acting in an official capacity in such transaction. 
(2)  Be excused from participation in the discussion by the public body; however, the official or employee may participate in the discussion on the matter as a private citizen from the audience. 
(b)  In those instances where there is a disagreement pertaining to a substantial interest, the Board of Trustees shall determine the matter, with its decision being final. (Ord. 10-1987 §6; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-6-70. - Remedies for violations. 
(a)  The Board of Trustees may censure any elected official who willfully violates any provision of this Article. Such censure shall be in accordance with applicable state law. 
(b)  The Board of Trustees may remove any person other than a Trustee from such person's appointed office or position of employment with a public body when such person willfully violates any provision of this Article. Such removal shall be in accordance with applicable state law. 
(c)  If a contract or sale is consummated contrary to the provisions of this Article, the Town may void the contract or sale. 
(d)  Any person affected by a Town transaction may commence a civil action in the District Court having jurisdiction for equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this Article upon showing a willful violation of any provision of this Article. Before filing such action, the person shall present the claim to the Board of Trustees and give the Board of Trustees an opportunity to act thereon. (Ord. 10-1987 §7; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 7 - Community Activities Commission 

Sec. 2-7-10. - Creation. 
    The Board of Trustees hereby finds the need for development and coordination of community activities which make the Town a quality place to live and generate civic pride. These activities may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The Easter Egg Hunt. 
(2)  The Fourth of July Family Funfest. 
(3)  A Town Garage Sale. 
(4)  A Christmas Parade. (Ord. 6-1998 §1; Ord. 26-2004 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-7-20. - Membership. 
(a)  The Community Activities Commission shall consist of five to seven members appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Board of Trustees. One (1) or more members of the Board of Trustees may be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Board of Trustees to serve as representatives to the CAC. Members must be eighteen (18) years of age and must meet at least one (1) of the following criteria: 
(1)  Residency within a seven-mile radius of the Town; or 
(2)  Ownership of a business which operates in the Town and holds a valid business license issued by the Town; or 
(3)  Employment within the Town by a business holding a valid business license issued by the Town; or 
(4)  Employment by or enrollment in a school operated by the Poudre School District and situated within the boundaries of the Town. 
(b)  Members of the CAC shall serve a three-year term, and such terms shall be staggered as established by resolution by the Board of Trustees. The terms of any representative(s) of the Board of Trustees shall be conterminous with that member's term on the Board of Trustees. In the event of a vacancy on the CAC Board, the Mayor, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, shall appoint a successor member for the balance of the vacant CAC Board member's term. In the event of a Town Board of Trustee representative vacancy, a new Trustee representative may be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Board of Trustees. 
(c)  CAC Board members may be removed by the Board of Trustees for neglect of duty or malfeasance. 
(d)  CAC Board members who wish to resign from the CAC must provide written notification of his or her resignation to the Commission, which shall be forwarded to the Board of Trustees. 
(e)  The CAC Board encourages and may solicit volunteers as necessary. The CAC Board may decline service by any volunteer for good cause. Volunteer members need not be residents of the Town. 
(f)  CAC volunteers may participate in all discussions before the CAC Board and serve on committees as appointed by the CAC Board, but shall not have a vote on motions before the CAC Board. 
(g)  All members of the CAC shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 6-1998 §1; Ord. 26-2004 §1; Ord. 6-2006 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 4-2018 , 2-23-18; Ord. No. 8-2018 , 5-22-18) 
Sec. 2-7-30. - Voting. 
(a)  Each CAC Member and Board of Trustee representative is entitled to one (1) vote on each matter submitted to the members for their consideration. Said member shall vote in person. No member shall vote or act by proxy. 
(b)  A simple majority is necessary for passage of all items brought before the CAC. (Ord. 6-1998 §1; Ord. 26-2004 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 4-2018 , 2-23-18) 
Sec. 2-7-40. - Officers. 
(a)  Titles. The CAC Board shall elect a Chair, Treasurer and Secretary from among its members. 
(b)  Election and appointment of officers. 
(1)  The term of each office shall be one (1) year, with eligibility of reelection. 
(2)  All officers shall be elected at the regular January meeting. New officers shall assume their duties at the close of the January meeting. 
(3)  The CAC shall fill an office vacancy by holding a special election at the next regular monthly meeting. 
(c)  Duties of officers shall be defined by the CAC bylaws. (Ord. 6-1998 §1; Ord. 26-2004 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 4-2018 , 2-23-18) 
Sec. 2-7-50. - Meetings. 
(a)  Meeting times, voting procedures, election of officers and other matters relating to the governing of the CAC Board shall be governed by a set of bylaws approved by the CAC Board and the Board of Trustees. The CAC shall convene meetings as set forth in its bylaws. The meeting time shall be set, regular and published. The CAC Board shall abide by Colorado Open Meetings Act. 
(b)  Special meetings may be called per procedures outlined in the bylaws. 
(c)  A majority of the CAC Board members shall constitute a quorum to do business at all meetings. 
(d)  There shall be a record kept regarding the minutes of every meeting of the CAC, and said minutes shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees within sixty (60) days of the meeting. 
(e)  Any meetings at which any action of the CAC Board is to be taken or at which issues before the Board are to be discussed shall be reflected in minutes or when possible recorded by tape or other audio recording device, and such recordings shall be maintained by the Town Administrator/Clerk. Except as approved by the Board of Trustees, meetings of the CAC Board shall be held at the Leeper Center or at the Town Hall. Notice of the time and place of meetings shall be posted as required by state law. (Ord. 6-1998 §1; Ord. 26-2004 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 4-2018 , 2-23-18) 
Sec. 2-7-60. - Consultants and finances. 
(a)  The Community Activities Commission may contract planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require. All contracted personnel shall provide appropriate tax-related information to the Town Treasurer. 
(b)  All revenues and expenditures of the Community Activities Commission shall be reported in the minutes of the Commission meeting. 
(c)  The Community Activities Commission shall prepare a recommended budget to be forwarded to the Board of Trustees for all expenses relating to the purposes defined herein. Said budget shall be delivered to the Town Administrator/Clerk by October 1 of each year. 
(d)  Revenues collected beyond the budgeted amount in any fiscal year may be expended for purposes defined herein upon a budget amendment approved by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 6-1998 §1;; Ord. 26-2004 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 8 - Wellington Housing Authority 

Sec. 2-8-10. - Creation. 
    The Board of Trustees hereby creates and establishes in the Town a Public Housing Authority (the "Housing Authority), which shall be operated and maintained in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Article. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-8-20. - Membership. 
    The Housing Authority shall consist of five (5) persons appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Board of Trustees. The Mayor may file with the Town Administrator/Clerk a certificate of the appointment or reappointment of any member, and such certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the due and proper appointment of such member. No more than one (1) member of the Housing Authority shall be an official of the Town. Members of the Housing Authority shall be residents of the Town or residents of the surrounding community. Appointments made after August 2, 2000, shall be made so that not less than one (1) member of the Housing Authority shall be an individual who is directly assisted by the Housing Authority and who may, if provided in a plan of the Housing Authority, be elected by individuals directly assisted by the Housing Authority. A majority of the Housing Authority members shall constitute a quorum. The Housing Authority shall, at the first meeting of each calendar year or as soon thereafter as practicable, select from its members a Vice Chair and a Chair when the office of the first Chair becomes vacant. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-8-30. - Term of office. 
    Each member shall serve for a term of five (5) years, except for the terms of the initial members, which shall be for staggered periods of one (1) year, two (2) years, three (3) years, four (4) years and five (5) years. A member shall receive no compensation for his or her services but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of his or her official duties. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 9 - Wellington Library Board 

Sec. 2-9-10. - Creation of library. 
    The Board of Trustees hereby creates and establishes in the Town a public library to be known as the Wellington Public Library, said library is to be operated and maintained for the use and enjoyment of the residents of the Town and the surrounding area according to state statutes. (Prior code 2.14.01; Ord. 3-2001; Ord. 8-2003; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 9-2016 , § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 2-9-20. - Membership. 
    The Wellington Public Library is to be governed by a seven-member Library Board appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Board of Trustees. One (1) or more members of the Board of Trustees may serve as members of the Library Board. The Library Board may establish bylaws and shall operate the library in accordance with state statutes. (Prior code 2.14.01; Ord. 5-1999 §1; Ord. 3-2001; Ord. 8-2003; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 9-2016 , § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 2-9-30. - Meetings. 
(a)  Except as approved by the Board of Trustees, meetings of the Library Board shall be held at the Leeper Center on such dates as may be set by the Board of Trustees or Library Board. Notice of the time and place of meetings shall be posted as required by state law. 
(b)  Minutes shall be kept of all meetings (except executive session meetings as authorized by state law) at which any action of the Library Board is to be taken or at which issues before the Library Board are to be discussed shall be recorded by audio recording device, and such recordings shall be maintained by the Town Administrator/Clerk. (Ord. 8-2003; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 9-2016 , § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 2-9-40. - Library facilities. 
    So long as the Public Library continues to operate within a Town-owned facility, the Town shall continue to maintain said facility with General Fund resources. This maintenance shall include, but may not be limited to, major structural repair and upkeep, payment of water, waste water, electricity and gas utility bills, and any repair or replacement of the heating, ventilation and air conditioning system. Insurance related to the building and library operations shall also be the responsibility of the General Fund. The Library Board shall be responsible for the cleaning of the facility or portion of the facility which is used as the Public Library. (Ord. 4-1997 §2; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 10 - Planning Commission 

Sec. 2-10-10. - Creation. 
    Pursuant to state law, there is hereby created a Planning Commission for the Town. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-10-20. - Purpose. 
    The Planning Commission is created for the following purposes: 
(1)  To prepare and maintain, subject to periodic revision as necessary, a Master Plan as described by state statutes. 
(2)  To implement the provisions of Chapters 16 and 17 of this Code, and to perform all functions and powers referred to in said chapters where reference is made. 
(3)  To study and recommend to the Board of Trustees amendments to the Zoning Map of the Town. 
(4)  To study and recommend appropriate zoning classifications for all annexations to the Town. 
(5)  To exchange information with the various governmental agencies charged with planning and zoning responsibilities and with the Board of Adjustment. 
(6)  To have all other duties and powers incidental to the above and any and all powers and duties set out by state statute, except that nothing herein shall permit the Planning Commission to make amendments or changes in the zoning of the Town, such powers expressly being reserved by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-10-30. - Membership. 
    The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) voting members as follows: 
(1)  Four (4) appointed citizens of the Town who shall be residents of the Town and shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees. 
(2)  The Mayor. 
(3)  One (1) Trustee appointed by the Board of Trustees. 
(4)  One (1) Trustee selected by the Mayor. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-10-40. - Duties and powers. 
(a)  The Planning Commission shall prepare plans and conduct hearings, and shall be governed by and have the responsibilities as provided for in Section 31-23-201 et seq., C.R.S., and other applicable statutes and ordinances. 
(b)  Members of the Planning Commission shall have the power to vote on matters brought before the Planning Commission. 
(c)  Alternate members shall serve as voting members at any meeting in the absence of regular members. The Chair shall appoint alternates to fill absences prior to the conduct of business at any meeting. If there is more than one (1) alternate member, appointments to fill absences shall be made on a rotating basis, and appointments shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-10-50. - Term of office. 
    The terms of office for members of the Planning Commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  The Mayor's term shall correspond to his or her term in office. 
(2)  The terms of the appointed members, including appointed Board of Trustee members, shall be staggered, with one (1) member, including members of the Board of Trustees appointed each six (6) years, for a six-year term. If a member of the Board Trustees is appointed as a Planning Commission member, that member's term on the Planning Commission shall terminate upon termination of the his or her term of office on the Board of Trustees. 
(3)  The Board of Trustees shall adopt a resolution prior to December 31, 2007, setting forth the staggered terms of each member of the Planning Commission. The Board of Trustees shall appoint one (1) Trustee to a two-year term as an ex officio member of the Planning Commission at the first regular meeting of the Board of Trustees following each biennial election. 
(4)  The Board of Trustees shall appoint regular and alternate members of the Planning Commission in January of every other year. Regular and alternate members shall serve six-year terms that expire when the Board of Trustees has made appointments for the succeeding terms. 
(5)  In order to institute staggered terms on the Planning Commission, the appointments of the initial regular and alternate members shall be made as follows: one (1) regular member and one (1) alternate member for two (2) years; one (1) regular member for four (4) years; and one (1) regular member and one (1) alternate member for six (6) years. Thereafter, all appointments to fill expired terms shall be for six (6) years. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-10-60. - Vacancies. 
    In the event of a vacancy among regular or alternate members, the Board of Trustees (or the Mayor in the case of the Planning Commission member appointed by the Mayor) shall appoint replacements for the balance of the unexpired term of the vacant position. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-10-70. - Officers. 
    Each calendar year, at the first regular meeting of the Planning Commission each year, the Planning Commission shall select a Chair and a Vice Chair for the year. The Chair shall preside at all meetings. The Vice-Chair shall preside in the absence of the Chair. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-10-80. - Meetings. 
(a)  The Planning Commission shall conduct at least one (1) regular meeting on the same day of each month. All meetings shall occur at Town-owned facilities, including the same location at which Board of Trustees meetings are held, Town Hall or such other place as designated by the Board of Trustees. In special instances, including if there is a conflict or unavailability of facilities, special meetings of the Planning Commission may be held at a location other than Town-owned facilities. 
(b)  All meetings shall be open to the public. Copies of all records and minutes of all meetings shall be kept in the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk for public inspection. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-10-90. - Compensation. 
    Members of the Planning Commission shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 11 - Board of Adjustment 

Sec. 2-11-10. - Creation. 
    The Board of Trustees hereby creates and establishes in the Town a Board of Adjustment, which shall be operated and maintained in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Article and state statutes. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-11-20. - Membership. 
(a)  Membership. The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) members and two (2) alternates appointed by the Board of Trustees. Non-Alternate members shall not simultaneously serve on the Board of Adjustments and the Board of Trustees or the Planning Commission. Alternate members may be appointed from among the membership of the Board of Trustees. The terms of appointment for non-alternate members shall be three (3) years on a staggered basis. Alternate members shall be appointed annually. Members must be residents of the Town for at least one (1) year. Alternate Members shall be entitled to participate and vote on any matter only in the absence of one (1) or two (2) regular members. The Town Board shall designate which of the two (2) alternate members shall have priority to vote by designating the alternates as a first and a second alternate member; such that if one (1) member is not in attendance, that alternate will vote and participate, and; if the first alternate and a member of the Board of Adjustment is not in attendance or if two (2) members of the Board of Adjustment are not in attendance then the second alternate will vote and participate. 
(b)  Organization. The Board of Adjustment shall elect a chairman during its first meeting of each calendar year and may create and fill such other offices as it may determine. The Board shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which shall be a public record. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2012 , § 1, 2-14-12) 
Sec. 2-11-30. - Term of office. 
    Each member shall serve for a term of three (3) years. A member shall receive no compensation for his or her services but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of his or her official duties. The Board of Trustees shall fill vacancies on the Board of Adjustment and may remove members for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-11-40. - Duties. 
    The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide: 
(1)  Appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by any administrative official charged with the enforcement of the Land Use Code or other matters authorized by statute. 
(2)  All matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under such ordinance. It shall also hear and decide other matters as provided by state statute or as otherwise provided by ordinance. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-11-50. - Action by Board of Adjustment and appeal. 
    The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under Chapter 16 of this Code, or to effect any variation in Chapter 16. At the time of any hearing, the Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and shall make such order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises and, to that end, has all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of Chapter 16, the Board of Adjustment has the power, in passing upon appeals, to vary or modify the application of the regulations or provisions of Chapter 16 relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land, so that the spirit of said Chapter is observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. Decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be subject to review by certiorari by the Larimer County District Court. Any appeal shall be filed not later than thirty (30) days from the final action taken by the Board of Adjustment and may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the Town. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 12 - Liquor Licensing 

Sec. 2-12-10. - Board of Trustees to serve as Licensing Authority. 
    The Board of Trustees shall serve as the Liquor Licensing Authority. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 2-12-20. - Special event permits. 
(a)  Pursuant to C.R.S. § 12-48-107(5)(a) the Board of Trustees of the Town of Wellington, acting as the local liquor licensing authority, elects not to notify the state licensing authority to obtain the state licensing authority's approval or disapproval of applications for special event permits. 
(b)  The provision of this section notwithstanding, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall report to the Colorado Liquor Enforcement Division, within ten (10) days after the Town issues any special event permit, the name of the organization to which the permit was issued, the address of the permitted location, and the permitted dates of alcohol beverage service. 
(c)  Upon receipt of an application for a special event permit the Town Administrator/Clerk shall, as required by C.R.S. § 12-48-107(5)(c), access information made available on the web site of the state licensing authority to determine the statewide permitting activity of the organization applying for the permit. The Town shall consider compliance with the provisions of C.R.S. § 12-48-105(3) limiting to fifteen (15) the number of special event permits issued in any one year to any one organization, before approving any application. 
(d)  Each application for a special event permit shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount equal to the maximum local licensing fee established by C.R.S. § 12-48-107(2). 
(Ord. No. 10-2011 , 8-23-11) 
ARTICLE 13 - Wellington Parks Advisory Board 

Sec. 2-13-10. - Creation of Parks Advisory Committee. 
    The Board of Trustees hereby creates and establishes to serve the Town an advisory public parks board, established to advise the Board of Trustees relative to the development and operation of the Town's park systems, to be known as the Wellington Parks Advisory Board. 
(Ord. No. 9-2014 , § 1, 5-20-14) 
Sec. 2-13-20. - Membership. 
    The Wellington Parks Advisory Board ("PAB") shall consist of five (5) to seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Board of Trustees. One (1) member of the Board of Trustees may be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Board of Trustees to serve as a participating representative to the PAB. The Wellington Parks Advisory Board shall appoint a chairman to serve annually for each calendar year and may establish bylaws to address governance of the Board. Members of the PAB must be eighteen (18) years of age and must meet one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Residency within a seven-mile radius of the Town; or 
(2)  Ownership of a business which operates in the Town and holds a valid business license issued by the Town; or 
(3)  Employment within the Town by a business holding a valid business license issued by the Town; or 
(4)  Employment or enrollment by a school operated by the Poudre R-l School District and situated within the boundaries of the Town. 
a.  Members of the PAB shall serve a three (3)-year term, and such terms shall be staggered as established by resolution by the Board of Trustees. The terms of any representatives(s) of the Board of Trustees shall be conterminous with that member's term on the Board of Trustees. In the event of a vacancy on the PAB Board, the Mayor, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, shall appoint a successor member for the balance of the vacant PAB Board member's term. In the event of a Town Board of Trustee representative vacancy, a new Trustee representative may be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Board of Trustees. 
b.  PAB members may be removed by the Board of Trustees for neglect of duty or malfeasance. 
c.  PAB members who wish to resign from the PAB must provide written notification of his or her resignation to the PAB, which shall be forwarded to the Board of Trustees. 
d.  The PAB encourages and may solicit volunteers as necessary. The PAB may decline service by any volunteer for good cause. Volunteer members need not be residents of the Town. 
e.  PAB volunteers may participate in all discussions before the PAB and serve on committees as appointed by the PAB, but shall not have a vote on motions before the PAB. 
f.  All members of the PAB shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 9-2014 , § 1, 5-20-14; Ord. No. 4-2018 , 2-23-18) 
Sec. 2-13-30. - Meetings. 
(a)  Except as approved by the Board of Trustees, meetings of the PAB shall be held at the Leeper Center or at the Town Hall. Notice of the time and place of meetings shall be posted as required by state law. 
(b)  Any meetings at which any action of the Wellington Parks Advisory Board is to be taken, or at which issues before the Board are to be discussed, shall be reflected in minutes, or when possible recorded by tape or other audio recording device, and such recordings shall be maintained by the Town Administrator/Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 9-2014 , § 1, 5-20-14; Ord. No. 4-2018 , 2-23-18) 
Sec. 2-13-40. - Voting. 
(a)  Each PAB Member and Board of Trustee representative is entitled to one (1) vote on each matter submitted to the members for their consideration. Said member shall vote in person. No member shall vote or act by proxy. 
(b)  A simple majority is necessary for passage of all items brought before the PAB. 
(Ord. No. 4-2018 , 2-23-18) 
Sec. 2-13-50. - Functions. 
(1)  To advise and make recommendations to the Board of Trustees for their approval as to rules, regulations, policies, planning, administration, design and upgrade and, to the extent so charged by the Board of Trustees, budgetary matters pertaining to the development and maintenance of parks within and proximate to the Town of Wellington, including matters relating to establishing, enhancing, and maintaining Town-owned recreational amenities including parks, trail systems, and park features but excluding the Library, which is overseen by the Library Board, and the cemetery. 
(2)  At the direction of the Board of Trustees, to explore and make recommendations supporting and identifying grant opportunities to allow the Town to enhance recreational opportunities in the Town. 
(3)  To advise the Board of Trustees in matters involving cooperation with the Poudre School District, North Poudre Irrigation Company, and other organizations and individuals interested in parks and recreational programs serving the Town. 
(4)  To assist the Board of Trustees in the preparing and maintaining the Wellington Parks and Trails Masterplan(s) as adopted by the Board of Trustees. 
(5)  To promote community awareness and understanding of, and appreciation for, the value of parks and recreation as a resource contributing to the quality of life in Wellington. 
(6)  The PAB shall have no authority to expend funds or make contracts on behalf of the Town. 
(Ord. No. 9-2014 , § 1, 5-20-14; Ord. No. 4-2018 , 2-23-18) 
ARTICLE 13.6 - Medical Marijuana Establishments 

Sec. 2-13.6-10. - Medical marijuana establishments. 
    The operation of marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing facilities, or retail marijuana stores as defined by Colorado Law and Article XVIII of the Constitution of the State of Colorado be prohibited within the Town. 
(Ord. No. 6-2013 , § 1, 5-28-13) 
CHAPTER 4 - Revenue and Finance 
ARTICLE 1 - Fiscal Year 

Sec. 4-1-10. - Fiscal year established. 
    The fiscal year of the Town shall commence on the first day of January and end on the last day of December of each year. (Prior code 3.01.01) 
ARTICLE 2 - Town Funds 

Sec. 4-2-10. - Custody and management of funds. 
    Moneys in the funds created in this Chapter shall be in the custody of and managed by the Town Treasurer. The Town Treasurer shall maintain accounting records and account for all of said moneys as provided by law. Moneys in the funds of the Town shall be invested or deposited by the Town Treasurer in accordance with the provisions of law. All income from the assets of any fund shall become a part of the fund from which derived and shall be used for the purpose for which such fund was created; provided that, except as otherwise provided in this Code or by other ordinances or laws, the Board of Trustees may transfer out of any fund any amount at any time to be used for such purpose as the Board of Trustees may direct. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-2-20. - General Fund created. 
    There is hereby created a fund, to be known as the General Fund, which shall consist of the following: 
(1)  All cash balances of the Town not specifically belonging to any existing special fund of the Town. 
(2)  All fixed assets of the Town (to be separately designated in an account known as the General Fund Fixed Assets) not specifically belonging to any existing special fund of the Town. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-2-30. - Merger of funds into General Fund. 
(a)  In the interest of simplifying and clarifying budgeting and accounting, the assets and liabilities of the Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund and Capital Projects Fund are hereby merged with the General Fund of the Town. 
(b)  A separate bank account shall be maintained for the purpose of depositing and recording monies for the exclusive purpose of the Cemetery Perpetual Care. (Prior code 3.05.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-2-40. - Conservation Trust Fund created. 
    There is established a Conservation Trust Fund in the Town as authorized by Section 29-21-201, C.R.S.. The funds received by the Town shall be expended as authorized by state laws as the same now exist or as may hereafter exist as a result of any amendments. This Section is necessary for the protection and preservation of funds which may be allocated to the Town by the State and for the protection of the rights of the residents of the Town. (Prior code 3.05.01) 
Sec. 4-2-50. - Library Fund created. 
    There is established a Library Fund in the Town. Funds received from overdue or damaged books and other library fines shall be deposited in this fund. Funds received from private contributions for library expenditures shall be deposited in this fund. Revenue received from grants, loans or formula disbursements shall be deposited in this fund. The Board of Trustees shall annually determine an allocation from the General Fund to be transferred to the Library Fund in lieu of creating a library district and setting a mill levy. All other funds received by the library or by the Town for library functions shall be deposited in this fund. This fund is subject to all federal, state and local laws regulating the management of public funds. This Section is necessary for the protection and preservation of funds which may be allocated to the library and for the protection of the rights of the residents of the Town. (Ord. 4-1997 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-2-60. - Sewer Fund created. 
    There is hereby created a special fund, to be known as the Sewer Fund, and the funds therein shall be used only for the purposes allowed by law. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-2-70. - Street Fund created. 
    There is hereby created a special fund, to be known as the Street Fund, and the funds therein shall be used only for the purposes allowed by law. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-2-80. - Water Fund created. 
    There is hereby created a special fund, to be known as the Water Fund, and the funds therein shall be used only for the purposes allowed by law. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-2-90. - Storm drainage fund. 
    There is hereby created a special fund, to be known as the storm drainage fund, and the funds therein shall be used only for the purposes allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 14A-2014 , § 1, 6-24-14) 
Sec. 4-2-100. - Parks fund. 
    There is hereby created a special fund, to be known as the parks fund, and the funds therein shall be used only for the purposes allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 14A-2014 , § 2, 6-24-14) 
ARTICLE 3 - Financial Management 

Sec. 4-3-10. - Annual budget. 
    Not later than the first regular meeting of the Board of Trustees in October of each year, the Budget Committee or other duly authorized person designated by the Board of Trustees shall submit to the Board the itemized annual budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget as approved by the Board of Trustees shall be adopted and administered in accordance with the provisions of Section 29-1-103 et seq., C.R.S. (Prior code 3.01.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-3-20. - Rate of tax levy. 
    The Board of Trustees shall, by resolution, fix the rate of tax to be levied upon all taxable property within the Town for municipal purposes and, through the Town Administrator/Clerk, shall officially certify said levy to the County Commissioners prior to December 31 of each year. (Prior code 3.01.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-3-30. - Annual appropriation. 
    The Board of Trustees shall pass an ordinance within the last quarter of each fiscal year, to be termed the annual appropriation ordinance for the next fiscal year. In such ordinance, the Board of Trustees shall appropriate such sums of money as are necessary expenses and liabilities of the Town, specifying the objects and purposes for which such appropriations are made and the amount appropriated for each object or purpose. The total amount appropriated shall not exceed the probable amount of revenue that will be collected during the fiscal year. (Prior code 3.01.04) 
Sec. 4-3-40. - Publication of financial statements. 
    The Board of Trustees shall, within twenty (20) days after the adjournment of each regular or special meeting, publish such of its proceedings as related to the payment of bills, stating for what the same are allowed, the name of the person to whom allowed and to whom paid. Said publication shall be in a paper of general circulation within the Town. (Prior code 3.01.05; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-3-50. - Deposits and investments. 
    The Town Treasurer shall deposit all of the funds and moneys coming into the possession of the Town Treasurer in one (1) or more resp onsible banks located in the State which have been designated by written resolution of the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may also authorize the Town Treasurer, by written resolution, to invest all or any part of such funds in securities which are authorized for such investment by state law. (Prior code 3.01.06; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-3-60. - Annual audit. 
    The Board of Trustees shall select a qualified person as auditor and cause to be made an annual audit of the financial affairs and transactions of the Town in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 29-1-603, C.R.S. (Prior code 3.01.07) 
ARTICLE 4 - Sales and Use Tax 
Division 1 - Sales Tax 

Sec. 4-4-10. - Purpose of sales tax. 
    A sales tax is imposed on the sale of tangible personal property at retail or for the furnishing of taxable services in the Town as authorized by Part I of Article 2, Title 29, C.R.S. (Prior code 3.06.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 4-2012 , § 1, 4-24-12) 
Sec. 4-4-20. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Division, the definitions of words herein contained shall be as defined in Section 39-26-102, C.R.S., and said definitions are incorporated herein by this reference. (Prior code 3.06.02) 
Sec. 4-4-30. - Location of sale. 
    For the purpose of this Article, all retail sales shall be considered consummated at the place of business of the retailer, unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to a destination outside the limits of the Town, or to a common carrier for delivery to a destination outside the limits of the Town. (Prior code 3.06.04) 
Sec. 4-4-40. - Credit for sales or use taxes previously paid to another municipality. 
    The value of construction and building materials on which a use tax has previously been collected by an incorporated town, city or county shall be exempt from the sales tax imposed by this Article if the materials are delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to a site within the limits of such town, city or county. (Prior code 3.06.04) 
Sec. 4-4-50. - Determination of sales location. 
    In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the Town, or more than one (1) place of business, the place at which the retail sales are consummated for the purpose of this sales tax shall be determined by the provisions of Article 26, Title 39, C.R.S., and by rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Revenue. (Prior code 3.06.04) 
Sec. 4-4-60. - State taxes excluded. 
    The amount subject to tax under this Article shall not include the state sales and use tax imposed by Article 26, Title 39, C.R.S. (Prior code 3.06.04) 
Sec. 4-4-70. - Exemptions. 
    The tangible personal property and services taxable pursuant to this Article shall be the same as the tangible personal property and services taxable pursuant to Section 39-26-104, C.R.S., and subject to the same exemptions as those specified in Section 39-26-701 et seq., C.R.S.; provided that the exemption allowed by Section 39-26-709, C.R.S., for purchase of machinery or machine tools, and the exemption for sales of food specified in Section 39-26-707, C.R.S., shall not be exempt from the sales tax imposed by this Article. Express provision is hereby made for the exemption of sales and purchases of electricity, coal, gas, fuel oil or coke as provided in Section 39-26-715, C.R.S., from the sales tax imposed by this Article, except that said exemption of sales and purchases of electricity, coal, gas, fuel oil or coke shall terminate without further action by the Town if the exemption of such sales and purchases provided in Section 39-26-715, C.R.S., is repealed, or if said exemption otherwise becomes unauthorized under state law. (Prior code 3.06.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-4-80. - Exemptions outside of Town limits. 
    All sales of personal property on which a specific ownership tax has been paid or is payable shall be exempt from the Town's sales tax when such sales meet both of the following conditions: 
(1)  The purchaser is a nonresident of, or has his or her principal place of business outside the Town; and 
(2)  Such personal property is registered or required to be registered outside the limits of the Town, under state law. (Prior code 3.06.04) 
Sec. 4-4-90. - Collection. 
    The collection, administration and enforcement of the Town sales tax shall be performed by the Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Revenue in the same manner as the collection, administration and enforcement of the state sales tax. The provisions of Article 26, Title 39, C.R.S., shall govern the collection, administration and enforcement of sales taxes authorized under this Article, unless otherwise provided in said Article 26. (Prior code 3.06.05) 
Sec. 4-4-100. - Imposition and schedule of sales tax. 
    There is hereby imposed on all sales of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services as provided in Section 39-26-104, C.R.S., a tax equal to three percent (3%) of the gross receipts. The imposition of the tax on individual sales shall be in accordance with schedules set forth in the rules and regulations promulgated by the Department of Revenue or by an amount established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs. (Prior code 3.06.06; Ord. 24-1998 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-4-110. - Vendor's fee. 
    The vendor (retailer) shall be entitled as collection agent for the Town to withhold a collection fee in the amount of three and one-third percent (3 1 / 3 %) from the total amount remitted by the vendor to the Town each month. If any vendor is delinquent in remitting said tax, other than in unusual circumstances shown to the satisfaction of the Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Revenue, the vendor shall not be allowed to retain any amounts to cover the vendor's expense in collecting and remitting said tax, and an amount equivalent to the full sales tax shall be remitted to the Executive Director by any such delinquent vendor. (Prior code 3.06.07; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Division 2 - Use Tax 

Sec. 4-4-210. - Purpose of use tax. 
    The purpose of the provisions of this Division is to impose a use tax on building and construction materials and motor and other vehicles which are purchased outside the Town for use, storage or consumption within the Town, as authorized by Section 29-2-102, C.R.S. (Prior code 3.06.08) 
Sec. 4-4-220. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Division, the definitions of words herein contained shall be as defined in Sections 39-26-102 and 39-26-201, C.R.S., and said definitions are incorporated herein by this reference. (Prior code 3.06.09) 
Sec. 4-4-230. - Imposition. 
    There is hereby imposed on the privilege of storing, using or consuming in the Town any construction and building materials and motor and other vehicles on which registration is required, purchased at retail, a use tax of three percent (3%) of the retail purchase price of said construction or building materials or motor or other vehicles. Such tax shall be payable to and shall be collected by the Town Administrator/Clerk. (Prior code 3.06.10; Ord. 24-1998 §1) 
Sec. 4-4-240. - Exemptions. 
    This use tax shall not apply: 
(1)  To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property the sale of which is subject to a retail sales tax imposed by the Town. 
(2)  To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property purchased for resale in the Town, either in its original form or as an ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product in the regular course of a business. 
(3)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the Town by a nonresident thereof for his or her own storage, use or consumption while temporarily within the Town; however, this exemption does not apply to the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the State by a nonresident to be used in the conduct of business in this State. 
(4)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by the United States government, the State of Colorado or its institutions or political subdivisions, in their governmental capacities only or by religious or charitable corporations in the conduct of their religious or charitable functions. 
(5)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing or compounding for sale, profit or use any article, substance or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product or service which is manufactured, compounded or furnished and the container, label or the furnished shipping case thereof. 
(6)  To the storage, use or consumption of any article of tangible personal property the sale or use of which has already been subjected to a sales or use tax of another county, city or town equal to or in excess of that imposed by this Article. A credit is granted against the use tax imposed by this Division with respect to a person's storage, use or consumption in the county, city or town of tangible personal property purchased elsewhere by the person. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the tax paid by the purchaser by reason of the imposition of a sales or use tax of another county, city or town on the purchase or use of the property. The amount of credit shall not exceed the tax imposed by this Article. 
(7)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property acquired outside of the Town and brought into it by a nonresident acquiring residency. 
(8)  To the storage or use of a motor vehicle if the owner is or was, at the time of purchase, a nonresident of the Town; purchased the vehicle outside of the Town for use outside the Town and actually so used it for a substantial and primary purpose for which it was acquired; and registered, titled and licensed said motor vehicle outside of the Town. 
(9)  To the storage, use or consumption of any construction and building materials and motor or other vehicles on which registration is required, if a written contract for the purchase thereof was entered into prior to the effective date of such use tax. 
(10)  To the storage, use or consumption of any construction and building materials required or made necessary in the performance of any construction contract bid, let or entered into at any time prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified herein. (Prior code 3.06.11; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-4-250. - Collection of use tax on construction and building materials and supplies. 
    The tax herein imposed on the privilege of storing, using or consuming in the Town any construction and building materials at retail, shall be collected, as follows: 
(1)  Said use tax shall be paid to the Town Administrator/Clerk and shall be collected at the time permits are issued for building and construction. The payment of said use tax shall be the responsibility of the person applying for and receiving the building permit. For the purpose of this Section, the value of the construction and building materials to be stored, used or consumed as a part of any project shall be deemed to be an amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the total valuation or gross cost of the building or construction project as is stated in the building permit issued. If the tax is paid in this way, no further sales or use tax information will be required for final inspection of the project by the Building Department. 
(2)  As an alternative to the estimation procedure for payment of the use tax described in Paragraph (1) above, the applicant, at the time of securing the building or construction permit, may register with the Town Administrator/Clerk to pay a deposit in an amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the total valuation or gross cost of the building or construction project and file monthly use tax reports with a reconciliation of actual amounts owed at the end of the project. Use Tax reports shall be due on the first day of the month next succeeding storage, consumption or use within the Town. All such use tax reports shall be subscribed by the taxpayer or his or her agent, and shall contain a written declaration that is made under penalty of perjury. Failure to provide reports when due may result in a stop work order being issued on the project. No final inspection shall be requested until the final use tax report has been submitted. The Town may coordinate with the Larimer County tax department in approving the total taxes owed. 
(3)  A building permit shall be applied for within thirty (30) days of storage, use or consumption within the limits of the Town, or, in lieu thereof, the owner or person whose custody the goods are, being severally liable therefor. 
(4)  If the alternative estimation procedure set forth in Paragraph (2) is elected, use tax is due and payable at the time of Town approval of final use tax report and determination of use tax amount owed; and if the tax is not paid when due, a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the amount due, plus interest at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum, will be added to the principal amount of the tax, if the amount on deposit is greater than the tax owed the Town shall refund the difference within 30 days of final report approval. 
(5)  The Town Administrator/Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to devise, publish and make available use tax returns and reports in and upon such forms as may be necessary and appropriate for the complete reporting and collection of the Town use tax under the provisions of this Article. The Town Attorney is authorized hereby to institute such legal action, suits or proceedings for and on behalf of the Town in any court of competent jurisdiction against any person from whom a use tax is due and payable, to establish the amount due and for collection of delinquent tax and any applicable penalties and interest. 
(6)  The tax imposed by this Article, together with any penalties and interest thereon, shall be a first and prior lien upon all of the property, real and personal, of the person from whom the tax is due, subject only to any liens of the State or the United States which, under applicable law, would have priority. Said lien shall become effective upon filing a notice of the same with the County Clerk and Recorder of any county in which the delinquent taxpayer owns any property, shall constitute a lien upon the property in said county, and shall constitute notice to all persons of said lien. Furthermore, the unpaid tax shall be a personal liability of the person owing the tax and the Town may pursue its remedies by foreclosing its lien, by proceeding personally against the delinquent taxpayer, or both, in which latter event, the Town shall be entitled to any deficiency after sale of the property of the taxpayer, it being intended that remedies provided herein are cumulative. 
(7)  A copy of the notice of lien shall be mailed to the delinquent taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the delinquent taxpayer's last known address, by delivering it personally to the taxpayer, or by delivering it to any member of the taxpayer's household at the taxpayer's usual place of residence. In the event the delinquent taxpayer is a corporation, entity or partnership, said notice may be mailed to any officer or registered agent of said corporation, entity or partnership by certified mail, return receipt requested at the officer's or registered agent's last known address. The delinquent taxpayer shall thereafter have ten (10) days from delivery or placement in the mail within which to apply to the Board of Trustees for a hearing on the issue of the deficiency. Upon timely written receipt of such a request, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall place upon the agenda for the next succeeding regular meeting of the Board of Trustees a hearing upon said issue. It shall be the responsibility of the person requesting said hearing to obtain information from the Town Administrator/Clerk as to the time, date and place of said hearing. At said hearing, the delinquent taxpayer shall have the opportunity to present evidence disproving his or her liability for said tax or the amount thereof. The Board of Trustees may, upon receipt of such evidence, including evidence given by the Town Administrator/Clerk, decide in favor of the Town Administrator/Clerk or in favor of the delinquent taxpayer, or may modify the assessment of the Town Administrator/Clerk in accordance with its findings as to the amount due upon the tax. 
(8)  After the hearing provided in Paragraph (7) above, or subsequent to the expiration of the period of time in which the delinquent taxpayer may make demand therefor, the Town Administrator/Clerk may proceed to file an action in the court of appropriate jurisdiction to pursue the remedies herein provided. (Prior code 3.06.12; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 2-2011 , § 1, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 4-4-260. - Collection of use tax on motor vehicles. 
    No registration shall be made for a motor or other vehicle for which registration is required, and no certificate of title shall be issued for such vehicle by the Colorado Department of Revenue until any tax due upon the use, storage or consumption thereof pursuant to this Article has been paid. The use tax imposed upon motor vehicles or other vehicles by this Article shall be collected by the authorized agent of the Colorado Department of Revenue in the county in which the purchaser resides. The Mayor is empowered to enter into and execute on behalf of the Town any agreements with the Colorado Department of Revenue or its authorized agents necessary for the administration and enforcement of the use tax on motor or other vehicles. (Prior code 3.06.13) 
Division 3 - General Provisions 

Sec. 4-4-310. - Effective date. 
    This Article shall be and become effective not later than January 1, 1981, and the sales and use tax imposed hereby shall be collected on all taxable sales, service and transactions not later than that date; provided that the provisions of this Article relating to approval by the electorate shall become effective thirty days (30) after posting as provided by law. It is the intent of the Board of Trustees that the sales and use tax imposed hereby shall become effective at the earliest time permitted by applicable state law. If state law permits, this Article shall become effective before January 1, 1981, or the earliest date permitted by state law, such as July 1, 1980, or other earlier date if permitted. (Prior code 3.06.14) 
Sec. 4-4-320. - Amendments. 
    Where permitted by the provisions of Part 1 of Article 2, Title 29, C.R.S., or where otherwise permitted by law, the Board of Trustees may amend, alter or change this Article, except as to the two-percent rate imposed, subsequent to adoption by a majority vote of the Board of Trustees. Such amendment, alteration or change need not be submitted to the electors of the Town for their approval. (Prior code 3.06.16) 
ARTICLE 5 - Telephone Utility Business and Occupation Tax 

Sec. 4-5-10. - Levy of tax. 
    There is hereby levied on and against each telephone utility company operating within the Town a tax on the occupation and business of maintaining a telephone exchange and lines connected therewith in the Town and of supplying local exchange telephone service to the inhabitants of the Town. The amount of the tax levied hereby shall be: for each calendar year, three dollars and forty cents ($3.40) per telephone account per year for which local exchange telephone service is provided within the corporate limits of the Town. (Prior code 3.07.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-5-20. - Time of payment of tax. 
    The tax levied by this Article shall be due and payable in four (4) equal quarterly installments each year, to be paid on the last business days of the months of March, June, September and December. (Prior code 3.07.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-5-30. - Interest on deficiency. 
    Interest on any deficiency in payment of this tax shall be enforced at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-5-40. - Filing statement. 
    Within thirty (30) days after the date on which the tax begins to accrue as provided in Section 4-5-20 above, each telephone utility company subject to this Article shall file with the Town Administrator/Clerk, in such form as the Town Administrator/Clerk may require, a statement showing the total telephone accounts for which local exchange telephone service was provided within the corporate limits of the Town on said date. Such statement shall be filed within thirty (30) days after each anniversary of the date on which the tax begins to accrue, showing such accounts on the anniversary date. (Prior code 3.07.03) 
Sec. 4-5-50. - Failure to pay. 
    If any telephone utility company subject to the provisions of this Article shall fail to pay the taxes as set forth in Section 4-5-10 above and/or shall fail to pay the taxes in the time frame set forth in Section 4-5-20 above, the full amount thereof shall be due and collected from such company, and the same together with an addition of ten percent (10%) of the amount of taxes due shall be and hereby is declared to be a debt due and owing from such company to the Town. The Town Attorney. upon direction of the Board of Trustees, shall commence and prosecute to final judgment and determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect said debt. (Prior code 3.07.04) 
Sec. 4-5-60. - Inspection of records. 
    The Town and its officers, agents or representatives shall have the right at all reasonable hours and times to examine the books and records of the telephone utility companies which are subject to the provisions of this Article and to make copies of the entries or contents thereof. (Prior code 3.07.06) 
Sec. 4-5-70. - Local purpose. 
    The tax herein provided is upon occupations and businesses in the performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those functions relating to interstate commerce. It is expressly understood that none of the terms of this Article shall be construed to mean that any telephone utility company is issued a franchise by the Town. (Prior code 3.07.07) 
Sec. 4-5-80. - Penalty clause. 
    If any officer, agent or manager of a telephone utility company which is subject to the provisions of this Article shall fail, neglect, refuse to make or file the annual statement of accounts provided in Section 4-5-30 above, said officer, agent, manager or person shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00); provided that each day after said statement becomes delinquent during which said officer, agent, manager or person shall so fail, neglect or refuse to make and file such statement shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. (Prior code 3.07.05) 
ARTICLE 6 - Gas Company Business and Occupation Tax 

Sec. 4-6-10. - Legislative intent. 
(a)  The transportation, distribution and sale of gas within the Town through pipelines, mains and other fixed facilities using easements and rights-of-ways, either granted by the Town or crossing Town streets, utilities or other public facilities without the benefit of easements granted by the Town, involves the use, availability and potential use of Town personnel and facilities, creates the potential for hazards dissimilar to other utility services, may require stand-by and active service by fire, police and other local safety agencies, as well as public works employees and the Town Engineer, and are matters of local and municipal concern. 
(b)  The nature of companies transporting, distributing and selling gas and otherwise operating within the Town, including, without limitation, their demands on Town agencies, the use of public and private easements, streets and rights-of-way and the potential and actual hazards from the operations of such companies, has a substantial effect upon the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town and upon the expenditures to be budgeted by the Town. 
(c)  Upon review of all matters proper to be considered relating to the operations and hazards of gas companies, the classification of such gas companies as separate businesses and occupations is reasonable, proper, uniform and nondiscriminatory; and the taxable amount hereby levied is reasonable, proper, uniform and nondiscriminatory and necessary for a just and proper distribution of the tax burdens of the Town. 
(d)  The potential for explosions of gas pipelines, as well as explosions related to escaping gas within buildings, indicates that there are dangers to the property and lives of the citizens of the Town from the operation of gas companies within the Town. 
(e)  The use by a gas company of the streets, alleys and public rights-of-way located within the Town is a valuable special privilege not provided to the public generally and for which the Town is entitled to consideration in the form of occupation tax revenues. 
(f)  The occupation tax herein created and defined is imposed on the privilege of gas companies to do business within the Town as are other occupation taxes so created and imposed in the Town. (Prior code 3.08.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-6-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section: 
    Gas or natural gas means such gaseous fuels as natural, artificial, synthetic, liquefied natural, liquefied petroleum manufactured or any mixture thereof. 
    Gas company means any person, officer, agent, manager or director of a company which provides, delivers or distributes gas to end users within the corporate limits of the Town through pipelines, mains and other facilities and appurtenances located in whole or in part on easements and rights-of-way granted by the Town or crossing Town streets, utilities or other public facilities without the benefit of easements granted by the Town. 
    Taxable amount means the monthly amount of the occupation tax levied upon a gas company by this Article. 
    Taxable year means the twelve-month period beginning on January 1 of any year, and ending on December 31 of that year. (Prior code 3.08.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 4-6-30. - Levy of tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied upon every gas company that operates within the Town an occupation tax. 
(b)  The taxable amount shall be twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) each year. (Prior code 3.08.03) 
Sec. 4-6-40. - Time of payment of tax. 
    The occupation tax levied by this Article shall accrue against each and every gas company and shall be payable in equal monthly installments. Each installment shall be due and payable by such company no later than the tenth day of each calendar month. Any monthly installment not paid on the tenth day of each calendar month shall become delinquent. (Prior code 3.08.04) 
Sec. 4-6-50. - Interest on deficiency. 
    Interest on any deficiency in payment of this tax shall be enforced at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum. (Prior code 3.08.05) 
Sec. 4-6-60. - Failure to pay. 
    If any gas company shall fail to pay the taxes as herein provided, the full amount thereof plus costs of collection, including reasonable attorney fees, shall be due and collected from such company, and the same together with an addition of ten percent (10%) of the amount of taxes due shall be and hereby is declared to be a debt due and owing from such company to the Town. The computation of said ten percent (10%) shall be in addition to interest on the deficiency as set forth in Section 4-6-50 above. The Town Attorney, upon the direction of the Board of Trustees, shall commence any legal action necessary to recover any amount so due and owing. (Prior code 3.08.06) 
Sec. 4-6-70. - Inspection of records. 
(a)  The Town, its officers, agents or representatives shall have the right at all reasonable hours and times to examine the books and records of the gas companies which are subject to the provisions of this Article and to make copies of the entries or contents thereof. 
(b)  Each gas company which is subject to the provisions of this Article shall provide to the Town on or before March 1 and September 1 of each year a report showing the following information for the preceding twelve (12) months ending December 31 and June 30, respectively: 
(1)  The total gas volumes delivered to all customers located within the Town. 
(2)  A statement of the total dollar amount, if any, surcharged by a gas company pursuant to this tax. (Prior code 3.08.07) 
Sec. 4-6-80. - Administrative hearings. 
    Any gas company subject to the provisions of this Article may request a hearing on the levy of the occupation tax after receiving notice of a final determination, assessment, demand for payment or denial of claim for refund. Such hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed hereinafter: 
(1)  If a gas company disputes the reasonableness or applicability of the tax, it may seek review of the assessment by filing a protest with the Town Administrator/Clerk within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the accounting statement. If such a protest is filed, the gas company shall appear before the Board of Trustees at a date specified. The gas company shall be notified of this hearing date by certified mail, return receipt requested. At this hearing, the gas company may present evidence regarding the reasonableness or applicability of the tax. The gas company shall bear the burden of proof. 
(2)  Said hearing shall be solely for the purpose of hearing protests as to the reasonableness and applicability of the tax. 
(3)  At said hearing, the Board of Trustees shall have all powers necessary to ensure the fair and efficient conduct of the hearing, but shall not be bound by the Colorado Rules of Evidence. The hearing shall be open to the public. 
(4)  Within sixty (60) days of such hearing, the Board of Trustees shall make such order in the matter as it shall deem just and proper, and shall furnish a copy of such final order to the protester. (Prior code 3.08.08) 
Sec. 4-6-90. - Administration of tax. 
    The Town Administrator/Clerk shall administer the provisions of this Article. The Board of Trustees may promulgate rules or regulations to aid in the enforcement and administration of this Article as it deems necessary. (Prior code 3.08.09) 
Sec. 4-6-100. - Local purpose. 
    The tax herein provided is upon occupations and business in the performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those functions relating to interstate commerce. It is expressly understood that none of the terms of this Article shall be construed to mean that any gas company subject to this tax is granted a franchise by the Town. (Prior code 3.08.10) 
Sec. 4-6-110. - Indemnification. 
    It is the expressed intent of this Article that all gas companies subject to this business and occupation tax shall hold harmless and indemnify the Town from any and all actions at law arising from their operations within the Town. (Prior code 3.08.11) 
Sec. 4-6-120. - Reimbursement of costs. 
    Any entity challenging the validity, legality, applicability or constitutionality of this Article or the tax levied, if unsuccessful, shall reimburse the Town for all cost incurred, including attorney's fees, in such litigation. (Prior code 3.08.12) 
Sec. 4-6-130. - Penalty. 
    If any officer, agent, manager or director of a gas company which is subject to the provisions of this Article shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this Article, said officer, agent, manager or director, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. (Prior code 3.08.13; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
CHAPTER 5 - Franchises and Communication Systems 
ARTICLE 1 - Cable Television Franchise 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 5-1-10. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Franchise, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. The word shall is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Activated means the status of any capacity or part of the cable system in which any cable service requiring the use of that capacity or part is available without further installation of system equipment, whether hardware or software. 
    Affiliate, when used in connection with the Grantee means any person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, the Grantee. 
    Bad debt means amounts lawfully billed to a subscriber, owed by the subscriber for cable service and accrued as revenues on the books of the Grantee, but not collected after reasonable efforts have been made by the Grantee to collect the charges. 
    Basic service means any cable service tier which includes, at a minimum, the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and local access programming. 
    Broadcast signal means a television or radio signal transmitted over the air to a wide geographic audience, and received by a cable system by antenna, microwave, satellite dishes or any other means. 
    Cable Act means Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended and codified at 47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq. 
    Cable Internet service means any cable service offered by the Grantee whereby persons receive access to the Internet through the cable system. 
    Cable operator means any person or groups of persons, including the Grantee, who provides cable service over a cable system and, directly or through one (1) or more affiliates, owns a significant interest in such cable system or who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
    Cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. If it is so determined by the FCC or after final judgment and completion of all appeals by a court of competent jurisdiction in Colorado, cable service shall include cable Internet service and any other service as may be determined to be a cable service by the FCC or court of competent jurisdiction. 
    Cable system means any facility, including the Grantee's facility, consisting of a set of closed transmissions paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community; however, such term does not include: 
a.  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1) or more television broadcast stations; 
b.  A facility that serves subscribers without using any right-of-way; 
c.  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Federal Communications Act (47 U.S.C. § 201 et seq.), except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c) (47 U.S.C. § 541(c)) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
d.  An open video system that complies with federal statutes; or 
e.  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. 
    Channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in the cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel (as television channel is defined by the FCC by regulation). 
    Commercial subscribers means any subscribers other than residential subscribers. 
    Designated access provider means the entity designated now or in the future by the Town to manage or co-manage access channels and facilities. The Town may be a designated access provider. 
    Downstream means carrying a transmission from the headend to remote points on the cable system or to interconnection points on the cable system. 
    Dwelling unit means any building, or portion thereof, that has independent living facilities, including provisions for cooking, sanitation and sleeping, and that is designed for residential occupancy. Buildings with more than one (1) set of facilities for cooking shall be considered multiple dwelling units unless the additional facilities are clearly accessory. 
    Expanded basic service means the tier of optional video programming services, which is the level of cable service received by most subscribers above basic service, and does not include premium services. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Fiber optic means a transmission medium of optical fiber cable, along with all associated electronics and equipment capable of carrying cable service by means of electric lightwave impulses. 
    Franchise means the document in which this definition appears, i.e., the contractual agreement executed between the Town and the Grantee, containing the specific provisions of the authorization granted to use the streets, alleys, public places or other rights-of-way of the Town, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters. 
    Franchise area means the area within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Town, including any areas annexed by the Town during the term of this Franchise. 
    GAAP means generally accepted accounting principles. 
    Generally applicable means, when referenced to ordinances, laws or regulations, legal obligations that are not limited solely to the Grantee. 
    Grantee means US Cable of Coastal, Texas, L.P., or its lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
    Gross revenues means any and all revenue received by the Grantee, or by any other entity, including the Grantee's affiliates, that is a cable operator of the cable system, from the operation of the Grantee's cable system to provide cable services in the Franchise Area. Gross revenues include, by way of illustration and not limitation, monthly fees charged subscribers for basic service; any expanded tiers of cable service; optional premium services; installation, disconnection, reconnection and change-in-service fees; leased access channel fees; remote control rental fees; all cable service lease payments from the cable system; revenues from rentals or sales of converters or other cable system equipment used to receive cable service; advertising revenues; the fair market value of consideration received by the Grantee for use of the cable system to provide cable service and accounted for as revenue under GAAP; revenues from program guides; revenue from cable Internet service or other service to the extent it is determined to be cable service in accordance with this Franchise; revenue from the sale or carriage of other cable services on the cable system; and revenue from home shopping, bank-at-home channels and other revenue-sharing arrangements. Gross revenues shall not include: 
a.  Payments or other consideration received by the Grantee from programmers for carriage of programming on the cable system to the extent that the Grantee's books and records consistent with GAAP indicate that all such payments are utilized for payments by the Grantee for advertising or promotion which are contractually required by programmers; 
b.  To the extent consistent with GAAP, bad debt; provided, however, that all or part of any such bad debt that is written off but subsequently collected shall be included in gross revenues in the period collected; 
c.  The capital contribution specified in Section 5-1-435; or 
d.  Any taxes on services furnished by the Grantee which are imposed directly on any subscriber or user by the State, Town or other governmental unit and which are collected by the Grantee on behalf of said governmental unit. The Franchise fee is not such a tax. 
    The parties intend for the definition of gross revenues to be as inclusive as possible consistent with existing applicable law. If there is a change in federal law subsequent to the effective date of this Franchise, such change shall not impact this gross revenues definition unless the change specifically preempts the affected portion of the definition above. 
    Headend means any facility for signal reception and dissemination on a cable system, including cables, antennas, wires, satellite dishes, monitors, switchers, modulators and processors for broadcast signals. 
    Institutional network or I-Net means that part of the cable system facilities or capacity designed principally as a private communications network governed by this Franchise and the Cable Act, to be utilized by the Town. 
    Interconnect or interconnection means the linking of the cable system or I-Net with another cable system, communications system or I-Net, including technical, engineering, physical, financial and other necessary components, to accomplish, complete and adequately maintain such linking, in a manner that permits the transmission and receiving of electronic or optical signals between the cable system and other cable system, communications system or I-Net; or the necessary components to accomplish, complete and adequately maintain pathways that permit the transmission and receiving of electronic or optical signals between locations connected to portions of the cable system outside the franchise area and those portions of the cable system inside the franchise area. 
    Leased access channel means any channel or portion of a channel of the cable system available to the public in a manner consistent with 47 U.S.C. § 532 for commercial use by persons other than the Grantee, for a fee or charge. 
    Node means an exchange point in the signal distribution system portion of the cable system, where optical signals are converted to RF signals. 
    PEG Access channel means any channel, or portion thereof, designated for PEG Access purposes or otherwise made available to facilitate or transmit PEG Access programming or services. 
    Person means any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, association or corporation, or any other form of entity or organization. 
    Premium service means programming choices (such as movie channels, pay-per-view programs, video on demand or a package of digital tier services) offered to subscribers on a per-channel, per-program or per-event basis. 
    Public, educational, and governmental access or PEG Access means the availability of channel capacity on the cable system for noncommercial use by various agencies, institutions, organizations, groups and individuals in the community, including the Town and its designees, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Public access means access where community-based, noncommercial organizations, groups or individual members of the general public, on a nondiscriminatory basis, are the primary users. 
b.  Educational access means access where schools are the primary users having editorial control over programming and services. For purposes of this definition, school means any state-accredited educational institution, public or private, including, for example, primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities. 
c.  Government access means access where governmental institutions or their designees are the primary users having editorial control over programming and services. 
    Residential subscriber means any person who receives cable service delivered to dwelling units or multiple dwelling units, excluding such multiple dwelling units billed on a bulk-billing basis. 
    Right-of-way means each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the franchise area: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, bridges, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property and areas. 
    State means the State of Colorado. 
    Subscriber means any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, cable service provided by the Grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system and whose premises are physically wired and lawfully activated to receive cable service from the Grantee's cable system. 
    Subscriber network means that portion of the cable system used primarily by the Grantee in the transmission of cable services to residential subscribers. 
    Telecommunications means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received (as provided in 47 U.S.C. § 153(43). 
    Telecommunications service means the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used (as provided in 47 U.S.C. § 153(46)). 
    Tier means a group of channels for which a single periodic subscription fee is charged. 
    Town means the Town of Wellington, Colorado, a body politic and corporate under the laws of the State, and all of the area within its boundaries, as such may change from time to time, and any of its legally established enterprises. 
    Town Administrator means the person designated by the Town who is responsible for the Town's administrative affairs. 
    Two-way means capable of providing both upstream and downstream transmissions. 
    Upgrade means improvements to the cable system, as specifically detailed in Section 5-1-710 of this Franchise. 
    Upstream means carrying a transmission to the headend from remote points on the cable system or from interconnection points on the cable system. (Ord. 2-2002 §1A; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 5-1-15. - Exhibits. 
    The document attached hereto as Appendix 5-A, entitled Customer Service Standards, and which is occasionally referred to in this Franchise, is formally incorporated and made a part of this Franchise by this reference. (Ord. 2-2002 §1B; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Division 2 - Grant of Franchise 

Sec. 5-1-60. - Grant. 
(a)  The Town hereby grants to the Grantee a nonexclusive Franchise which authorizes the Grantee to construct, operate, maintain, reconstruct, rebuild and upgrade a cable system in, along, among, upon, across, above, over, under or in any manner connected with public ways within the service area, for the purpose of providing cable service subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this Franchise and in any prior utility use agreements entered into with regard to individual property. This Franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the cable services required by, and to fulfill the obligations set forth in, the provisions of this Franchise. 
(b)  Nothing in this Franchise shall be deemed to waive the lawful requirements of any generally applicable Town ordinance existing as of the effective date, as defined in Section 5-1-70. 
(c)  Each and every term, provision or condition herein is subject to state law, federal law and Town ordinances and regulations enacted pursuant thereto. 
(d)  This Franchise shall not be interpreted to prevent the Town from imposing additional lawful conditions, including additional compensation conditions for use of the rights-of-way, should the Grantee provide service other than cable service. 
(e)  The Grantee promises and guarantees, as a condition of exercising the privileges granted by this Franchise, that any person who is a cable operator of this cable system in the franchise area, or directly involved in the management or operation of the cable system in the franchise area, will also comply with the terms and conditions of this Franchise. 
(f)  No rights shall pass to the Grantee by implication. Without limiting the foregoing, by way of example and not limitation, this Franchise shall not include or be a substitute for: 
(1)  Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the Town that may be required by the ordinances and laws of the Town; 
(2)  Any permit, agreement or authorization required by the Town for right-of-way users in connection with operations on or in rights-of-way or public property including, by way of example and not limitation, street cut permits; or 
(3)  Any permits or agreements for occupying any other property of the Town or private entities to which access is not specifically granted by this Franchise including, without limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on poles, in conduits or in or on other structures. 
(g)  This Franchise is intended to convey limited rights and interests only as to those rights-of-way in which the Town has an actual interest. It is not a warranty of title or interest in any right-of-way; it does not provide the Grantee with any interest in any particular location within the right-of-way; and it does not confer rights other than as expressly provided in the grant hereof. 
(h)  This Franchise does not authorize the Grantee to provide telecommunications service, or to construct, operate or maintain telecommunications facilities. This Franchise is not a bar to imposition of any lawful conditions on the Grantee with respect to telecommunications, whether similar, different or the same as the conditions specified herein. This Franchise does not relieve the Grantee of any obligation it may have to obtain from the Town an authorization to provide telecommunications services or to construct, operate or maintain telecommunications facilities or relieve the Grantee of its obligation to comply with any such authorizations that may be lawfully required. (Ord. 2-2002 §2.1) 
Sec. 5-1-65. - Use of rights-of-way. 
    Subject to the Town's supervision and control, the Grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the rights-of-way within the Town such wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of a cable system within the Town. The Grantee, through this Franchise, is granted extensive and valuable rights to operate its cable system for profit using the Town's rights-of-way in compliance with all applicable Town construction codes and procedures. As trustee for the public, the Town is entitled to fair compensation to be paid for these valuable rights throughout the term of the Franchise. (Ord. 2-2002 §2.2) 
Sec. 5-1-70. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-1-75. - Franchise nonexclusive. 
    This Franchise shall be nonexclusive, and subject to all prior rights, interests, easements or licenses granted by the Town to any person to use any property, right-of-way, right, interest or license for any purpose whatsoever, including the right of the Town to use the same for any purpose it deems fit, including the same or similar purposes allowed the Grantee hereunder. The Town may at any time grant authorization to use the rights-of-way for any purpose not incompatible with the Grantee's authority under this Franchise and for such additional franchises for cable systems as the Town deems appropriate on the same terms and conditions, so long as, in the reasonable direction of the Town, such additional franchises contain terms and conditions which, taken as a whole, are neither more favorable nor less burdensome than this Franchise. (Ord. 2-2002 §2.4) 
Sec. 5-1-80. - Police powers. 
(a)  The Grantee's rights hereunder are subject to the police powers of the Town to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the safety, health and welfare of the public, and the Grantee agrees to comply with all laws and ordinances of general applicability enacted, or hereafter enacted, by the Town or any other legally constituted governmental unit having lawful jurisdiction over the subject matter hereof. The Town shall have the right to adopt, from time to time, such generally applicable ordinances as may be deemed necessary in the exercise of its police power; provided that such ordinances shall be reasonable and not destructive of the rights granted in this Franchise. 
(b)  The Town reserves the right to exercise its police powers, notwithstanding anything in this Franchise to the contrary, and any conflict between the provisions of this Franchise and any other present or future lawful exercise of the Town's police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter. (Ord. 2-2002 §2.5) 
Sec. 5-1-85. - Familiarity with Franchise. 
    The Grantee and the Town each acknowledge and warrant by acceptance of the rights, privileges and agreements granted herein, that they have carefully read and fully comprehend the terms and conditions of this Franchise and are willing to and do accept all lawful and reasonable risks of the meaning of the provisions, terms and conditions herein. The Grantee further acknowledges and states that it has fully studied and considered the requirements relating to the upgrade of the cable system and all other requirements and provisions of this Franchise, and finds that the same are commercially practicable as of the effective date of this Franchise. (Ord. 2-2002 §2.6; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 5-1-90. - Effect of acceptance. 
    By accepting the Franchise, the Grantee: (1) acknowledges and accepts the Town's legal right to issue and enforce the Franchise; (2) accepts and agrees to comply with each and every provision of this Franchise subject to applicable law and that as of the effective date this Franchise is consistent with federal and state law; and (3) agrees that the Franchise was granted pursuant to processes and procedures consistent with applicable law and that it will not raise any claim to the contrary. (Ord. 2-2002 §2.7) 
Division 3 - Franchise Fee Payment and Financial Controls 

Sec. 5-1-110. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  As compensation for the benefits and privileges granted under this Franchise and in consideration of permission to use the Town's rights-of-way, the Grantee shall pay as a franchise fee to the Town, throughout the duration of this Franchise, an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the Grantee's annual gross revenues. Accrual of such franchise fee shall commence as of the effective date of this Franchise. 
(b)  Whenever cable services (which are includable in gross revenues and subject to the franchise fee) are bundled (included) with noncable services (which are not includable in gross revenues) and are billed to customers, such cable services revenues shall be calculated in the following manner and included in gross revenues subject to franchise fees. 
(1)  Step 1 - calculate the total price for all cable services using the a la carte prices for each. Example: $10 + $25 + $5 = $40. 
(2)  Step 2 - calculate the total price for all noncable services using the a la carte price for each. Example: $20 + $40 = $60. 
(3)  Step 3 - add the amounts calculated in Steps 1 and 2. Example: $40 + $60 = $100. 
(4)  Step 4 - compare the amount calculated in Step 3 with the price for the bundled services; if the bundled price is less than the amount calculated in Step 3, go to Step 5. Example: bundled price = $75. 
(5)  Step 5 - calculate the price discount percentage to be applied to both cable and non-cable revenues by dividing the amount of discount by the total a la carte price from Step 3. Example: discount ($100 - $75 = $25) divided by a la carte price total from Step 3 ($100) = 25%. 
(6)  Step 6 - multiply the cable services total price from Step 1 by the discount percentage from Step 5. Example: $40 times 25% = $30. 
(7)  Step 7 - include the amount calculated in Step 6 with gross revenues reported for franchise fee purposes. 
    In no event shall the amount allocated to cable services under the foregoing calculation exceed: (a) the total amount of combined revenue actually received by the operator; or (b) the net revenues derived when mandatory tariff rates, if any, imposed by a governmental authority for components of the combined service are deducted from the combined revenue. (Ord. 2-2002 §3.1) 
Sec. 5-1-115. - Payments. 
    In accordance with the Cable Act, the twelvemonth period applicable under the Franchise for the computation of the franchise fee shall be a calendar year. The franchise fee payment shall be due annually. Each payment shall be due and payable no later than thirty (30) days after the end of the preceding calendar year. (Ord. 2-2002 §3.2) 
Sec. 5-1-120. - Acceptance of payment and recomputation. 
    No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord by the Town that the amount paid is, in fact, the correct amount, nor shall any acceptance of payments be construed as a release of any claim the Town may have for further or additional sums payable or for the performance of any other obligation of the Grantee. (Ord. 2-2002 §3.3) 
Sec. 5-1-125. - Franchise fee reports. 
    The Grantee shall, with each franchise fee payment, furnish to the Town a statement stating the total amount of gross revenues for the year and all payments, deductions and computations for the period. Such statement shall be certified by an officer of the Grantee, prior to submission to the Town. Throughout the term of the Franchise, the Grantee, within thirty (30) days of the last day of the quarter, shall also submit to the Town annually franchise fee reports stating the total amount of gross revenues for the year, and all payments, deductions and computations for the quarter. (Ord. 2-2002 §3.4) 
Sec. 5-1-130. - Audits. 
    On an annual basis, upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice, the Town, including the Town's auditor, shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of the Grantee's records reasonably related to the administration or enforcement of this Franchise, in accordance with GAAP. If the audit shows that franchise fee payments have been underpaid by three percent (3%) or more, the Grantee shall reimburse the total out-of-pocket cost of the audit, such cost not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). The Town's right to audit and the Grantee's obligation to retain records related to a franchise fee audit shall expire three (3) years after each franchise fee payment has been made to the Town. Reimbursement is due to the Town within thirty (30) days of mailing of an invoice to the Grantee. (Ord. 2-2002 §3.5) 
Sec. 5-1-135. - Late payments. 
    In the event any payment due annually is not received within sixty (60) days from the end of the calendar year, the Grantee shall pay interest on the amount due (at the rate of ten percent [10%] per annum compounded daily), calculated from the date the payment was originally due until the date the Town receives the payment. (Ord. 2-2002 §3.6) 
Sec. 5-1-140. - Underpayments. 
    If a net franchise fee underpayment is discovered as the result of an audit, the Grantee shall pay interest at the rate of the eight percent (8%) per annum, compounded quarterly, calculated from the date each portion of the underpayment was originally due until the date the Grantee remits the underpayment to the Town. (Ord. 2-2002 §3.7) 
Sec. 5-1-145. - Alternative compensation. 
    In the event the obligation of the Grantee to compensate the Town through franchise fee payments is lawfully suspended or eliminated, in whole or part, the Grantee shall pay to the Town compensation equivalent to the compensation paid to the Town by other similarly situated users of the Town's rights-of-way for the Grantee's use of the Town's rights-of-way, provided that in no event shall such payments exceed the equivalent of five percent (5%) of the Grantee's gross revenues (subject to the other provisions contained in this Franchise). (Ord. 2-2002 §3.8) 
Sec. 5-1-150. - Additional commitments not franchise fee payments. 
    No term or condition in this Franchise, including the funding required by Division 6, shall in any way modify or affect the Grantee's obligation to pay franchise fees. Although the total sum of franchise fee payments and additional PEG Access commitments set forth elsewhere in this Franchise may total more than five percent (5%) of the Grantee's gross revenues in any twelve-month period, the Grantee agrees that the additional PEG Access commitments herein are not franchise fees as defined under any federal law, nor are they to be offset or credited against any franchise fee payments due to the Town, nor do they represent an increase in franchise fees to be passed through to subscribers pursuant to any federal law. (Ord. 2-2002 §3.9) 
Sec. 5-1-155. - Tax liability. 
    Subject to applicable law, the franchise fees shall be in addition to any and all taxes or other levies or assessments which are now or hereafter required to be paid by businesses in general by any law of the Town, the State or the United States, including without limitation sales, use and other taxes, business license fees or other payments. Payment of the franchise fees under this Franchise shall not exempt the Grantee from the payment of any other license fee, permit fee, tax or charge on the business, occupation, property or income of the Grantee that may be lawfully imposed by the Town. Any other license fees, taxes or charges shall be of general applicability in nature and shall not be levied against the Grantee solely because of its status as a cable operator, or against subscribers, solely because of their status as such. (Ord. 2-2002 §3.10) 
Sec. 5-1-160. - Financial records. 
    The Grantee agrees to meet with a representative of the Town upon request to review the Grantee's methodology of recordkeeping, financial reporting, the computing of franchise fee obligations and other procedures, the understanding of which the Town deems necessary for reviewing reports and records. (Ord. 2-2002 §3.11) 
Sec. 5-1-165. - Payment on termination. 
    If this Franchise terminates for any reason, the Grantee shall file with the Town within ninety (90) calendar days of the date of the termination, a financial statement, certified by an independent certified public accountant, showing the gross revenues received by the Grantee since the end of the previous fiscal year. The Town reserves the right to satisfy any remaining financial obligations of the Grantee to the Town by utilizing the funds available in the letter of credit or other security provided by the Grantee. (Ord. 2-2002 §3.12) 
Division 4 - Administration and Regulation 

Sec. 5-1-210. - Authority. 
(a)  The Town is vested with the power and right to reasonably regulate the exercise of the privileges permitted by this Franchise in the public interest or to delegate that power and right, or any part thereof, in its sole discretion, to the extent permitted under state and local law; provided, however, that the Grantee shall have the right to appeal to the legislative body of the Town any adverse determination made by a delegate of the Town. 
(b)  Nothing in this Franchise shall limit or expand the Town's right of eminent domain under state law. (Ord. 2-2002 §4.1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 5-1-215. - Rates and charges. 
    All of the Grantee's rates and charges related to or regarding cable services shall be subject to regulation by the Town to the full extent authorized by applicable federal, state and local laws. (Ord. 2-2002 §4.2) 
Sec. 5-1-220. - Rate discrimination. 
    All of the Grantee's rates and charges shall be nondiscriminatory as to all persons and organizations of similar classes, under similar circumstances and conditions, pursuant to Section 623 of the Cable Act, federal regulations promulgated thereunder and any other applicable federal, state or local law. (Ord. 2-2002 §4.3) 
Sec. 5-1-225. - Filing of rates and charges. 
(a)  Throughout the term of this Franchise, the Grantee shall maintain on file with the Town a complete schedule of applicable rates and charges for cable services provided under this Franchise. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require the Grantee to file rates and charges under temporary reductions or waivers of rates and charges in conjunction with promotional campaigns. As used in this Section, no rate or charge shall be considered temporary if subscribers have the ability over a period greater than four (4) consecutive months (or such other period as may be approved by the Town) to purchase cable services at such rate or charge. 
(b)  Upon written request of the Town, the Grantee shall provide a complete schedule of current rates and charges for leased access channels, or portions of such channels, provided by the Grantee. The schedule shall include a description of the price, terms and conditions if established by the Grantee for leased access channels. (Ord. 2-2002 §4.4) 
Sec. 5-1-230. - Cross-subsidization. 
    The Grantee shall comply with all applicable laws regarding rates for cable services and all applicable laws covering issues of cross-subsidization. (Ord. 2-2002 §4.5) 
Sec. 5-1-235. - Reserved authority. 
    The Grantee and the Town each reserve all rights and authority arising from the Cable Act and any other relevant provisions of federal, state or local law. (Ord. 2-2002 §4.6) 
Sec. 5-1-240. - Time limits strictly construed. 
    Whenever this Franchise sets forth a time for any act to be performed by the Grantee, such time shall be deemed to be of the essence. (Ord. 2-2002 §4.7) 
Sec. 5-1-245. - Franchise amendment procedure. 
    Either party may at any time seek an amendment of this Franchise by so notifying the other party in writing. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice, the Town and the Grantee shall meet to discuss the proposed amendment. If the parties reach a mutual agreement upon the suggested amendment, such amendment shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees for its approval. If so approved by the Board of Trustees and the Grantee, then the amendment shall be deemed part of this Franchise. If mutual agreement is not reached, there shall be no amendment. (Ord. 2-2002 §4.8) 
Sec. 5-1-250. - Performance evaluations. 
(a)  The Town may hold performance evaluation sessions within ninety (90) days of the annual anniversary dates of the effective date of this Franchise. All such evaluation sessions shall be conducted by the Town. 
(b)  Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time by the Town during the term of this Franchise upon reasonable prior written notice to the Grantee. 
(c)  All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced at least two (2) weeks in advance in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town. The Grantee shall also include with or on the subscriber billing statements, for the billing period immediately preceding the commencement of the session, written notification of the date, time and place of the regular performance evaluation session, and any special evaluation session as required by the Town, provided that the Grantee receives appropriate advance notice. 
(d)  Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation session may include, but are not limited to, cable service rate structures; franchise fee payments; liquidated damages; free or discounted cable services; application of new technologies; cable system performance; cable services provided; programming offered; subscriber complaints; privacy; amendments to this Franchise; judicial and FCC rulings; line extension policies; and the Town's or the Grantee's rules; provided that nothing in this Section shall be construed as requiring the renegotiation of this Franchise. 
(e)  During evaluations under this Section, the Grantee shall fully cooperate with the Town and shall provide such information and documents as the Town may reasonably require to perform the evaluation; provided, however, that nothing herein shall require the Grantee to create documents unless the parties mutually agree to the terms and conditions thereof. (Ord. 2-2002 §4.9) 
Sec. 5-1-255. - Late fees. 
(a)  For purposes of this Section, any assessment, charge, cost, fee or sum, however characterized, that the Grantee imposes upon a subscriber solely for late payment of a bill is a late fee and shall be applied in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to create, limit or otherwise affect the ability of the Grantee, if any, to impose assessments, charges, fees or sums other than those permitted by this Section, for the Grantee's other services or activities it performs in compliance with applicable law, including FCC law, rule or regulation. 
(c)  The Grantee's late fee and disconnection policies and practices shall be nondiscriminatory; and such policies and practices, and any fees imposed pursuant to this Section, shall apply equally in all parts of the Town without regard to the neighborhood or income level of the subscriber. (Ord. 2-2002 §4.10) 
Sec. 5-1-260. - Force majeure. 
(a)  In the event the Grantee is prevented or delayed in the performance of any of its obligations under this Franchise by reason beyond the control of the Grantee, the Grantee shall have a reasonable time, under the circumstances, to perform the affected obligation under this Franchise or to procure a substitute for such obligation which is reasonably satisfactory to the Town. Those conditions which are not within the control of the Grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, labor unrest, lack of equipment or labor, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather conditions which have a direct and substantial impact on the Grantee's ability to provide cable services in the Town and which were not caused and could not have been avoided by the Grantee using its reasonable best efforts in its operations to avoid such results. 
(b)  If the Grantee believes that a reason beyond its control has prevented or delayed its compliance with the terms of this Franchise, the Grantee shall provide documentation as reasonably required by the Town to substantiate the Grantee's claim. If the Grantee has not yet cured the deficiency, the Grantee shall also provide the Town with its proposed plan for remediation, including the timing for such cure. (Ord. 2-2002 §4.11) 
Division 5 - Financial Responsibilities 

Sec. 5-1-310. - Indemnification. 
(a)  General indemnification. The Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold the Town, its officers, officials, boards, commissions and employees, harmless from any action or claim for injury, damage, loss, liability, cost or expense, including court and appeal costs and attorneys' fees or expenses, arising from any casualty or accident to persons or property, including without limitation copyright infringement, defamation and all other damages in any way arising out of, or by reason of, any construction, excavation, operation, maintenance, reconstruction or any other act done under this Franchise, by or for the Grantee, its agents or employees, or by reason of any neglect or omission of the Grantee; provided, however, that the Grantee shall have no responsibility whatsoever to indemnify any actions or claims of any kind arising from or related to PEG programming. The Grantee shall reasonably consult and cooperate with the Town while conducting its defense of the Town. 
(b)  Indemnification for relocation. The Grantee shall indemnify the Town for any damages, claims, additional costs or expenses assessed against, or payable by, the Town arising out of, or resulting from, the Grantee's failure to remove, adjust or relocate any of its facilities in the rights-of-way in a timely manner in accordance with any relocation required by the Town. 
(c)  Additional circumstances. The Grantee shall also indemnify, defend and hold the Town harmless for any claim for injury, damage, loss, liability, cost or expense, including court and appeal costs and attorneys' fees or expenses in any way arising out of: 
(1)  The lawful actions of the Town in granting this Franchise to the extent such actions are consistent with this Franchise and applicable law; or 
(2)  Damages arising out of any failure by the Grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees/licensors of programs to be delivered by the cable system, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Franchise. 
(d)  Procedures and defenses. If a claim or action arises, the Town or any other indemnified party shall promptly tender the defense of the claim to the Grantee, which defense shall be at the Grantee's expense. The Town may participate in the defense of a claim in which it is named, at its own cost. 
(e)  Nonwaiver. The fact that the Grantee carries out any activities under this Franchise through independent contractors shall not constitute an avoidance of or defense to the Grantee's duty of defense and indemnification under this Section. 
(f)  Expenses. If separate representation to fully protect the interests of both parties is necessary, such as arising from a conflict of interest between the Town and the counsel selected by the Grantee to represent the Town, after all reasonable measures have been taken to prevent the necessity of hiring separate counsel for the Town, the Grantee shall pay all reasonable expenses incurred by the Town in defending itself with regard to any action, suit or proceeding indemnified by the Grantee. The Town's expenses shall include all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses, such as consultants' fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the Town Attorney or his or her assistants or any employees of the Town, but shall not include outside attorneys' fees for services that are unnecessarily duplicative of services provided to the Town by the Grantee. (Ord. 2-2002 §5.1) 
Sec. 5-1-315. - Insurance. 
(a)  The Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect at its own cost and expense each of the following policies of insurance coverage: 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance with limits of no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) general aggregate. Coverage shall be at least as broad as that provided by ISO CG 00 01 1/96 or its equivalent and include severability of interests. Such insurance shall name the Town, its officers, officials and employees as additional insureds per ISO CG 2026 or its equivalent. There shall be a waiver of subrogation and rights of recovery against the Town, its officers, officials and employees. Coverage shall apply as to claims between insureds on the policy, if applicable. 
(2)  Commercial automobile liability insurance with minimum combined single limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) aggregate with respect to each of the Grantee's owned, hired and non-owned vehicles assigned to or used in the operation of the cable system in the Town. The policy shall contain a severability of interests provision. 
(b)  Each policy shall provide that a certificate of insurance shall be provided to the Town stating that the policy or policies of insurance shall not be canceled or materially changed so as to be out of compliance with these requirements without thirty (30) days' written notice first provided to the Town, via certified mail, and ten (10) days' notice for nonpayment of premium. If the insurance is canceled or materially altered so as to be out of compliance with the requirements of this Section within the term of this Franchise, the Grantee shall provide a replacement coverage policy. The Grantee agrees to maintain continuous uninterrupted insurance coverage, in at least the amounts required, for the duration of this Franchise. (Ord. 2-2002 §5.2) 
Sec. 5-1-320. - Deductibles and certificate of insurance. 
(a)  Liability. Any deductible of the policies shall not in any way limit the Grantee's liability to the Town. 
(b)  Endorsements. All policies shall contain, or shall be endorsed so that: 
(1)  The Town, its officers, official, boards, commissions and employees shall be covered as, and have the rights of, additional insureds with respect to liability arising out of activities performed by, or on behalf of, the Grantee under this Franchise or applicable law, or in the construction, operation, repair or ownership of the cable system. 
(2)  The Grantee's insurance coverage shall be primary insurance with respect to the Town, its officers, officials, boards, commissions, employees and agents. Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the Town, its officers, officials, boards, commissions, employees and agents shall be in excess of the Grantee's insurance and shall not contribute to it. 
(3)  The Grantee's insurance shall apply separately to each insured against whom a claim is made or lawsuit is brought, except with respect to the limits of the insurer's liability. 
(c)  Acceptability of insurers. The insurance obtained by the Grantee shall be placed with insurers with a Best's rating of no less than "A VIII." 
(d)  Verification of coverage. The Grantee shall furnish the Town with a certificate of insurance and endorsements or a copy of the page of the policy reflecting blanket additional insured status. The certificate and endorsements for each insurance policy are to be signed by a person authorized by that insurer to bind coverage on its behalf. The certificates and endorsements for each insurance policy are to be on standard forms or such forms as are consistent with standard industry practices. 
(e)  Self-insurance. In the alternative to providing a certificate of insurance to the Town certifying insurance coverage as required above, the Grantee may provide self-insurance in the same amount and level of protection for the Grantee and the Town, its officers, agents and employees, as otherwise required under this Division. The adequacy of self-insurance shall be subject to the periodic review and approval of the Town. (Ord. 2-2002 §5.3) 
Sec. 5-1-325. - Construction bond. 
(a)  The Grantee shall provide and maintain in effect a construction bond in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to secure completion of the upgrade of the cable system. Upon the successful completion of the upgrade described in Division 8, the Town shall release or return the bond within ten (10) business days of receipt of written request, either by signing a release form or returning the bond itself. 
(b)  The construction bond may be drawn on by the Town for those purposes specified in Section 5-1-845 hereof, and/or violations of the requirements of Divisions 5 and 7 with regard to the system upgrade requirements provided in Division 8 herein. Any such draw shall be conducted according to the procedures of Division 10, as the case may be, provided that the Grantee has received written notice and thirty (30) days after receipt of notice to cure any material violations before any payment. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days after notice to the Grantee that any amount has been withdrawn by the Grantee from the bond pursuant to Division 10, the Grantee shall restore the bond to its original amount. 
(d)  The Grantee shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Trustees for reimbursement in the event the Grantee believes that the bond was drawn upon improperly. The Grantee shall also have the right of judicial appeal if the Grantee believes that the bond has not been properly drawn upon in accordance with this Franchise. Any amounts the Town erroneously or wrongfully withdraws from the bond shall be returned to the Grantee with interest, from the date of withdrawal at a rate equal to the prime rate of interest as quoted in the Wall Street Journal on the date the funds were withdrawn. 
(e)  Maintenance of the requisite construction bond shall not in any way limit the liability of the Grantee for any failure to fully perform its obligations under this Franchise. (Ord. 2-2002 §5.4; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 5-1-330. - Letter of credit. 
(a)  The Grantee shall establish and provide to the Town, as security for the faithful performance by the Grantee of all of the provisions of this Franchise, a letter of credit in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(b)  The letter of credit shall be maintained at five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) throughout the term of this Franchise. 
(c)  The letter of credit may be drawn upon by the Town in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 5-1-810, for purposes including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Failure of the Grantee to pay to the Town sums due under the terms of this Franchise; 
(2)  Reimbursement of costs borne by the Town to correct franchise violations not corrected by the Grantee; 
(3)  Monetary remedies or damages assessed against the Grantee due to default or breach of franchise requirements; and 
(4)  Failure to comply with the Customer Service Standards of the Town, as the same may be amended from time to time by the Board of Trustees acting by resolution or ordinance. 
(d)  Upon assessment of any amounts that may be drawn from the letter of credit after compliance with the procedures of Section 5-1-810 herein, the Town shall provide written notice to the Grantee of the amount assessed. The Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from the date of such notice to pay the assessment prior to the Town's accessing the letter of credit. 
(e)  The Town shall give the Grantee written notice of any withdrawal under this Section upon such withdrawal. Within seven (7) business days following receipt of such notice, the Grantee shall restore the letter of credit to the amount required under this Franchise. 
(f)  The Grantee shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Trustees for reimbursement in the event the Grantee believes that the letter of credit was drawn upon improperly. The Grantee shall also have the right of judicial appeal if the Grantee believes that the letter of credit has not been properly drawn upon in accordance with this Franchise. Any funds the Town erroneously or wrongfully withdraws from the letter of credit shall be returned to the Grantee, with interest from the date of withdrawal at a rate equal to the prime rate of interest as quoted in the Wall Street Journal. (Ord. 2-2002 §5.5) 
Sec. 5-1-335. - Customer service standards. 
    The Grantee shall comply with customer service standards promulgated by the FCC, as well as any applicable customer service standards lawfully adopted of the Town, as the same may be amended from time to time by the Board of Trustees acting by resolution or ordinance. The Town's current customer service standards are attached to this Chapter as Appendix 5-A. The Grantee reserves the right to challenge any customer service ordinance that it believes is inconsistent with its contractual rights under this Franchise. (Ord. 2-2002 §6.1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 5-1-340. - Customer service. 
(a)  Subscriber privacy. The Grantee shall fully comply with any provisions regarding the privacy rights of subscribers contained in federal, state or local law. 
(b)  Subscriber contracts. The Grantee shall not enter into a contract with any subscriber that is in conflict with the terms of this Franchise or any exhibit thereto, or the requirements of any applicable customer service standard. Upon request, the Grantee will provide to the Town a sample of the subscriber contract or service agreement then in use. 
(c)  Advance notice to Town. The Grantee shall use reasonable efforts to furnish to the Town, in advance, any notices provided to subscribers or the media in the normal course of business. (Ord. 2-2002 §§6.2-6.4; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 5-1-345. - Open records. 
    The Town, including the Town's auditor, shall have access to and the right to inspect any books and records of the Grantee and its parent corporations and affiliates, which are related to the administration or enforcement of the terms of this Franchise, subject to the provisions of Section 5-1-350 and which are not subject to contractual confidentiality agreements or subscriber privacy requirements. The Grantee shall not deny the Town access to any such records on the basis that the Grantee's records are under the control of any affiliate or a third party. The Town may, in writing, request copies of any such records required under this Division, and the Grantee shall provide such copies within thirty (30) days of the receipt of such request. One (1) copy of all reports and records required under this or any other section shall be furnished to the Town, at the sole expense of the Grantee. If the requested books and records are too voluminous, or for security reasons cannot be copied or removed, the Grantee may request, in writing within ten (10) days of receipt of the Town's written request, that the Town inspect them at the Grantee's local offices. If any books or records of the Grantee are not kept in a local office, and if the Town reasonably determines that an examination of such records is necessary or appropriate for the performance of any of the Town's administration or enforcement of this Franchise, the Grantee shall deliver the books or records for inspection locally. (Ord. 2-2002 §7.1) 
Sec. 5-1-350. - Confidentiality. 
    The Town agrees to treat as confidential any books or records that constitute proprietary, confidential or trade secret information under federal or state law, to the extent that the Grantee makes the Town aware of such confidentiality, and why such information is confidential under state or federal law. If the Town believes it must release any such confidential books and records in the course of enforcing this Franchise, or for any other reason, it shall advise the Grantee in writing at least ten (10) days in advance so that the Grantee may take appropriate steps to protect its interests. If the Town receives a demand from any person for disclosure of any information designated by the Grantee as confidential, the Town shall advise the Grantee and provide the Grantee with a copy of any written request by the party demanding access to such information as soon as reasonably possible, but in all cases prior to the release of the information. Until otherwise ordered by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, the Town agrees that, to the extent permitted by state and federal law, it shall deny access to any of the Grantee's books and records marked confidential as set forth above to any person. The Grantee shall indemnify the Town and reimburse the Town for all reasonable costs and attorneys' fees incurred in any legal proceedings pursued under this Section. (Ord. 2-2002 §7.2) 
Sec. 5-1-355. - Records required. 
(a)  Except as otherwise indicated herein, the Grantee shall maintain and retain records for the period of time required by the FCC or other applicable governmental regulatory agency or, when there is no applicable governmental agency requirement, for five (5) years, and shall furnish to the Town upon written request: 
(1)  At the completion of the upgrade of the cable system, a complete set of maps showing the location of all cable system equipment and facilities in the right-of-way, but excluding details on proprietary electronics contained therein and subscriber drops. As-built maps including proprietary electronics shall be available at the Grantee's offices for inspection by the Town's authorized representative or agent and made available to such upon reasonable notice during regular business hours, during the course of technical inspections as reasonably conducted by the Town. These maps shall be certified as accurate at the time they are prepared by an appropriate representative of the Grantee. 
(2)  A copy of all FCC filings on behalf of the Grantee and its affiliates which relate to the operation of the cable system in the Town. 
(3)  A current list of cable services, rates and channel line-ups. 
(b)  Subject to Section 350, all information furnished to the Town is public information and shall be treated as such, except for information involving the privacy rights of individual subscribers. (Ord. 2-2002 §7.3) 
Sec. 5-1-360. - Annual reports. 
    Upon written request, but no more often than annually, the Grantee shall submit to the Town a written report which shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, a summary of the previous year's activities in the development of the cable system, including but not limited to cable services begun or discontinued during the reporting year. (Ord. 2-2002 §7.4) 
Sec. 5-1-365. - Copies of federal and state reports. 
    Upon reasonable written request, the Grantee shall submit to the Town copies of all pleadings, applications, notifications, communications and documents of any kind, submitted by the Grantee or its parent corporation to any federal, state or local courts, regulatory agencies and other governmental bodies if such documents directly relate to the operations of the Grantee's cable system within the Town. The Grantee shall submit such documents to the Town no later than thirty (30) days following receipt of a written request. The Grantee shall not claim confidential, privileged or proprietary rights to such documents unless, under federal, state or local law, such documents have been determined to be confidential by a court of competent jurisdiction or a federal or state agency. With respect to all documents provided to any federal, state or local regulatory agency as a routine matter in the due course of operating the Grantee's cable system within the Town, the Grantee shall make such documents available to the Town upon reasonable written request. (Ord. 2-2002 §7.5; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 5-1-370. - Complaint file and reports. 
(a)  The Grantee shall keep an accurate and comprehensive file of any and all complaints it receives regarding the cable system and the Grantee's actions in response to those complaints. Such files shall be kept in a manner consistent with the privacy rights of subscribers. These files shall remain open to the Town and the public during normal business hours. Within sixty (60) days of December 31 of each year, the Grantee shall provide to the Town a report in a mutually acceptable format which shall include all customer complaints received by the Grantee within the time period specified in the Town's request, but no greater than a one-year period, including customer complaints referred by the Town to the Grantee. 
(b)  A log of all service interruptions shall be maintained and provided to the Town upon written request. 
(c)  The Grantee shall provide to the Town such other reports as mutually agreed upon. (Ord. 2-2002 §7.6) 
Sec. 5-1-375. - False statements. 
    Any false statement or representation in any written report required by this Franchise (not including clerical errors or errors made in good faith) may be deemed a breach of this Franchise and may subject the Grantee to liquidated damages. The Grantee shall have notice and the opportunity to cure any such statement, which shall bar the assessment of liquidated damages. (Ord. 2-2002 §7.7) 
Division 6 - Programming and Services 

Sec. 5-1-410. - Broad programming categories. 
    The Grantee shall provide or enable the provision of at least the following initial broad categories of programming to the extent such categories are reasonably available: 
(1)  Educational programming; 
(2)  Colorado news, weather and information; 
(3)  Sports; 
(4)  General entertainment (including movies); 
(5)  Children/family-oriented; 
(6)  Arts, culture and performing arts; 
(7)  Science/documentary; and 
(8)  National news, weather and information. (Ord. 2-2002 §8.1) 
Sec. 5-1-415. - Deletion or reduction of broad programming categories. 
(a)  Subject to federal law, the Grantee shall not delete or so limit as to effectively delete any broad category of programming within its control without the prior written consent of the Town. 
(b)  In the event of a modification proceeding under federal law, the mix and quality of cable services provided by the Grantee on the effective date of this Franchise shall be deemed the mix and quality of cable services required under this Franchise throughout its term. (Ord. 2-2002 §8.2) 
Sec. 5-1-420. - Parental control device. 
    Upon request by any subscriber, the Grantee shall lease or sell a parental control or lockout device, trap or filter to enable a subscriber to prohibit viewing of a particular cable service during periods selected by the subscriber. The Grantee shall inform its subscribers of the availability of the lockout device at the time of their initial subscription and periodically thereafter. (Ord. 2-2002 §8.3) 
Sec. 5-1-425. - Continuity of service mandatory. 
(a)  It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue to receive cable service from the Grantee insofar as their financial and other obligations to the Grantee are honored. The Grantee shall use its best efforts so as to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted cable service regardless of the circumstances. For the purposes of this Section, uninterrupted does not include short-term outages of the cable system for maintenance or testing. 
(b)  In the event of a change of Grantee, or in the event a new cable operator acquires the cable system in accordance with this Franchise, the Grantee shall reasonably cooperate with the Town, new franchisee or cable operator in maintaining continuity of cable service to all subscribers. During any transition period, the Grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the cable system, and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its services when it no longer operates the cable system. 
(c)  Subject to the force majeure provision of this Franchise, failure of the Grantee to operate the cable system for four (4) consecutive days without prior approval of the Town Administrator or without just cause may be considered a material violation of this Franchise. (Ord. 2-2002 §8.4) 
Sec. 5-1-430. - Initial capital contribution. 
    Within ten (10) days of the effective date of this Franchise, the Grantee shall provide a capital contribution of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) which the Town shall use for video production and to purchase equipment to produce access programming. On or before January 23, 2003, the Grantee shall provide a second capital contribution of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) which the Town shall use for video production and to purchase equipment to produce access programming. (Ord. 2-2002 §9.1) 
Sec. 5-1-435. - Management and control of access channels. 
(a)  The Town shall have sole and exclusive responsibility for the operation and administration of the access channels, identifying the designated access providers and allocating the access resources under this Division. The Town may authorize designated access providers to control and manage the use of any and all access facilities provided by the Grantee under this Franchise, including without limitation the operation of access channels. To the extent of such designation by the Town, the designated access provider shall have sole and exclusive responsibility for operating and managing such access facilities and for compliance with the law regarding the same. The Town may formulate rules for the operation of the access channels, consistent with this Franchise and the Grantee's reasonable technical requirements. The Grantee shall cooperate with the Town and designated access providers in the use of the cable system and access facilities for the provision of access; however, nothing herein shall require the Grantee to expend capital or human resources in support of access beyond that specifically required by this Franchise. Nothing herein shall prohibit the Town from authorizing itself to be a designated access provider. Nothing herein shall prohibit the Town from assigning several designated access providers to share a single access channel. 
(b)  All assigned access channels can be used to transmit signals in any format which is technically compatible with the cable system, including, by way of example and not limitation, video, audio only, secondary audio and/or text messages. Such uses must be in furtherance of access purposes. (Ord. 2-2002 §9.2; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 5-1-440. - Initial access channel. 
    As of the effective date, the Grantee shall provide one (1) downstream government and educational access channel on the cable system for the Town's exclusive use. (Ord. 2-2002 §9.3) 
Sec. 5-1-445. - Additional access channels. 
    The Town may require the Grantee to activate, at the Grantee's expense, up to two (2) additional downstream access channels, for a maximum of three (3) access channels. If the Town believes that additional access channel capacity is needed, and if the Grantee provides more than three (3) access channels to any of its other cable systems in Larimer County, within ninety (90) days of receiving a request for an additional channel or channels from the Town, the Grantee shall provide such additional channel; provided, however, that the Grantee shall not be obligated to provide a greater total number of access channels to the Town than it provides to any other franchising authority in the County. (Ord. 2-2002 §9.4) 
Sec. 5-1-450. - Access channels on basic service. 
    All access channels provided to subscribers under this Franchise shall be included by the Grantee, without limitation, as a part of the basic service. (Ord. 2-2002 §9.5) 
Sec. 5-1-455. - Access channel assignments. 
    The Grantee will use its best efforts to minimize the movement of access channel assignments. (Ord. 2-2002 §9.6) 
Sec. 5-1-460. - Relocation of access channels. 
    The Grantee shall provide the Town with a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) days' notice prior to the time any access channel designation is changed, unless the change is required by federal law, in which case the Grantee shall give the Town the maximum notice possible. The Grantee, at its expense, will place the Town's notices of the channel change on or with its regular monthly billings, upon the Town's request. Any new channel designations for the access channels provided pursuant to this Franchise shall be in full compliance with FCC signal quality and proof-of-performance standards. (Ord. 2-2002 §9.7) 
Sec. 5-1-465. - Technical quality. 
    The Grantee shall maintain all access channels, interconnects and return lines at the same or better level of technical quality and reliability required by this Franchise and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations for other channels, services and Interconnects. The Grantee shall provide routine maintenance and shall repair and replace all Grantee-owned transmission equipment as necessary to carry a quality signal from the access facilities provided under this Franchise to subscribers. (Ord. 2-2002 §9.8) 
Sec. 5-1-470. - Change in technology. 
    In the event the Grantee makes any change in the cable system and related equipment and facilities or in the Grantee's signal delivery technology, which affects the signal quality or transmission of access services or programming, the Grantee shall, at its own expense, take necessary technical steps or provide necessary technical assistance, including the acquisition of all necessary equipment and training of access personnel, to ensure that the capabilities of access services are not diminished or adversely affected by such change. For example, this provision shall apply if the cable system is converted from an analog to a digital format, such that the access channels must also be converted to digital in order to be received by subscribers. (Ord. 2-2002 §9.9) 
Sec. 5-1-475. - Information about access programming to subscribers. 
    Upon request by the Town, the Grantee shall include information about access programming in the installation packet provided to subscribers. The Town shall supply the materials, for insertion in the packet, in a format consistent with the Grantee's requirements. (Ord. 2-2002 §9.10) 
Sec. 5-1-480. - Institutional network. 
    The I-Net is a private communications network governed by this Franchise and the Cable Act. The I-Net may be used by the Town and any qualified I-Net user to provide any technically and legally compatible, noncommercial service. The Town and the Grantee shall negotiate in good faith and mutually agree on the development, use and cost of the I-NET; provided however, that any charges imposed by the Grantee upon the Town shall not exceed its actual costs. (Ord. 2-2002 §10) 
Division 7 - General Right-of-Way Use and Construction 

Sec. 5-1-510. - Right to construct. 
    Subject to generally applicable laws, regulations, rules, resolutions and ordinances of the Town and the provisions of this Franchise, the Grantee may perform all construction in the rights-of-way for any facility needed for the maintenance, upgrade or extension of the Grantee's cable system. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.1) 
Sec. 5-1-515. - Right-of-way meetings. 
    Subject to receiving reasonable advance notice, the Grantee will regularly attend and participate in meetings of the Town regarding right-of-way issues that may impact the cable system. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.2) 
Sec. 5-1-520. - Joint trenching/boring. 
    Whenever it is possible and reasonably practicable to jointly trench or share bores or cuts, the Grantee shall work with other providers, licensees, permittees and franchisees so as to reduce so far as possible the number of right-of-way cuts within the Town. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.3; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 5-1-525. - General standard. 
    All work authorized and required hereunder shall be done in a safe, thorough and workmanlike manner. All installations of equipment shall be permanent in nature, durable and installed in accordance with good engineering practices. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.4) 
Sec. 5-1-530. - Permits required for construction. 
    Prior to doing any work in the right-of-way or other public property, the Grantee shall apply for and obtain appropriate permits from the Town. The Grantee shall comply with the generally applicable ordinances, laws or regulations regarding Town rights-of-way as may be adopted from time to time pursuant to the Town's lawful police powers. The Grantee shall pay all generally applicable and lawful fees for the requisite Town permits received by the Grantee. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.5) 
Sec. 5-1-535. - Emergency permits. 
    In the event that emergency repairs are necessary, the Grantee shall immediately notify the Town of the need for such repairs. The Grantee may initiate such emergency repairs and shall apply for appropriate permits within forty-eight (48) hours after discovery of the emergency. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.6) 
Sec. 5-1-540. - Compliance with applicable codes. 
(a)  Town construction codes. The Grantee shall comply with all applicable Town construction codes, including without limitation the Uniform Building Code and other building codes, the Uniform Fire Code, the Uniform Mechanical Code and zoning codes and regulations. 
(b)  Tower specifications. Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be designed for the proper loading as specified by the Electronics Industries Association (EIA), as those specifications may be amended from time to time. Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted, erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and all other applicable federal, state and local codes or regulations. 
(c)  Safety codes. The Grantee shall comply with all applicable federal, state and Town safety requirements, rules, regulations, laws and practices, and employ all necessary devices as required by applicable law during construction, operation and repair of its cable system. By way of illustration and not limitation, the Grantee shall comply with the National Electric Code, National Electrical Safety Code and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Standards. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.7) 
Sec. 5-1-545. - Mapping. 
    The Grantee shall comply with any generally applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town regarding mapping systems for users of the rights-of-way. Upon completion of the upgrade, the Grantee shall provide to the Town Administrator a current, accurate and complete set of maps, in digital format, compatible with the Town's mapping system. Such maps shall provide information indicating the horizontal and vertical location of the Grantee's system and equipment which the Grantee owns or controls for all new installations, and horizontal location of all existing system and equipment located in the streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, bridges, sidewalks and front yard rights-of-way. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.8) 
Sec. 5-1-550. - Minimal interference. 
    Work in the right-of-way, on other public property, near public property or on or near private property shall be done in a manner that minimizes interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and residents. The Grantee's cable system shall be constructed and maintained in such manner as not to interfere with sewers, water pipes or any other property of the Town, or with any other pipes, wires, conduits, pedestals, structures or other facilities that may have been laid in the rights-of-way by, or under, the Town's authority. The cable system shall be located, erected and maintained so as not to endanger or unreasonably interfere with the lives of persons, to interfere with new improvements the Town may deem proper to make, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the rights-of-way or other public property; shall not unreasonably interfere with the travel and use of public places by the public during the construction, repair, operation or removal thereof; and shall not obstruct or impede traffic. In the event of such interference, the Town may require the removal or relocation of the Grantee's lines, cables, equipment and other appurtenances from the property in question at the Grantee's expense. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.9) 
Sec. 5-1-555. - Safety provisions. 
    The Grantee shall provide and use any equipment and facilities necessary to control and carry the Grantee's signals so as to prevent injury to the Town's property or property belonging to any person. The Grantee, at its own expense, shall repair, renew, change and improve its facilities to keep them in good repair and in safe and presentable condition. All excavations made by the Grantee in the rights-of-way shall be properly safeguarded for the prevention of accidents by the placement of adequate barriers, fences or boarding, the bounds of which, during periods of dusk and darkness, shall be clearly designated by warning lights. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.10) 
Sec. 5-1-560. - Hazardous substances. 
(a)  The Grantee shall comply with any and all applicable laws, statutes, regulations and orders concerning hazardous substances relating to the Grantee's cable system in the rights-of-way. 
(b)  The Grantee agrees to indemnify the Town against any claims, costs and expenses of any kind, whether direct or indirect, incurred by the Town arising out of a release of hazardous substances caused by the Grantee's cable system. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.11) 
Sec. 5-1-565. - Notice prior to work. 
    Prior to doing any work in the right-of-way, the Grantee shall give appropriate notices to the Town and to the notification association established in Section 9-1.5-105, C.R.S. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.12; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 5-1-570. - Notice to private property owners. 
    Except in the case of an emergency involving public safety or service interruptions to a large number of subscribers, the Grantee shall give notice to private property owners or legal tenants of work on private property in accordance with the adopted customer service standards, as the same may be amended from time to time by the Board of Trustees acting by ordinance. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.13; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 5-1-575. - Underground construction and use of poles. 
(a)  Where electric, telephone and other above-ground utilities are installed underground at the time of cable system construction upgrade, when construction in new developments where all utilities are required to be placed underground, or when all such wiring is subsequently placed underground, all cable system lines shall also be placed underground with other wire line service at no expense to the Town or subscribers unless funding is generally available for such relocation to all users of the rights-of-way. Related cable system equipment, such as pedestals, must be placed in accordance with the Town's applicable code requirements and rules. In areas where either electric or telephone utility wiring is aerial, the Grantee may install aerial cable, except when a property owner or resident requests underground installation and agrees to bear the additional cost in excess of aerial installation. Nothing contained in this Section shall require the Grantee to construct, operate and maintain underground any ground-mounted appurtenances. 
(b)  The Grantee shall utilize existing poles and conduit wherever possible and commercially reasonable. For purposes of this Section, rates set forth by any applicable state or federal regulations shall be considered commercially reasonable. 
(c)  In the event the Grantee cannot obtain the necessary poles and related facilities pursuant to a pole attachment agreement on commercially reasonable terms, and only in such event, then it shall be lawful for the Grantee to make all needed excavations in the rights-of-way for the purpose of placing, erecting, laying, maintaining, repairing and removing poles, supports for wires and conductors, and any other facility needed for the maintenance or extension of the Grantee's cable system. All poles of the Grantee shall be located as designated by the proper Town authorities. 
(d)  This Franchise does not grant, give or convey to the Grantee the right or privilege to install its facilities in any manner on specific utility poles or equipment of the Town or any other person. 
(e)  The Grantee and the Town recognize that situations may occur in the future where the Town may desire to place its own cable or conduit for fiber-optic cable in trenches or bores opened by the Grantee. The Grantee agrees to cooperate with the Town in any construction by the Grantee that involves trenching or boring, provided that the Town has first provided reasonable notice to the Grantee that it is interested in sharing the trenches or bores in the area where the Grantee's construction is occurring. The Grantee shall allow the Town to lay its cable, conduit and fiber-optic cable in the Grantee's trenches and bores, provided that the Town shares in the cost of the trenching and boring on the same terms and conditions as the Grantee at that time shares the total cost of trenches and bores. The Town shall be responsible for maintaining its respective cable, conduit and fiberoptic cable buried in the Grantee's trenches and bores under this Section. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.14; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 5-1-580. - Undergrounding of multiple-dwelling-unit drops. 
    In cases of single-site multiple-dwelling units, the Grantee shall minimize the number of individual aerial drop cables by installing multiple drop cables underground between the pole and the multiple-dwelling unit where determined to be technologically feasible and commercially reasonable in agreement with the owners and/or owner's association of the multiple-dwelling units. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.15) 
Sec. 5-1-585. - Burial standards. 
(a)  Depths. Unless otherwise required by law, the Grantee shall comply with the following burial depth standards. In no event shall the Grantee be required to bury its cable deeper than electric or gas facilities in the same portion of the right-of-way: 
(1)  Underground cable drops from the curb shall be buried at a minimum depth of twelve (12) inches unless blocked by rock, terrain or other utilities. 
(2)  Feeder lines and trunk lines for coaxial cable shall be buried at a minimum depth of twenty-four (24) inches, unless blocked by rock, terrain or other utilities. 
(3)  Fiber-optic cable for all lines shall be buried at a minimum depth of thirty-six (36) inches, unless blocked by rock, terrain or other utilities. 
(b)  Timeliness. Cable drops installed by the Grantee to residences shall be buried according to these standards within one (1) calendar week of initial installation, or at a time mutually agreed upon between the Grantee and the subscriber. When freezing surface conditions or other weather conditions prevent the Grantee from achieving such timetable, the Grantee shall apprize the subscriber of the circumstances and the revised schedule for burial, and shall provide the subscriber with the Grantee's telephone number and instructions as to how and when to call the Grantee to request burial of the line if the revised schedule is not met. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.16) 
Sec. 5-1-590. - Electrical bonding. 
    The Grantee shall ensure that all cable drops are properly bonded to the electrical power ground at the home, consistent with applicable code requirements. All nonconforming or nonperforming cable drops shall be replaced by the Grantee as necessary. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.17) 
Sec. 5-1-595. - Prewiring. 
    Any ordinance or resolution of the Town which requires prewiring of residential developments in a joint trench for electrical and telephone service shall be construed to include wiring for cable systems, subject to compliance with Section 5-1-755. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.18) 
Sec. 5-1-600. - Repair and restoration of property. 
(a)  The Grantee shall protect public and private property from damage. If damage occurs, the Grantee shall promptly notify the property owner within twenty-four (24) hours in writing. 
(b)  Whenever the Grantee disturbs or damages any right-of-way, other public property or any private property, the Grantee shall promptly restore the right-of-way or property to at least its prior condition, normal wear and tear excepted, at its own expense. 
(c)  The Grantee shall warrant any restoration work performed by or for the Grantee in the right-of-way or on other public property for two (2) years, which two-year warranty shall not include landscaping materials. With respect to landscaping materials, the Grantee shall warrant such work and materials for one (1) year, provided that the party responsible for the landscaping material reasonably maintains it during the warranty period. 
(d)  Upon completion of the work that caused any disturbance or damage, the Grantee shall promptly commence restoration of private property, and will use its best efforts to complete the restoration within seventy-two (72) hours, considering the nature of the work that must be performed. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.19) 
Sec. 5-1-605. - Use of conduits by Town. 
    Subject to any applicable state or federal regulations or tariffs, the Town may install or affix and maintain wires and equipment owned by the Town for Town purposes in or upon any and all of the Grantee's ducts, conduits or equipment in the rights-of-way and other public places on mutually acceptable terms and conditions to the extent space therein or thereon is reasonably available and pursuant to all applicable ordinances and codes; provided that: (1) such use by Town does not interfere with the current or future use by the Grantee; (2) the Town holds the Grantee harmless against and from all claims, demands, costs or liabilities of every kind and nature whatsoever arising out of such use, including but not limited to reasonable attorneys' fees and costs; (3) such use by the Town is restricted to noncommercial municipal purposes; (4) the Town takes reasonable precautions to prevent any use of the Grantee's conduits, ducts or equipment in any manner that results in inappropriate use thereof, or any loss or damage to the conduit, ducts, equipment or cable system; and (5) the Town does not use the conduits, ducts or equipment for any purpose that is in competition with the services offered by the Grantee. For the purposes of this Subsection, Town purposes includes, but is not limited to, the use of the structures and installations for Town fire, police, traffic, water, telephone and/or signal systems, but not for cable service in competition with the Grantee. The Grantee shall not deduct the value of such use of its facilities from its franchise fee payments or from other fees payable to the Town. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.20) 
Sec. 5-1-610. - Common users. 
(a)  For the purposes of this Subsection: 
    Attachment means any wire, optical fiber or other cable, and any related device, apparatus or auxiliary equipment, for the purpose of voice, video or data transmission. 
    Conduit or conduit facility means any structure, or section thereof, containing one (1) or more ducts, conduits, manholes, handholes or other such facilities in the Grantee's cable system. 
    Duct means a single enclosed raceway for cables, fiber optics or other wires. 
    Licensee means any person licensed or otherwise permitted by the Town to use the rights-of-way. 
    Surplus ducts or conduits are conduit facilities other than those occupied by the Grantee or any prior licensee, or unoccupied ducts held by the Grantee as emergency use spares, or other unoccupied ducts that the Grantee reasonably expects to use within two (2) years from the date of a request for use. One (1) extra duct installed for backup or expansion shall not be considered surplus. 
(b)  The Grantee acknowledges that the rights-of-way have a finite capacity for containing conduits. Therefore, the Grantee agrees that, whenever the Town determines it is impracticable to permit construction of an underground conduit system by any other person which may at the time have authority to construct or maintain conduits or ducts in the rights-of-way, but excluding persons providing cable services in competition with the Grantee, the Town may require the Grantee to afford to such person the right to use the Grantee's surplus ducts or conduits in common with the Grantee, pursuant to the terms and conditions of a mutually acceptable agreement for use of surplus ducts or conduits entered into by the Grantee and the licensee. Nothing herein shall require the Grantee to enter into an agreement with such person on less than commercially reasonable terms and if, in the Grantee's reasonable determination, such an agreement could compromise the integrity of the cable system. 
(c)  A licensee occupying part of a duct shall be deemed to occupy the entire duct. 
(d)  The Grantee shall give a licensee a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) days' notice of its need to occupy a licensed conduit and shall propose that the licensee take the first feasible action as follows: 
(1)  Pay revised conduit rent designed to recover the cost of retrofitting the conduit with multiplexing, fiber optics or other space-saving technology sufficient to meet the Grantee's space needs; 
(2)  Pay revised conduit rent based on the cost of new conduit constructed to meet the Grantee's space needs; 
(3)  Vacate the needed ducts or conduit; or 
(4)  Construct and maintain sufficient new conduit to meet the Grantee's space needs. 
(e)  When two (2) or more licensees occupy a section of conduit facility, the last licensee to occupy the conduit facility shall be the first to vacate or construct new conduit. When conduit rent is revised because of retrofitting, space-saving technology or construction of new conduit, all licensees shall bear the increased cost. 
(f)  All attachments shall meet applicable local, state and federal clearance and other safety requirements, be adequately grounded and anchored, and meet the provisions of contracts executed between the Grantee and the licensee. The Grantee may, at its option, correct any attachment deficiencies and charge the licensee for its costs. Each licensee shall pay the Grantee for any fines, fees, damages or other costs the licensee's attachments cause the Grantee to incur. 
(g)  In order to enforce the provisions of this Subsection with respect to the Grantee, the Town must demonstrate that it has required that all similarly situated users of the rights-of-way comply with the provisions of this Subsection. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.21) 
Sec. 5-1-615. - Discontinuing use or abandonment of cable system facilities. 
    Whenever the Grantee intends to discontinue using any facility within the rights-of-way, the Grantee shall submit to the Town a complete description of the facility and the date on which the Grantee intends to discontinue using the facility. The Grantee may remove the facility or request that the Town permit it to remain in place. Notwithstanding the Grantee's request that any such facility remain in place, the Town may require the Grantee to remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility to protect the public health, welfare, safety and convenience, or otherwise serve the public interest; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any facilities which are used to provide telecommunications services. The Town may require the Grantee to perform a reasonable combination of modification and removal of the facility. The Grantee shall complete such removal or modification in accordance with a reasonable schedule set by the Town. Until such time as the Grantee removes or modifies the facility as reasonably directed by the Town, or until the rights to and responsibility for the facility are accepted by another person having authority to construct and maintain such facility, the Grantee shall retain all liability for such facility and be responsible for all necessary repairs and relocations of the facility, as well as maintenance of the right-of-way, in the same manner and degree as if the facility were in active use. If the Grantee abandons its facilities, the Town may choose to use such facilities for any purpose whatsoever, including but not limited to access purposes. If the Town chooses to utilize any such abandoned facilities, the Grantee's liability for those facilities shall cease. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.22) 
Sec. 5-1-620. - Movement of cable system facilities for Town purposes. 
(a)  The Town shall have the right to require the Grantee to relocate, remove, replace, modify or disconnect the Grantee's facilities and equipment located in the rights-of-way or on any other property of the Town in the event of an emergency or when reasonable public convenience requires such change (for example, without limitation, by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, right-of-way vacation, right-of-way construction, change or establishment of right-of-way grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other types of structures or improvements by the Town for public purposes). Such work shall be performed at no cost to the Town. Except during an emergency, the Town shall provide reasonable notice to the Grantee, not to be less than thirty (30) days, and allow the Grantee the opportunity to perform such action. In the event of any capital improvement project exceeding five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) in expenditures by the Town which requires the removal, replacement, modification or disconnection of the Grantee's facilities or equipment, the Town shall provide at least sixty (60) days' written notice to the Grantee. Following notice by the Town, the Grantee shall relocate, remove, replace, modify or disconnect any of its facilities or equipment within any right-of-way or on any other property of the Town. If the Town requires the Grantee to relocate its facilities located within the rights-of-way, the Town shall make a reasonable effort to provide the Grantee with an alternate location within the rights-of-way. If funds are generally made available to users of the rights-of-way for such relocation, the Grantee shall be entitled to its pro rata share of such funds. 
(b)  If the Grantee fails to complete this work within the time prescribed and to the Town's reasonable satisfaction, the Town may cause such work to be done and bill the actual cost of the work to the Grantee, including all out-of-pocket costs and expenses incurred by the Town due to the Grantee's delay. In such event, the Town shall not be liable for any damage to any portion of the Grantee's cable system unless the Town acted in a negligent manner. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of an itemized list of those costs, the Grantee shall pay the Town. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.23) 
Sec. 5-1-625. - Movement of cable system facilities for other franchise holders. 
    If any removal, replacement, modification or disconnection of the cable system is required to accommodate the construction, operation or repair of the facilities or equipment of another Town franchise holder, the Grantee shall, after at least thirty (30) days' advance written notice, take action to effect the necessary changes requested by the responsible entity. The Grantee may require that the costs associated with the removal or relocation be paid by the benefited party at no cost to the Town. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.24) 
Sec. 5-1-630. - Temporary changes for other permittees. 
    At the request of any person holding a valid permit and upon reasonable advance notice, the Grantee shall temporarily raise, lower or remove its wires as necessary to permit the moving of a building, vehicle, equipment or other item. The expense of such temporary changes must be paid by the permit holder, and the Grantee may require a reasonable deposit of the estimated payment in advance. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.25) 
Sec. 5-1-635. - Reservation of Town use of right-of-way. 
    Nothing in this Franchise shall prevent the Town or public utilities owned, maintained or operated by public entities other than the Town from constructing sewers; grading, paving, repairing or altering any right-of-way; laying down, repairing or removing water mains; or constructing or establishing any other public work or improvement. All such work shall be done, insofar as practicable, so as not to obstruct, injure or prevent the use and operation of the Grantee's cable system. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.26) 
Sec. 5-1-640. - Tree trimming. 
    The Grantee may prune or cause to be pruned, using proper pruning practices, any tree in the Town's rights-of-way which interferes with the Grantee's cable system. The Grantee shall comply with any general ordinance or regulations of the Town regarding tree trimming. Except in emergencies, the Grantee may not prune trees at a point below thirty (30) feet above sidewalk grade until one (1) week's written notice has been given to the owner or occupant of the premises abutting the right-of-way in or over which the tree is growing. The owner or occupant of the abutting premises may prune such tree at his or her own expense during this one-week period. The Grantee shall have no liability whatsoever for any acts or omissions by the owner or occupant of the abutting premises. If the owner or occupant fails to do so, the Grantee may prune such tree at its own expense. For purposes of this Section, emergencies exist when it is necessary to prune to protect the public or the Grantee's facilities from imminent danger only. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.27) 
Sec. 5-1-645. - Inspection of construction and facilities. 
    The Town may inspect any of the Grantee's facilities, equipment or construction at any time upon at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice or, in case of emergency, upon demand without prior notice. If the Grantee is out of compliance with its obligations hereunder, the Town, in addition to taking any other action permitted under applicable law, may order the Grantee, in writing, to make the necessary repairs and alterations specified therein forthwith to correct the unsafe condition by a time the Town reasonably establishes. The Town has the right to correct, inspect, administer and repair the unsafe condition if the Grantee fails to do so, and to reasonably charge the Grantee therefor. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.28) 
Sec. 5-1-650. - Stop work. 
(a)  On notice from the Town that any work is being performed contrary to the provisions of this Franchise, in an unsafe or dangerous manner as determined by the Town, or in violation of the terms of any generally applicable permit, laws, regulations, ordinances or standards, the work may immediately be stopped by the Town. The Grantee shall have the immediate right to challenge the basis for the stop work order, including the right to seek equitable relief from the enforcement of such order, and shall be entitled to recoup from the Town all out-of-pocket costs and expenses incurred by the Grantee, excluding legal fees, legal costs and in-house costs due to the Town's action if it is not sustained. 
(b)  The stop work order shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Be given to the person doing the work, or posted on the work site; 
(3)  Be sent to the Grantee by overnight delivery or by facsimile at the address given herein; 
(4)  Indicate the nature of the alleged violation or unsafe condition; and 
(5)  Establish conditions under which work may be resumed. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.29) 
Sec. 5-1-655. - Work of contractors and subcontractors. 
    The Grantee's contractors shall be licensed and bonded in accordance with the Town's generally applicable ordinances, regulations and requirements. Work by contractors and subcontractors is subject to the same restrictions, limitations and conditions as if the work were performed by the Grantee. The Grantee shall be responsible for all work performed by its contractors and subcontractors and others performing work on its behalf as if the work were performed by it, shall ensure that all such work is performed in compliance with this Franchise and other applicable law, and shall be jointly and severally liable for all damages and correcting all damage caused by them. It is the Grantee's responsibility to ensure that contractors, subcontractors or other persons performing work on the Grantee's behalf are familiar with the requirements of this Franchise and other applicable laws governing the work performed by them. (Ord. 2-2002 §11.30) 
Division 8 - Technical Standards 

Sec. 5-1-710. - Subscriber network and system upgrade. 
(a)  The Grantee shall install a fiber optic trunk to connect the cable system in the Town with the Grantee's headend facility at 1021 N. State Highway 287, LaPorte, within nine (9) months of the effective date of this Franchise. The Grantee shall upgrade and activate the cable system bandwidth to at least five hundred fifty (550) MHz throughout the franchise area within eighteen (18) months from the effective date of this Franchise. The Grantee intends to deploy fiber optics to nodes which serve no more than five hundred (500) subscribers per node, with amplifier cascades no longer than eight (8) amplifiers, as part of the upgrade. The Grantee may substitute another transmission material and/or modify its upgrade design, provided that the same technical benefits in reliability and picture quality are attained. The cable system shall be capable of supporting cable service and cable Internet service. Upon completion of the upgrade, the cable system shall deliver no less than one hundred ten (110) channels of analog and/or digital video programming services to subscribers. 
(b)  At such time as the Grantee has completed the upgrade required above, the Grantee shall send written notice to the Town. The Town shall have ninety (90) days from receipt of such notice to review the sweep analysis records kept by the Grantee which verify the completion of the cable system bandwidth expansion, and to complete such technical inspections as may be reasonably necessary to verify that the other components of the upgrade are complete; provided, however, that cable Internet service testing shall not occur until such time as the service is activated. The Town Administrator may require the Grantee to provide additional facts and information, in his or her reasonably exercised discretion, necessary to verify the completion of the upgrade. Upon its completion of this review and inspection, the Town shall notify the Grantee in writing of the Town's position concerning the completion of the upgrade. 
(c)  Equipment must be installed so that all closed captioning programming received by the cable system shall include the closed caption signal, so long as the closed caption signal is provided consistent with FCC standards. Equipment must be installed so that all local signals received in stereo or with secondary audio tracks (broadcast and access) are retransmitted in those same formats. 
(d)  All upgrade construction shall be subject to the Town's permitting process. 
(e)  The Grantee and Town shall meet, at the Town's request, to discuss the progress of the upgrade design plan and construction. 
(f)  The Grantee will take prompt corrective action if it finds that any facilities or equipment on the cable system are not operating as expected, or if it finds that facilities and equipment do not comply with the requirements of this Franchise or applicable law. 
(g)  The Grantee's construction decisions shall be based solely upon legitimate engineering decisions and shall not take into consideration the income level of any particular community within the franchise area. 
(h)  The Grantee shall provide a substantially similar channel line-up and service offerings in Town as it provides to other communities served from the Grantee's LaPorte headend. (Ord. 2-2002 §12.1) 
Sec. 5-1-715. - Periodic evaluation. 
(a)  Upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the Grantee, the Town may require an evaluation session. Evaluation sessions shall occur a minimum of once every five (5) years, beginning five (5) years from the effective date of this Franchise. All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public. 
(b)  Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation session may include, but are not limited to, application of new technologies, system performance, programming offered, access channels, facilities and support, municipal uses of cable, customer complaints, amendments to this Franchise, judicial rulings, FCC rulings, line extension policies and any other topics the Town and the Grantee deem relevant. 
(c)  As a result of a periodic review or evaluation session, the Town and the Grantee may develop such changes and modifications to the terms and conditions of this Franchise as are mutually agreed upon. (Ord. 2-2002 §12.2) 
Sec. 5-1-720. - Standby power. 
    The Grantee shall provide standby power generating capacity at the cable system headend which is rated to provide twelve (12) hours of emergency operation. The Grantee shall maintain standby power system supplies, rated for at least two (2) hours' duration, throughout the trunk and distribution networks, and rated for at least four (4) hours' duration at all nodes and at all hubs. (Ord. 2-2002 §12.3) 
Sec. 5-1-725. - Emergency alert capability. 
(a)  The Grantee shall provide an operating Emergency Alert System ("EAS") in accordance with and as required by the provisions of FCC Regulations, 47 C.F.R. Part II, and as such provision may from time to time be amended, so that the Town may use the cable system to transmit an emergency alert signal, including the ability to override the audio and, to the extent required by federal law, video on all channels throughout the Town from the Larimer County Communications Center or other location as may be designated by the Town pursuant to federal law. The Grantee shall test the EAS as required by federal law. Upon request, the Town shall be permitted to participate in and/or witness any EAS testing on a schedule formed in consultation with the Grantee. If the test indicates that the EAS is not performing consistent with FCC requirements, the Grantee shall make any necessary adjustment to the EAS, and the EAS shall be retested 
(b)  The Grantee shall ensure that the EAS is functioning properly at all times. It will test the EAS periodically, in a manner consistent with sound operational practices for emergency systems in accordance with federal law. The Grantee will advise the Town of the testing schedule and the Town may be present for the tests. (Ord. 2-2002 §12.4) 
Sec. 5-1-730. - Technical performance. 
    The Grantee shall fully comply with FCC technical standards and procedures, including all required FCC tests and all requirements to maintain test results in its public file. The technical performance of the cable system shall meet or exceed all applicable technical standards, as they may be amended from time to time, regardless of the transmission technology utilized. The Town shall have the full authority permitted by applicable law to enforce compliance with these technical standards. Copies of such test results will be available to the Town upon written request. (Ord. 2-2002 §12.5) 
Sec. 5-1-735. - Additional tests. 
    Where there exists other evidence which in the judgment of the Town casts doubt upon the reliability or technical quality of cable service, the Town shall have the right and authority to require the Grantee to test, analyze and report on the performance of the cable system. The Grantee shall reasonably cooperate with the Town in performing such testing and shall prepare the results and a report, if requested, within thirty (30) days after testing. Such report shall include the following information: 
(1)  The nature of the complaint or problem which precipitated the special tests; 
(2)  The cable system component tested; 
(3)  The equipment used and procedures employed in testing; 
(4)  The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem was resolved; and 
(5)  Any other information pertinent to said tests and analysis which may be required. (Ord. 2-2002 §12.6) 
Division 9 - Service Availability 

Sec. 5-1-750. - Universal service. 
    The Grantee shall not arbitrarily refuse to provide cable services to any person within its franchise area. All dwelling units and multiple dwelling units in the franchise area shall have the same availability of cable services from the Grantee's cable system under nondiscriminatory rates and reasonable terms and conditions. The Town acknowledges that the Grantee cannot control the dissemination of particular cable services beyond the point of demarcation at a multiple dwelling unit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee may introduce new or expanded cable services on a geographically phased basis, where such services require an upgrade of the cable system. The Grantee may also charge for line extensions and nonstandard installations pursuant to Section 5-1-755. (Ord. 2-2002 §13.1) 
Sec. 5-1-755. - Service availability. 
(a)  In general. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Grantee shall use its best efforts to provide cable service requiring a standard installation within seven (7) days of a request by any person within the Town, subject to payment of any required or owed fees or charges. For purposes of this Section, a request shall be deemed made on the date of signing a service agreement, receipt of funds by the Grantee, receipt of a written request by the Grantee or receipt by the Grantee of a verified verbal request. The Grantee shall provide such service: 
(1)  With no line extension charge except as specifically authorized elsewhere in this Franchise. 
(2)  At a nondiscriminatory installation charge for a standard installation, consisting of a one-hundred-twenty-five-foot drop from the existing subscriber distribution system to the demarcation point as that term is defined in federal law for residential subscribers, with additional charges for nonstandard installations computed according to a nondiscriminatory methodology for such installations, adopted by the Grantee and provided in writing to the Town. 
(3)  At nondiscriminatory monthly rates for residential subscribers. 
(b)  Extension. Whenever the Grantee receives a request for cable service from a customer in a contiguous unserved area where there are at least thirty-five (35) residences within five thousand two hundred eighty (5,280) cablebearing strand feet (one [1] cable mile) from the portion of the Grantee's trunk or distribution cable which is to be extended, it shall extend its cable system to such customer at no cost to said customer for the cable system extension, other than the published standard installation fees charged to all customers. 
(c)  Customer charges for extensions of service. No customer shall be refused service arbitrarily. However, for unusual circumstances, such as a customer's request to locate the cable drop underground, the existence of more than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of distance from distribution cable to connection of service to customers, or a request from a customer in an area which does not meet the density requirement of Subsection (b) above, density of less than thirty-five (35) residences per five thousand two hundred eighty (5,280) cable-bearing strand feet of trunk or distribution cable service may be made available on the basis of a capital contribution in aid of construction, including cost of material, labor and easements. For the purpose of determining the amount of capital contribution in aid of construction to be borne by the Grantee and customers in the area in which service may be expanded, the Grantee will contribute an amount equal to the construction and other costs per mile, multiplied by a fraction whose numerator equals the actual number of residences per five thousand two hundred eighty (5,280) cable-bearing strand feet of its trunk or distribution cable and whose denominator equals thirty-five (35). Customers who request service hereunder will bear the remainder of the construction and other costs on a pro rata basis. The Grantee may require that the payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction borne by such potential customers be paid in advance. (Ord. 2-2002 §13.2) 
Sec. 5-1-760. - Interconnection with other cable systems. 
(a)  The cable system shall be interconnected to the LaPorte headend, pursuant to this Article, and may, at its option, be interconnected with other area cable systems that are owned and operated by the Grantee or an affiliate, provided that such systems are within Larimer County. 
(b)  The Grantee shall explore with any public interconnection authority, regional interconnection authority or town, county, state or federal regulatory agency which may hereafter be established for the purpose of regulating, financing or otherwise providing for the interconnection of cable systems beyond the boundaries of the Town, the possibility of further interconnects. (Ord. 2-2002 §13.3) 
Sec. 5-1-765. - Connection of public facilities. 
    The Grantee shall, at no cost to the Town, provide one (1) outlet of basic service and expanded basic service to all Town-owned buildings, schools and public libraries where such service is provided as of the effective date of this Franchise. For purposes of this Section, school means all state-accredited K-12 public and private schools, but does not include home schools. In addition, the Grantee shall provide, at no cost to the Town or other entity, one (1) outlet of basic and expanded basic service to additional owned or leased and occupied Town buildings, schools and libraries upon request, if the drop line from the feeder cable to such building does not exceed one hundred twenty-five (125) feet or if the Town or other entity agrees to pay the incremental cost of such drop line in excess of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet, including the cost of such excess labor and materials. Outlets of basic and expanded basic service provided in accordance with this Section may be used to distribute cable services throughout such buildings, provided that such distribution can be accomplished without causing cable system disruption and general technical standards are maintained. Such outlets may only be used for lawful purposes, nor shall the outlets be used to entertain public groups or for commercial purposes. (Ord. 2-2002 §13.4) 
Sec. 5-1-770. - Cable Internet service to schools, libraries and Town-owned and Town-leased buildings. 
    At such time as the Grantee offers cable Internet service in the Town, the Grantee shall provide one (1) outlet of basic or first level cable Internet service (including one [1] modem) to all accredited K-12 public and private schools, excluding home schools, and public libraries which are within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the cable system at no cost to the institution. (Ord. 2-2002 §13.5) 
Division 10 - Franchise Violations and Terms 

Sec. 5-1-810. - Procedure for remedying franchise violations. 
(a)  If the Town believes that the Grantee has failed to perform any obligation under this Franchise or has failed to perform in a timely manner, the Town shall notify the Grantee in writing, stating with reasonable specificity the nature of the alleged default, the Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of such notice to: 
(1)  Respond to the Town, contesting the Town's assertion that a default has occurred, and requesting a meeting in accordance with Subsection (b), below; 
(2)  Cure the default; or 
(3)  Notify the Town that the Grantee cannot cure the default within the thirty (30) days, because of the nature of the default. In the event the default cannot be cured within thirty (30) days, the Grantee shall promptly take all reasonable steps to cure the default and notify the Town in writing and in detail as to the exact steps that will be taken and the projected completion date. In such case, the Town may set a meeting in accordance with Subsection (b) below to determine whether additional time beyond the thirty (30) days specified above is indeed needed, and whether the Grantee's proposed completion schedule and steps are reasonable. 
(b)  If the Grantee does not cure the alleged default within the cure period stated above or by the projected completion date under Paragraph (a)(3) above, or denies the default and requests a meeting in accordance with Paragraph (a)(1) above, or the Town orders a meeting in accordance with Paragraph (a)(3) above, the Town shall set a meeting to investigate said issues or the existence of the alleged default. The Town shall notify the Grantee of the meeting in writing, and such meeting shall take place no less than thirty (30) days after the Grantee's receipt of notice of the meeting. At the meeting, the Grantee shall be provided an opportunity to be heard and to present evidence in its defense. 
(c)  If, after the meeting, the Town determines that a default exists, the Town shall order the Grantee to collect or remedy the default or breach within fifteen (15) days or within such other reasonable time frame as the Town shall determine. In the event the Grantee does not cure within such time to the Town's reasonable satisfaction, the Town may recommend any legal or equitable remedy available under this Franchise or applicable law: 
(1)  Withdraw an amount from the letter of credit as monetary damages; 
(2)  Recommend the revocation of this Franchise pursuant to the procedures in Section 5-1-815; or 
(3)  Recommend any other legal or equitable remedy available under this Franchise or any applicable law. 
(d)  The determination as to whether a violation of this Franchise has occurred shall be within the discretion of the Town, provided that any such final determination may be subject to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction under applicable law. (Ord. 2-2002 §14.1) 
Sec. 5-1-815. - Revocation. 
(a)  In addition to revocation in accordance with other provisions of this Franchise, the Town may revoke this Franchise and rescind all rights and privileges associated with this Franchise in the following circumstances, each of which represents a material breach of this Franchise: 
(1)  If the Grantee fails to perform any material obligation under this Franchise or under any applicable local law or ordinance; 
(2)  If the Grantee willfully fails for more than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours to provide continuous and uninterrupted cable service; 
(3)  If the Grantee attempts to evade any material provision of this Franchise or to practice any fraud or deceit upon the Town or subscribers; 
(4)  If the Grantee becomes insolvent or if there is an assignment for the benefit of the Grantee's creditors; or 
(5)  If the Grantee makes a material misrepresentation of fact in the application for or negotiation of this Franchise. 
(b)  Following the procedures set forth in Subsections 5-1-810(a) and (b), and prior to forfeiture or termination of this Franchise, the Town shall give written notice to the Grantee of its intent to revoke the Franchise. The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the noncompliance. 
(c)  Any proceeding under Subsection (b) above shall be conducted by the Board of Trustees and open to the public. The Grantee shall be afforded at least sixty (60) days' prior written notice of such proceeding. 
(1)  At such proceeding, the Grantee shall be provided a fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to be represented by legal counsel, to introduce evidence and, to the extent otherwise permitted by law, to require production of evidence, to compel the testimony of persons and to question witnesses. A complete verbatim record and transcript shall be made of such proceeding and the cost shall be shared equally between the parties. The Board of Trustees shall hear any persons interested in the revocation, and shall allow the Grantee, in particular, an opportunity to state its position on the matter. 
(2)  Within ninety (90) days after the hearing, the Board of Trustees shall determine whether to revoke the Franchise and declare that the Franchise is revoked and the letter of credit forfeited; or, if the breach at issue is capable of being cured by the Grantee, direct the Grantee to take appropriate remedial action within the time and in the manner and on the terms and conditions that the Board of Trustees determines are reasonable under the circumstances. If the Town determines that the Franchise is to be revoked, the Town shall set forth the reasons for such a decision and shall transmit a copy of the decision to the Grantee. The Grantee shall be bound by the Town's decision to revoke the Franchise unless the Grantee appeals the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision. 
(3)  The Grantee shall be entitled to such relief as the court may deem appropriate. 
(4)  The Board of Trustees may at its sole discretion take any lawful action which it deems appropriate to enforce the Town's rights under this Franchise in lieu of revocation of this Franchise. (Ord. 2-2002 §14.2) 
Sec. 5-1-820. - Procedures in event of termination or revocation. 
(a)  If this Franchise expires without renewal or is otherwise lawfully terminated or revoked, the Town may, subject to applicable law: 
(1)  Allow the Grantee to maintain and operate its cable system on a month-to-month basis or short-term extension of this Franchise for not less than six (6) months, unless a sale of the cable system can be closed sooner or the Grantee demonstrates to the Town's satisfaction that it needs additional time to complete the sale; or 
(2)  Purchase the Grantee's cable system in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 5-1-825 below. 
(b)  In the event that a sale has not been completed in accordance with Paragraphs (a)(1) and/or (a)(2) above, the Town may order the removal of the above-ground cable system facilities and such underground facilities from the Town at the Grantee's sole expense within a reasonable period of time as determined by the Town. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, the Grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that is made by it and shall leave all rights-of-way, public places and private property in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the Grantee's removal of its equipment without affecting the electrical or telephone cable wires or attachments. The indemnification and insurance provisions and the letter of credit shall remain in full force and effect during the period of removal, and the Grantee shall not be entitled to, and agrees not to request, compensation of any sort therefor. 
(c)  If the Grantee fails to complete any removal required by Subsection (b) above to the Town's satisfaction, after written notice to the Grantee, the Town may cause the work to be done and the Grantee shall reimburse the Town for the costs incurred within thirty (30) days after receipt of an itemized list of the costs, or the Town may recover the costs through the letter of credit provided by the Grantee. 
(d)  The Town may seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this Franchise. (Ord. 2-2002 §14.3) 
Sec. 5-1-825. - Purchase of cable system. 
(a)  If at any time this Franchise is revoked, terminated or not renewed upon expiration in accordance with the provisions of federal law, the Town shall have the option to purchase the cable system. 
(b)  The Town may, within sixty (60) days of such events as described in Subsection (a) above, offer in writing to purchase the Grantee's cable system. The Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of a written offer from the Town within which to accept or reject the offer. 
(c)  In any case where the Town elects to purchase the cable system, the purchase shall be closed within one hundred twenty (120) days of the date of the Town's audit of a current profit and loss statement of the Grantee. The Town shall pay for the cable system in cash or certified funds, and the Grantee shall deliver appropriate bills of sale and other instruments of conveyance. 
(d)  For the purposes of this Section, the price for the cable system shall be determined as in accordance with federal law. (Ord. 2-2002 §14.4) 
Sec. 5-1-830. - Receivership and foreclosure, 
(a)  At the option of the Town, subject to applicable law, this Franchise may be revoked one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the Grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless: 
(1)  The receivership or trusteeship is vacated within one hundred twenty (120) days of appointment; or 
(2)  The receivers or trustees have, within one hundred twenty (120) days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this Franchise, and have remedied all defaults under this Franchise. Additionally, the receivers or trustees shall have executed an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction, by which the receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of this Franchise. 
(b)  If there is a foreclosure or other involuntary sale of the whole or any part of the plant, property and equipment of the Grantee, the Town may serve notice of revocation on the Grantee and to the purchaser at the sale, and the rights and privileges of the Grantee under this Franchise shall be revoked thirty (30) days after service of such notice, unless: 
(1)  The Town has approved the transfer of the Franchise, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Franchise and as provided by law; and 
(2)  The purchaser has covenanted and agreed with the Town to assume and be bound by all of the terms and conditions of this Franchise. (Ord. 2-2002 §14.5) 
Sec. 5-1-835. - No monetary recourse against Town. 
    The Grantee shall not have any monetary recourse against the Town or its officers, officials, boards, commissions or employees for any loss, costs, expenses or damages arising out of any provision or requirement of this Franchise or the enforcement thereof, in accordance with the provisions of applicable federal, state and local law. The rights of the Town under this Franchise are in addition to, and shall not be read to limit, any immunities the Town may enjoy under federal, state or local law. (Ord. 2-2002 §14.6) 
Sec. 5-1-840. - Alternative remedies. 
    No provision of this Franchise shall be deemed to bar the right of the Town to seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provision of this Franchise or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in this Franchise nor the exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of the Town to recover monetary damages for such violations by the Grantee, or to seek and obtain judicial enforcement of the Grantee's obligations by means of specific performance, injunctive relief or mandate, or any other remedy at law or in equity. (Ord. 2-2002 §14.7) 
Sec. 5-1-845. - Assessment of monetary damages. 
    To the extent the Town chooses to assess damages pursuant to Subsection 5-1-810(c), the Town may assess against the Grantee monetary damages for material cable system upgrade delays of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. For all other Franchise violations, the Town may assess monetary damages of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day. To assess any amount of damages from the letter of credit, the Town shall follow the procedures for withdrawals from the letter of credit set forth in the letter of credit and in this Franchise. Such damages shall accrue beginning the day following the Grantee's receipt of notice required by Subsection 5-1-810(a) or at such later date if approved by the Town in its sole discretion, but may not be assessed until after the procedures in Section 5-1-810 have been completed. (Ord. 2-2002 §14.8) 
Sec. 5-1-850. - Effect of abandonment. 
    If the Grantee abandons its cable system during the franchise term, or fails to operate its cable system in accordance with its duty to provide continuous service, the Town may obtain an injunction requiring the Grantee to continue operations. If the Town is authorized by a court of competent jurisdiction to operate or designate another entity to operate the cable system, the Grantee shall reimburse the Town for all reasonable costs, expenses and damages incurred. (Ord. 2-2002 §14.9) 
Sec. 5-1-855. - What constitutes abandonment. 
    The Town shall be entitled to exercise its options in Section 5-1-850 if: 
(1)  The Grantee fails to provide cable service in accordance with this Franchise over a substantial portion of the franchise area for four (4) consecutive days, unless the Town authorizes a longer interruption of service; or 
(2)  The Grantee, for any period, willfully and without cause refuses to provide cable service in accordance with this Franchise. (Ord. 2-2002 §14.10) 
Sec. 5-1-860. - Renewal. 
    The Town and the Grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the Town that relate to the renewal of this Franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act, unless the procedures and substantive protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of any subsequent provision of federal or state law. (Ord. 2-2002 §15.1) 
Sec. 5-1-865. - Transfer of ownership or control. 
(a)  No sale, transfer, lease or corporate change of or in the Grantee, including but not limited to the sale of a majority of the entity's assets, a merger including the merger of a subsidiary and parent entity, consolidation or the creation of a subsidiary or affiliate entity, shall take place until the parties to the sale, transfer or corporate change file a written request with the Town for its approval and such approval is granted by the Town; provided, however, that said approval shall not be required where the Grantee grants a security interest in its Franchise and assets to secure an indebtedness. 
(b)  The Grantee shall promptly notify the Town of any actual or proposed change in, transfer of or acquisition by any other party of control of the Grantee. Any sale, transfer, exchange, lease or assignment of stock in the Grantee so as to create a new controlling interest in the system shall be subject to the requirements of this Division. The term controlling interest, as used herein, is not limited to majority stock ownership, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. As a minimum, control or controlling interest, as used herein, means a legal or beneficial interest (even though actual working control does not exist) of at least twenty-five percent (25%). 
(c)  The parties to the sale or transfer shall make a written request to the Town for its approval of a sale or transfer and furnish all information required by law and the Town. 
(d)  In seeking the Town's consent to any change in ownership or control, the proposed transferee shall indicate whether it: 
(1)  Has ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving deceit, including any violation of federal, state or local law or regulations, or is currently under an indictment, investigation or complaint charging such acts; 
(2)  Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or misrepresentation entered against the proposed transferee by any court of competent jurisdiction; 
(3)  Has pending any material legal claim, lawsuit, or administrative proceeding arising out of or involving a cable system; 
(4)  Is financially solvent, by submitting financial data, including financial statements that are audited by a certified public accountant who may also be an officer of the transferee, along with any other data that the Town may reasonably require; and 
(5)  Has the financial, legal and technical capability to enable it to maintain and operate the cable system for the remaining term of the Franchise. 
(e)  The Town shall act by ordinance on the request within one hundred twenty (120) days of the request; provided that it has received all requested information. Subject to the foregoing, if the Town fails to render a final decision on the request within one hundred twenty (120) days, such request shall be deemed granted unless the requesting party and the Town agree to an extension of time. 
(f)  Within thirty (30) days of any transfer or sale, if approved or deemed granted by the Town, the Grantee shall file with the Town a copy of the deed, agreement, lease or other written instrument evidencing such sale or transfer of ownership or control, certified and sworn to as correct by the Grantee and the transferee, and the transferee shall file its written acceptance agreeing to be bound by all of the provisions of this Franchise, subject to applicable law. In the event of a change in control, in which the Grantee is not replaced by another entity, the Grantee will continue to be bound by all of the provisions of the Franchise, subject to applicable law, and will not be required to file an additional written acceptance. 
(g)  In reviewing a request for sale or transfer, the Town may inquire into the legal, technical and financial qualifications of the prospective controlling party or transferee, and the Grantee shall assist the Town in so inquiring. The Town may condition said sale or transfer upon such terms and conditions as it deems reasonably appropriate; provided, however, that any such terms and conditions so attached shall be related to the legal, technical and financial qualifications of the prospective controlling party or transferee and to the resolution of outstanding and unresolved issues of noncompliance with the terms and conditions of this Franchise by the Grantee. For purposes of this Division, non-compliance means issues that have been identified to the Grantee, where the Grantee has been given a reasonable opportunity to cure. 
(h)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section, the prior approval of the Town shall not be required for any sale, assignment or transfer of the Franchise or cable system to an affiliate of the Grantee; provided that the proposed assignee or transferee must show financial responsibility as may be reasonably determined necessary by the Town, and must agree in writing to comply with all of the provisions of this Franchise. Further, the Grantee may pledge the assets of the cable system for the purpose of financing without the consent of the Town; provided that such pledge of assets shall not impair or mitigate the Grantee's responsibilities and capabilities to meet all of its obligations under the provisions of this Franchise. (Ord. 2-2002 §15.2) 
Sec. 5-1-870. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, term or provision of this Franchise is determined to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, subsection, paragraph, term or provision of this Franchise, all of which will remain in full force and effect for the term of this Franchise. (Ord. 2-2002 §16) 
Division 11 - Miscellaneous Provisions 

Sec. 5-1-910. - Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited. 
    In connection with the performance of work under this Franchise, the Grantee agrees not to refuse to hire, discharge, promote demote or discriminate in matters of compensation against any person otherwise qualified, solely because of race, color, religion, national origin, gender, age, military status, sexual orientation, marital status or physical or mental disability; and the Grantee further agrees to insert the foregoing provision in all subcontracts hereunder. Throughout the term of this Franchise, the Grantee shall fully comply with all equal employment or nondiscrimination provisions and requirements of federal, state and local laws, and in particular, FCC rules and regulations relating thereto. (Ord. 2-2002 §17.1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 5-1-915. - Notices. 
    Throughout the term of this Franchise, each party shall maintain and file with the other a local address for the service of notices by mail. All notices shall be sent postage prepaid to such respective address, and such notices shall be effective upon the date of mailing. These addresses may be changed by the Town or the Grantee by written notice at any time. At the effective date of this Franchise: 
(1)  The Grantee's address shall be: 
General Manager 
US Cable Group 
III West South Street 
Johnstown, Colorado 80534 
With a copy to: 
US Cable of Coastal-Texas, L.P. 
14700 West 66th Place, Unit 22 
Arvada, Colorado 80004 
(2)  The Town's address shall be: 
Town of Wellington 
Attention: Town Administrator 
3735 Cleveland Avenue 
P.O. Box 127 
Wellington, Colorado 80549 
With a copy to: 
Brad March, Town Attorney 
March, Olive & Pharris 
110 East Oak Street, Suite 200 
Fort Collins, Colorado 80524 
(Ord. 2-2002 §17.2; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 5-1-920. - Descriptive headings. 
    The headings and titles of the sections and subsections of this Franchise are for reference purposes only, and shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of the text herein. (Ord. 2-2002 §17.3) 
Sec. 5-1-925. - Publication costs to be borne by Grantee. 
    The Grantee shall reimburse the Town for all costs incurred in publishing this Franchise, if such publication is required. (Ord. 2-2002 §17.4) 
Sec. 5-1-930. - Binding effect. 
    This Franchise shall be binding upon the parties hereto, their permitted successors and assigns. (Ord. 2-2002 §17.5) 
Sec. 5-1-935. - No joint venture. 
    Nothing herein shall be deemed to create a joint venture or principal-agent relationship between the parties, and neither party is authorized to, nor shall either party, act toward third persons or the public in any manner which would indicate any such relationship with the other. (Ord. 2-2002 §17.6) 
Sec. 5-1-940. - Waiver. 
    The failure of the Town at any time to require performance by the Grantee of any provision hereof shall in no way affect the right of the Town hereafter to enforce the same. Nor shall the waiver by the Town of any breach of any provision hereof be taken or held to be a waiver of any succeeding breach of such provision, or as a waiver of the provision itself or any other provision. (Ord. 2-2002 §17.7) 
Sec. 5-1-945. - Reasonableness of consent or approval. 
    Whenever under this Franchise "reasonableness" is the standard for the granting or denial of the consent or approval of either party hereto, such party shall be entitled to consider public and governmental policy and moral and ethical standards, as well as business and economic considerations. (Ord. 2-2002 §17.8) 
Sec. 5-1-950. - Entire agreement. 
    This Franchise and all exhibits represent the entire understanding and agreement between the parties hereto with respect to the subject matter hereof and supersede all prior oral negotiations between the parties. (Ord. 2-2002 §17.9) 
ARTICLE 2 - Electric Franchise[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-2009 , arts. 1-18, adopted December 8, 2009, amended article 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article 2, §§ 5-2-10-5-2-130, pertained to similar subject matter. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 5-2-10. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this franchise, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this article. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this article shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
    "Board" or "Town Board" refers to, and is, the legislative body of the Town. 
    "Association" refers to, and is, Poudre Valley Rural Electric Association, Inc. and its successors and assigned, but does not include its affiliates, subsidiaries or any other entity in which it has an ownership interest. 
    "Distribution facilities" refers to, and is, only that portion of the Association's electric system which delivers electric energy from the substation breakers to the point-of-delivery of the customer, including all devices connected to that system. 
    "Facilities" refers to, and are, all facilities reasonably necessary to provide electricity into, within and through the Town and include plants, works, systems, substations, transmission and distribution structures, lines, equipment, mains, conduit, transformers, underground lines, meters, wires, cables and poles. 
    "Public Easements" refers to, and are, public and dedicated easements created and available for use by investor-owned, cooperative or other public utilities for their facilities. 
    "Public Utilities Commission" or "PUC" refers to, and is, the Public Utilities Commission of the State of Colorado, or other authority, including the board of directors of the Association succeeding to the regulatory powers of the Public Utilities Commission. 
    "Residents" refers to, and includes, all persons, businesses, industry, governmental agencies and any other entity whatsoever presently located or to be hereinafter located, in whole or in part, within the territorial boundaries of the Town. 
    "Revenues" refers to, and are, those amounts of money which the Association receives from its customers within the Town from the sale of electricity under rates authorized by the Association's board of directors to its customers within the Town and represents amounts billed under such rates as adjusted for refunds, the net write-off of uncollectible accounts, correction or other regulatory adjustments. 
    "Town" refers to, and is, the municipal corporation designated as the Town of Wellington, Larimer County, Colorado, and includes the territory as currently is, or may in the future, be included within the boundaries of the Town of Wellington. 
    "Streets and other public places" refers to, and are, streets, alleys, viaducts, bridges, roads, lanes and other public places in said Town. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 1, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 5-2-20. - Grant of franchise. 
(a)  Grant of franchise. The Town of Wellington hereby grants to the Association, for the period specified in and subject to the conditions, terms and provisions contained in this franchise, a nonexclusive right to furnish, sell and distribute electricity to the Town and to all residents of the Town. Subject to the conditions, terms and provisions contained in this franchise, the Town also hereby grants to the Association a nonexclusive right to acquire, construct, install, locate, maintain, operate and extend into, within and through the Town all facilities reasonably necessary to furnish, sell and distribute electricity within and through the Town and a nonexclusive right to make reasonable use of the streets and other public places and public easements as may be necessary to carry out the terms of this franchise. These rights shall extend to all areas of the Town as it is now constituted and to additional areas as the Town may increase in size by annexation or otherwise. 
(b)  Street lighting service. The rights granted in this franchise encompass the nonexclusive franchise to provide street lighting service to the Town and the provisions of this franchise apply with full and equal force to the street lighting service provided by the Association. Wherever reference is made to the sale of electricity or to the provision of electric service in this franchise, these references shall be deemed to include the provision of street lighting service. Wherever reference is made to Association facilities, equipment, system or plant in this franchise, this reference shall be deemed to include Association owned street lighting facilities, equipment, system and plant. 
(c)  Term of franchise. This franchise agreement shall take effect thirty (30) days after its execution. The term of this franchise shall begin with said effective date of this franchise and expire on August 13, 2030. 
    The grant of this franchise shall have no effect on the Grantee's duty under prior Ordinances and franchise agreements, and all amendments thereto, or any ordinance in effect prior to the effective date of this franchise to indemnify or insure the Town against acts and omissions of the Association. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 2, 12-8-09; Ord. No. 5-2010) 
Sec. 5-2-30. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  Franchise fee. In consideration for the grant of this franchise, the Association shall pay the Town a sum equal to three percent (3%) of all revenues received from the sale of electricity within the Town, excluding all revenues received from the Town for street lighting service furnished it. 
(b)  Payment schedule. For the franchise fee owed on revenues received after the effective date of this franchise, payment shall be made in monthly installments not more than thirty (30) days following the close of the month for which payment is to be made. Initial and final payments shall be prorated for the portions of the months at the beginning and end of the term of this franchise. All payment shall be made to the Town Clerk. The Town Administrator, or other authorized representatives, shall have access to the books of the Association for the purpose of auditing or checking to ascertain that the franchise fee has been correctly computed and paid. 
    In the event an error by the Association results in an overpayment of the franchise fee to the Town and said overpayment is in excess of two hundred dollars ($200.00), credit for the overpayment shall be spread over the same period the error was undiscovered. If the overpayment is two hundred dollars ($200.00) or less, credit shall be taken against the next payment. 
(c)  Change of franchise fee and other franchise terms. Once during each calendar year of the franchise term, the Town Board, upon giving thirty (30) days' notice to the Association of its intention to do so, may review and change the consideration the Town may be entitled to receive as a part of the franchise; provided, however, the Town Board may only change the consideration to be received by the Town under the terms of this franchise to the equivalent of the consideration paid by the Association to any city or town in the State of Colorado in which the Association supplies electric service under franchise. 
    The Association shall report to the Town within sixty (60) days of the execution of a subsequent franchise or of any change of franchise in other municipalities that could have a significant financial impact on the consideration to be paid by the Association to the Town hereunder. If the Town Board decides the consideration shall be so changed, it shall provide for such change by Ordinance, provided, however, that any change in the franchise fee is then allowed to be surcharged by the Association; and provided, further, that the consideration is not higher than the highest consideration paid by the Association to any municipality within the State of Colorado. For purposes of this section, consideration means the franchise fee established in subsection (a); the undergrounding program established in subsection 5-2-110(b); and also includes any other provision which is of similar significant financial benefit to the Town. 
(d)  Franchise fee payment in lieu of other fees. Payment of the franchise fee by the Association is accepted by the Town in lieu of any occupancy tax, license tax, permit charge, inspection fee, or similar tax on the privilege of doing business or in connection with the physical operation thereof, but does not exempt the Association from any lawful taxation upon its property or any other tax not related to the franchise or the physical operation thereof and does not exempt the Association from payment of head taxes or other fees or taxes assessed generally upon businesses. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 3, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 5-2-40. - Supply, construction and design. 
(a)  Supply of electricity. The Association shall take all reasonable and necessary steps to provide an adequate supply of electricity to its customers at the lowest reasonable cost consistent with long-term reliable supplies. If the supply of electricity to its customers should be interrupted, the Association shall take all necessary and reasonable actions to restore such supply within the shortest practicable time. 
(b)  Restoration of service. In the event the Association's electric system, or any part thereof, is partially or wholly destroyed or incapacitated, the Association shall use due diligence to restore the system to satisfactory service within the shortest practicable time. 
(c)  Obligations regarding association facilities. The Association shall install, maintain, repair, renovate and replace its facilities with due diligence in a good and workmanlike manner, and the Association's facilities will be of sufficient quality and durability to provide adequate and efficient electric service to the Town and its residents. Association facilities shall not interfere with the Town's water mains, sewer mains or other municipal use of streets and other public places. The Association shall erect and maintain its facilities in such a way so as to minimize interference with trees and other natural features. Association facilities shall be installed in public easements so as to cause a minimal amount of interference with such property. 
(d)  Excavation and construction. All excavation and construction work done by the Association shall be done in a timely and expeditious manner which minimizes the inconvenience to the public and individuals. All public and private property whose use conforms to restrictions in public easements disturbed by Association excavation or construction activities shall be restored by the Association at its expense to substantially its former condition. 
(e)  Relocation of Association facilities. Any relocation of the Association's facilities in any street or other public place required, caused or occasioned by any Town project shall be at the cost of the Association. Relocation shall be completed within a reasonable time from the date when the Town makes its request, such time to be established by the Association as soon as possible after the Town's request. The Association shall be granted an extension of time of completion equivalent to any delay caused by conditions not under its control provided that the Association proceeds with due diligence at all times. 
    Relocated underground facilities shall be underground. Relocated aboveground facilities shall be aboveground unless the Town either agrees to pay the additional cost of moving them underground or requests that such additional cost be paid out of available funds under Section 10.2, pursuant to Colorado law. 
(f)  Service to new areas. If the boundaries of the Town are expanded during the term of this franchise, the Association shall extend service to residents in the expanded area at the earliest practicable time and in accordance with the Association's extension policy in areas certificated to the Association. Service to the expanded area shall be in accordance with the terms of this franchise agreement, including payment of franchise fees. 
(g)  Town not required to advance funds. Upon receipt of the Town's authorization for billing and construction, the Association shall extend its facilities to provide electric service to the Town for municipal uses within the Town limits or for any major municipal facility outside the Town limits, and within the Association's certificated service area, without requiring the Town to advance funds prior to construction. 
(h)  Technological improvements. The Association shall generally introduce and install, as soon as practicable, electrical energy technological advances in its equipment and service within the Town when such advances are technically and economically feasible and are safe and beneficial to the Town and its residents. Upon request by the Town, the Association shall review and promptly report advances which have occurred in the electric utility industry that have been incorporated into the Association's operations in the Town in the previous year or will be so incorporated in the six (6) months following the Town's request. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 4, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 5-2-50. - Compliance. 
(a)  Town regulation. The Town expressly reserves, and the Association expressly recognizes, the Town's right and duty to adopt, from time to time, in addition to the provisions herein contained, ordinances and rules and regulations as may by the Town be deemed necessary in the exercise of its police power for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
(b)  Compliance with Town requirements. The Association will comply with all Town requirements regarding curb and pavement cuts, excavating, digging and related construction activities. If requested by the Town, the Association shall submit to the Town copies of reports of annual and long-term planning for capital improvement projects with descriptions of required street cuts, excavation, digging and related construction activities within thirty (30) days after issuance. Except for emergencies, the Town may require that all installations be coordinated with the Town's street improvement programs. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall be the Town's agent for inspection and for compliance with Town ordinances and regulations on any such projects. 
(c)  Town review of construction and design. Prior to construction of any significant facilities above ground, or for electrical energy, any transmission lines or generating plant, building, substation or similar structure within the Town, the Association shall furnish to the Town the plans for such facilities. In addition, the Association shall assess and report on the impact of such proposed construction on the Town environment. Such plans and reports may be reviewed by the Town to ascertain, without limitation [1] that all applicable laws, including building and zoning codes and air and water pollution regulations, are complied with; [2] that aesthetic and good planning principles have been given due consideration; and [3] that adverse impact on the environment has been minimized. 
(d)  Compliance with standards. The electrical energy which the Association distributes shall conform with the standards adopted by the Association's board of directors, as the same may be amended from time to time. A copy of such standards shall be kept on file at the PUC and at the Association's office for inspection by the Town. 
(e)  Compliance with air and water pollution laws. The Association shall use its best efforts to take measures which will result in its facilities meeting the standards required by applicable Federal and State air and water pollution laws. Upon the Town's request, the Association will provide the Town with a status report of such measures. 
(f)  Inspection. The Town shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times any portion of the Association's system used to serve the Town and its residents. The Town shall also have access to Association records for the purpose of determining Association compliance with this franchise. The Association agrees to cooperate with the Town in conducting the inspection and to correct any discrepancies affecting the Town's interest in a prompt and efficient manner. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 5, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 5-2-60. - Lawful provisions of tariffs. 
(a)  Tariff provisions. Notwithstanding the deregulated nature of the Association, the Town and the Association recognize that the lawful provisions of the Association's tariffs are consistent with the restrictions and limitations of Article XXV of the Colorado Constitution regarding the rights of municipalities to franchise are controlling over any inconsistent provision in this franchise dealing with the same subject matter. In the opinion of the Association, no provision of this franchise is inconsistent with any of the currently effective provisions of the Association's tariffs. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 6, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 5-2-70. - Reports to town. 
(a)  Reports on Association operations. The Association shall submit reasonable and necessary reports containing or based on information readily obtainable from the Association's books and records as the Town may request with respect to the operations of the Association under this franchise and provide the Town with a list of real property within the Town which is owned by the Association. 
(b)  Copies of Tariffs. The Association shall keep on file in the Association's office, all tariffs, rules, regulations and policies filed with the Public Utilities Commission relating to service by the Association to the Town and its residents. Upon request by the Town, the Association shall provide the Town with copies of filings affecting said service which it makes for the PUC. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 7, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 5-2-80. - Town use of Association facilities. 
(a)  Town use. The Town shall have the right, for the purpose of stringing wires, to use all poles and suitable overhead structures constructed by the Association within the Town, which use shall not include the distribution or transmission of electricity. Such use by the Town will be without cost. The Association will allow others holding a franchise, except electric service, from the Town to so utilize such poles and suitable overhead structures upon reasonable terms and conditions to be agreed upon by the Association and such holder of a franchise from the Town; provided, however, that the Association shall assume no liability nor shall it be put to any additional expense in connection therewith, and the use of said poles and structures by the Town or others holding a franchise from the Town shall be in such a manner as not to constitute a safety hazard or to interfere unnecessarily with the Association's use of same. 
(b)  Underground conduit. If the Association installs new electric underground conduit or opens a trench or replaces such conduit, the Association shall provide adequate advance notice to permit additional installations of similar conduit and pull wire for the Town. If the Town wants additional similar conduit and pull wire installed, it will so notify the Association and provide similar conduit and pull wire at its expense to the Association, which will install it without further expense to the Town provided that such action by the Town will not unnecessarily interfere with the Association's facilities or delay the accomplishment of the project. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 8, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 5-2-90. - Indemnification of the Town. 
(a)  Town held harmless. The Association shall indemnify, defend and save the Town harmless from and against all liability or damage and all claims or demands whatsoever in nature arising out of the operations of the Association within the Town pursuant to this franchise and the securing of and the exercise by the Association of the franchise rights granted in this franchise and shall pay all reasonable expenses arising therefrom. The Town will provide prompt written notice to the Association of the pendency of any claim or action against the Town arising out of the exercise by the Association of its franchise rights. The Association will be permitted, at its own expense, to appear and defend or to assist in defense of such claim. Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, the Association shall not be obligated to indemnify, defend or hold the Town harmless to the extent any claim, demand or lien arises out of or in connection with any negligent act or failure to act of the Town or any of its officers or employees. 
(b)  Payment of expenses incurred by Town in relation to ordinance. At the Town's option, the Association shall pay in advance or reimburse the Town for expenses incurred in publication of notices and ordinances and for photocopying of documents arising out of the negotiations or process for obtaining the franchise. The Association shall also be responsible for attorney fees. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 9, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 5-2-100. - Underground construction and overhead conversion. 
(a)  Underground electrical distribution lines in new areas. The Association will place newly constructed electrical distribution lines underground to serve new residential subdivision areas in accordance with the Association's tariffs and Town subdivision regulations. 
(b)  Overhead conversion at expense of Association. As and when requested by the Town, the Association will spend one percent (1%) of the preceding calendar year's electric revenues to move electric distribution facilities located in streets and other public places in the Town underground, provided that the undergrounding shall extend for a minimum distance of one block or 750 feet, or as may be mutually agreed to by the parties. 
    Any unexpended portion of the one percent (1%) of electric revenue may be carried over to succeeding years and, in addition, upon request by the Town, the Association shall anticipate amounts to be available for up to three (3) years in advance. Any amounts advanced shall be credited against amounts to be expended in succeeding years until such advances are eliminated. No relocation expenses which the Association is required to expend pursuant to Section 4.5 shall be charged to this allocation. 
    Funds to be expended pursuant to this section shall not be used in any project or situation for which and to the extent that the Town has received Federal or State funds for the purpose of undergrounding utilities. Funds to be expended pursuant to this section may be used for "matching" purposes with State or Federal monies. 
    In addition to the provisions of this section, the Town may require additional facilities to be moved underground at the Town's expense, pursuant to Colorado law. 
    The Town acknowledges that the establishment of this undergrounding fund creates no vested right in the Town to the undergrounding monies. Further, if such monies are not expended pursuant to the conditions hereof, the fund is not convertible to cash or available for any other purposes. 
(c)  Review of undergrounding program. Representatives of both the Town and the Association shall meet periodically to review the Association's undergrounding program. This review shall include: 
(1)  Underground programs, including conversions and replacements which have been accomplished or are underway by the Association, together with the Association's plans for additional undergrounding; and 
(2)  Undergrounding projects anticipated by the Town. 
    Such meetings shall be held to achieve a continuing program for the orderly undergrounding of electrical lines in the Town. 
(d)  Cooperation with other utilities. When undertaking a project of undergrounding, the Town and the Association shall work with other utilities or companies which have their lines overhead to attempt to have all lines undergrounded as part of the same project. When other utilities or companies are placing their lines underground, the Association shall cooperate with these utilities and companies and undertake to underground Association facilities as part of the same project where feasible. The Association shall not be required to pay the costs of any other utility in connection with work under this section. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 10, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 5-2-110. - Transfer of franchise. 
(a)  Consent of Town required. The Association shall not transfer or assign any rights under this franchise to a third party, excepting only corporate reorganizations of the Association not including a third party, unless the Town shall approve in writing such transfer or assignment. Approval of the transfer or assignment shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(b)  Transfer fee. Inasmuch as the Association is a consumer-owned electric cooperative, the approval of the transfer or assignment of rights under this franchise shall be without a transfer fee, except that the Association shall pay the full amount of all costs and expenses incurred by the Town as a result of any such transfer. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 11, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 5-2-120. - Purchase or condemnation. 
(a)  Town's right to purchase or condemn. The right of the Town to construct, purchase or condemn any public utility works or ways, and the rights of the Association in connection therewith, as provided by the Colorado Constitution and statutes, are hereby expressly reserved. 
(b)  Continued cooperation by Association. In the event the Town exercises its option to purchase or condemn, the Association agrees that, at the Town's request, it will continue to supply any service it supplies under this franchise, for the duration of the term of this franchise pursuant to terms and conditions negotiated for such continued operation. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 12, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 5-2-130. - Removal of Association facilities at end of franchise. 
(a)  Limitations on Association removal. In the event this franchise is not renewed at the expiration of its term or the Association terminates any service provided herein for any reason whatsoever, and the Town has not purchased or condemned the system and has not provided for alternative electrical service, the Association shall have no right to remove said system pending resolution of the disposition of the system. The Association further agrees it will not withhold any temporary services necessary to protect the public and shall be entitled only to monetary compensation in no greater amount than it would have been entitled to were such services provided during the term of this franchise. Only upon receipt of written notice from the Town stating that the Town has adequate alternative electrical energy sources to provide for the people of the Town shall the Association be entitled to remove any or all of said systems in use under the terms of this franchise. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 13, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 5-2-140. - Small power production and cogeneration. 
(a)  Association to purchase. The Town expressly reserves the right to engage in the production of electricity. The Association agrees to negotiate for the purchase of Town-generated power in accordance with its tariffs. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 14, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 5-2-150. - Forfeiture. 
(a)  Forfeiture. Both the Association and the Town recognize there may be circumstances whereby compliance with the provisions of this franchise is impossible or is delayed because of circumstances beyond the Association's control. In those instances, the Association shall use its best efforts to comply in a timely manner and to the extent possible. If the Association fails to perform any of the terms and conditions of this franchise and such failure is within the Association's control, the Town, acting by and through its Town Board, may determine, after hearing, that such failure is of a substantial nature. Upon receiving notice of such determination, the Association shall have a reasonable time in which to remedy the violations. If during said reasonable time corrective actions have not been successfully taken, the Town acting by and through its Town Board, shall determine whether any or all rights and privileges granted the Association under this ordinance shall be forfeited. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any such declaration of forfeiture shall be subject to judicial review as provided by law. 
(c)  Other legal remedies. Nothing herein contained shall limit or restrict any legal rights that the Town or the Association may possess arising from any alleged violation of this franchise. 
(d)  Continued obligation. Upon forfeiture, the Association shall continue to provide service to the Town and its residents in accordance with the terms hereof until the Town makes alternative arrangements for such service. If the Association fails to provide continued service, it shall be liable for damages to the Town. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 15, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 5-2-160. - Amendments. 
(a)  Amendments to franchise. At any time during the term of this franchise, the Town, through its Town Board, or the Association may propose amendments to this franchise by giving thirty (30) days' written notice to the other of the proposed amendment(s) desired and both parties thereafter, through their designated representatives, will negotiate within a reasonable time in good faith in an effort to agree on mutually satisfactory amendment(s). The word "amendment" as used in this section does not include a change authorized in subsection 5-2-30(c). 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 16, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 5-2-170. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Successors and assigns. The rights, privileges, franchises and obligations granted and contained in this ordinance shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon the Association, its successors and assigns. 
(b)  Third parties. Nothing contained in this franchise shall be construed to provide rights to third parties. 
(c)  Representatives. Both parties shall designate from time to time in writing representatives for the Association and the Town who will be the persons to whom notices shall be sent regarding any action to be taken under this ordinance. Notice shall be in writing and forwarded by certified mail or hand delivery to the persons and addresses as hereinafter stated, unless the persons and addresses are changed at the written request of either party, delivered in person or by certified mail. Until any such change shall hereafter be made, notices shall be sent to the Town Mayor and to the Association's General Manager. Currently the addresses are as follows: 
For the Town of Wellington: 
Mayor of the Town of Wellington and Town Administrator 
3735 Cleveland Avenue 
P.O. Box 127 
Wellington, CO 80549 
With a copy to the Town attorney: 
J. Brad March 
March, Olive and Pharris, LLC 
110 E. Oak St., Ste. 200 
Fort Collins, CO 80524 
For the Association: 
Poudre Valley Rural Electric Assn., Inc. 
P. O. Box 272550 
Fort Collins, CO 80527-2550 
(d)  Severability. Should any one or more provisions of this franchise be determined to be illegal or unenforceable, all other provisions nevertheless shall remain effective; provided, however, the parties shall forthwith enter into good faith negotiations and proceed with due diligence to draft a term that will achieve the original intent of the parties hereunder. 
(e)  Entire Agreement. This franchise constitutes the entire agreement of the parties. There have been no representations made other than those contained in this franchise. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 17, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 5-2-180. - Approval. 
(a)  Board approval. This grant of franchise shall not become effective unless approved by a majority vote of the Town Board. 
(b)  Association approval. The Association shall file with the Town Clerk its written acceptance of this franchise and of all of its terms and provisions within ten (10) days after the adoption of this franchise by the Town Board. The acceptance shall be in form and content approved by the Town Attorney. If the Association shall fail to timely file its written acceptance as herein provided, this franchise shall be and become null and void. 
(c)  Validity. If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections of the ordinance. The Board of Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance, including each part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that one or more parts, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases might be declared invalid. 
(d)  Certification. The Town Clerk shall certify to the passage of this ordinance and make not fewer than three copies of the adopted ordinance available for inspection by the public during regular business hours. 
(e)  Emergency clause. The Board of Trustees find and determine that, because this ordinance concerns the immediate and ongoing administration and operation of the Town, its adoption as an emergency measure is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public's health, safety and welfare, and this ordinance shall therefore take effect immediately upon adoption as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 13-2009 , Art. 18, 12-8-09) 
Appendix 5-A - Customer Service Standards 

Section 1 - Policy 
(a)  The Cable Operator shall be permitted to first resolve citizen complaints without delay and interference from the Franchising Authority. 
(b)  Where a given complaint is not addressed by the Cable Operator to the citizen's satisfaction, the Franchising Authority may intervene, if requested to do so by the citizen. In addition, if after written notice and a fifteen-day opportunity thereafter to cure is provided to the Grantee, the Grantee has failed to cure the complaint, the Franchising Authority may prescribe a cure which complies with the Grantee's Franchise and its rights under applicable law, and establish a thirty-day deadline for implementation of the cure. If the noncompliance is not cured within thirty (30) days, monetary sanctions may be imposed pursuant to the Grantee's Franchise to encourage compliance. 
(c)  These Standards are intended to be of general application; however, the Cable Operator shall be relieved of any obligations hereunder if it is unable to perform due to a region-wide natural emergency or in the event of force majeure affecting a significant portion of the Franchise Area. The Cable Operator is free to exceed these Standards to the benefit of its Customers, and such shall be considered performance for the purposes of these Standards. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §1) 
Section 2 - Definitions 
    When used in these Customer Service Standards (the "Standards"), the following words, phrases and terms shall have the meanings given below. 
    Cable Operator shall mean any grantee of a franchise to provide Cable Service over a Cable System and, directly or through one (1) or more affiliates, owns a significant interest in such Cable System or who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a Cable System. 
    Customer shall mean any person who lawfully receives Cable Service from the Cable Operator. 
    Customer Service Representative (or CSR ) shall mean any person employed by the Cable Operator to assist, or provide service to, Customers, whether by answering public telephone lines, writing service or installation orders, answering Customers' questions, receiving and processing payments or performing other Customer service-related tasks. 
    Franchising Authority shall mean the Town acting by and through the Board of Trustees or its designee. 
    Normal business hours shall mean those hours during which most similar businesses in the Town are open to serve Customers. In all cases, normal business hours must include some evening hours at least one (1) night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
    Normal operating conditions shall mean those service conditions which are within the control of the Cable Operator. Those conditions which are not within the control of the Cable Operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the Cable Operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
    Service interruption shall mean the loss of picture or sound on one (1) or more cable channels. 
    Town shall mean the Town of Wellington, Colorado. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §2; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Section 3 - Customer Service 
3.1. - Courtesy. 
    All employees of the Cable Operator shall use their best efforts to be courteous, knowledgeable and helpful and to provide effective and satisfactory service in all contacts with Customers. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §3.1) 
3.2. - Accessibility; cable system office hours and telephone availability. 
(a)  The Cable Operator shall maintain a local, toll-free or collect-call telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. 
(1)  Trained company representatives will be available to respond to Customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours. 
(2)  After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
(b)  Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a Customer Service Representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. These standards shall be met no less than ninety percent (90%) of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. 
(c)  The Cable Operator will not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards set forth above, unless a historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply. 
(d)  Under normal operating conditions, the Customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time. 
(e)  Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §3.2) 
3.3. - Responsiveness; installations, outages and service calls. 
(a)  Under normal operating conditions, each of the following standards will be met no less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the time, measured on a quarterly basis: 
(1)  Standard installation will be performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed. Standard installations are those that are located up to one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the existing distribution system. 
(2)  Excluding conditions beyond the control of the Cable Operator, the Cable Operator will begin working on service interruptions promptly, and in no event later than twenty-four (24) hours after the interruption becomes known. If the service interruption occurs on a weekend, the Grantee shall respond on the first business day thereafter, unless three (3) or subscribers are affected, in which case, the Grantee shall respond within twelve (12) hours. The Cable Operator must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem. 
(3)  The appointment window alternatives for installations, service calls and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. The Cable Operator may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the Customer. 
(4)  The Cable Operator may not cancel an appointment with a Customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
(5)  If the Cable Operator's representative is running late for an appointment with a Customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the Customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the Customer. 
(b)  The Cable Operator shall meet the following standards for TV reception: The Cable Operator shall provide clear television reception that meets or exceeds technical standards established by the United States Federal Communications Commission (the "FCC"). The Cable Operator shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions for maintenance shall be preceded by notice and, to the extent reasonably possible, shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system, preferably between 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(c)  The Cable Operator's Customer Service Representative shall have the authority to provide credit for interrupted service, to waive fees, to schedule service appointments and to change billing cycles, where appropriate. Any difficulties that cannot be resolved by the Customer Service Representative shall be referred to the appropriate supervisor who shall contact the Customer and shall attempt to resolve the problem within forty eight (48) hours or within such other time frame as is acceptable to the Customer and the Cable Operator. 
(d)  Billings, refunds and credits. 
(1)  Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. In case of a billing dispute, the Cable Operator must respond to a written complaint from a Customer within thirty (30) days. 
(2)  Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either the Customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier, or the return of the equipment supplied by the Cable Operator if service is terminated. 
(3)  Credits for service will be issued no later than the Customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
(e)  Treatment of public or private property. 
(1)  Nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing access or entry to private property or any other property, where such right to access or entry is not otherwise provided by law. For major construction or installation projects, property owners or occupants shall also be notified forty-eight (48) hours prior to the commencement of construction. In the case of an emergency, the Cable Operator shall attempt to contact the property owner or legal tenant in person, and shall leave a door hanger notice in the event personal contact is not made. 
(2)  The Cable Operator personnel shall clean all areas surrounding any work site and ensure that all cable materials have been disposed of properly. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §3.3) 
3.4. - Services for customers with disabilities. 
(a)  For any Customer with a disability, the Cable Operator shall at no charge deliver and pick up converters at the Customer's home. In the case of a malfunctioning converter, the technician shall provide another converter, hook it up and ensure that it is working properly, and shall return the defective converter to the Cable Operator. 
(b)  The Cable Operator shall provide assistance rendered by the Cable Operator's Customer Service Representatives for any hearing-impaired Customer at no charge. 
(c)  The Cable Operator shall provide free use of a remote control unit to mobility-impaired (if disabled, in accordance with Paragraph (d) below) Customers. 
(d)  Any Customer with a disability may request the special services described above by providing the Cable Operator with a letter from the Customer's physician stating the need, or by making the request to the Cable Operator's installer or service technician, where the need for the special services can be visually confirmed. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §3.4) 
3.5. - Notification to subscribers. 
(a)  The Cable Operator shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually, to all subscribers and at any time upon request. 
(1)  Products and services offered; 
(2)  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
(3)  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
(4)  Instructions on how to use the cable service; 
(5)  Channel positions programming carried on the system; and 
(6)  Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the local franchise authority's cable office. 
(b)  Customers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the Cable Operator. In addition, the Cable Operator shall notify subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required by Paragraph (a) above. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the Cable Operator shall not be required to provide prior notice of any rate change that is the result of a regulatory fee, franchise fee or any other fee, tax, assessment or change of any kind imposed by any federal agency, state or Franchising Authority on the transaction between the Cable Operator and the subscriber. 
(c)  All officers, agents and employees of the Cable Operator or its contractors or subcontractors who are in personal contact with Customers shall wear on their outer clothing identification cards bearing their names and photographs. The Cable Operator shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every vehicle of the Cable Operator shall be clearly visually identified to the public as working for the Cable Operator. All CSRs shall identify themselves orally to callers immediately following the greeting during each telephone contact with the public. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §3.5) 
3.6. - Customer privacy. 
(a)  The Cable Operator shall not monitor cable television signals to determine the individual viewing patterns or practices of any Customer without prior written consent from that Customer, except as otherwise permitted by the Cable Franchise Agreement. 
(b)  The Cable Operator shall not sell or otherwise make available Customer lists or other personally identifiable Customer information without prior written Customer consent, except as otherwise permitted by the Cable Franchise Agreement. The Cable Operator is permitted to disclose such information if such disclosure is necessary to render or conduct a legitimate business activity related to a cable service or other service provided by the Cable Operator to its Customers. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §3.6) 
3.7. - Safety. 
    The Cable Operator shall install and locate its facilities, cable system and equipment in compliance with all federal, state, local and company safety standards, and in such manner as shall not unduly interfere with or endanger persons or property. Whenever the Cable Operator receives notice that an unsafe condition exists with respect to its equipment, the Cable Operator shall investigate such condition immediately, and shall take such measures as are necessary to remove or eliminate any unsafe condition. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §3.7) 
Section 4 - Complaint Procedure 
4.1. - Complaints to Cable Operator. 
(a)  The Cable Operator shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving Customer complaints and crediting Customer accounts without interventions by the Franchising Authority; and shall publicize such procedures through printed documents at the Cable Operator's sole expense. 
(b)  Said written procedures shall prescribe a simple manner in which any Customer may submit a complaint by telephone or in writing to the Cable Operator that it has violated any provision of these Customer Service Standards, any terms or conditions of the Customer's contract with the Cable Operator, or reasonable business practices. 
(c)  At the conclusion of the Cable Operator's investigation of a Customer complaint, but in no more than thirty (30) calendar days after receiving the complaint, the Cable Operator shall notify the Customer of the results of its investigation and its proposed action or credit. 
(d)  The Cable Operator shall also notify the Customer of the Customer's right to file a complaint with the Franchising Authority in the event the Customer is dissatisfied with the Cable Operator's decision, and shall thoroughly explain the necessary procedures for filing such complaint with the Franchising Authority. 
(e)  The Cable Operator's complaint procedures shall be filed with the Franchising Authority prior to implementation. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §4.1) 
4.2. - Security fund. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of these Standards or the effective date of any franchise granted by the Franchising Authority, whichever occurs first, the Cable Operator shall establish and provide to the Franchising Authority a letter of credit from a financial institution satisfactory to the Franchising Authority in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or, in the sole discretion of the Franchising Authority, such lesser amount as the Franchising Authority deems reasonable to protect subscribers within its jurisdiction. The letter of credit shall constitute the "Security Fund" for ensuring compliance with these Standards for the benefit of the Franchising Authority. The letter of credit shall be maintained by the Cable Operator at five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), or such lesser amount accepted by the Franchising Authority, even if amounts are withdrawn pursuant to any provision of these Standards. 
(b)  The Security Fund shall serve as security for the payment of any penalties, fees, charges or credits as provided for herein and for the performance by the Cable Operator of all its obligations under these Customer Service Standards. If any Cable Operator is required by its Franchise Agreement to provide a letter of credit or other Security Fund, such security shall suffice as the Security Fund required pursuant to this Section. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §4.2) 
4.3. - Complaints to Franchising Authority. 
(a)  Any Customer who is dissatisfied with any proposed decision of the Cable Operator or who has not received a decision within the thirty-day period as required shall be entitled to have the complaint reviewed by the Franchising Authority. 
(b)  The Customer may initiate the review by filing a written complaint together with the Cable Operator's written decision, if any, with the Franchising Authority. 
(c)  The Customer shall make such filing and notification within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the Cable Operator's decision or, if no decision has been provided, within forty (40) days after filing the original complaint with the Cable Operator. The Customer shall notify the Cable Operator that a complaint has been filed with the Franchising Authority by mailing a copy of the complaint to the Cable Operator by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(d)  The Cable Operator shall file a written response to the complaint with the Franchising Authority within fifteen (15) days of receipt of a copy of the complaint from the Customer. 
(e)  If the Franchising Authority decides that further evidence is warranted, the Franchising Authority may require the Cable Operator and the Customer to submit, within ten (10) days of notice thereof, a written statement of the facts and arguments in support of their respective positions. 
(f)  The Cable Operator and the Customer shall produce any additional evidence, including any reports from the Cable Operator, which the Franchising Authority may deem necessary to an understanding and determination of the complaint. 
(g)  The Franchising Authority shall issue a determination within thirty (30) days after examining the materials submitted, setting forth its basis for the determination. 
(h)  The Franchising Authority may extend these time limits for reasonable cause and may intercede and attempt to negotiate an informal resolution. 
(i)  If the Franchising Authority determines that the Customer's complaint is valid and that the Cable Operator did not provide the complaining customer with the proper resolution and/or credit, the Franchising Authority may reverse any decision of the Cable Operator in the matter and/or require the Cable Operator to grant a specific resolution as determined by the Franchising Authority. If the Franchising Authority determines that the Customer's complaint has no validity, the complaint shall be dismissed with no further action being taken. 
(j)  Any decision by the Franchising Authority may be reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to C.R.C.P. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §4.3; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
4.4. - Verification of compliance. 
    The Cable Operator shall establish its compliance through annual reports that demonstrate said compliance, or as requested by the Franchising Authority. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §4.4) 
4.5. - Overall quality of service. 
    The Franchising Authority may evaluate the overall quality of Customer service provided by the Cable Operator to Customers: 
(1)  In conjunction with any performance review provided for in the Cable Franchise Agreement; and 
(2)  At any other time, at its sole discretion, based on the number of Customer complaints received by the Cable Operator and the Franchising Authority, and the Cable Operator's response to those complaints. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §4.5) 
4.6. - Noncompliance with Standards. 
    Noncompliance with any provision of these Standards is a violation of these Standards. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §4.6) 
4.7. - Procedure for remedying violations. 
    If any Cable Operator is found to have violated any of these Standards, such Cable Operator shall be subject to any appropriate damages, penalties or any other remedy as provided by its cable Franchise with the Town. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §4.7) 
Section 5 - Miscellaneous 
5.1. - Severability. 
    Should any section, subsection, paragraph, term or provision of these Standards be determined to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction with regard thereto, such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, subsection, paragraph, term or provision of these Standards, each of the latter of which shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §5.1) 
5.2. - Nonwaiver. 
    Failure to enforce any provision of these Standards shall not operate as a waiver of the obligations or responsibilities of the Cable Operator under said provision, or any other provision of these Standards. (Ord. 2-2002 Exh. A §5.2) 
CHAPTER 6 - Business Licenses and Regulations 
ARTICLE 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 6-1-10. - Persons subject to license. 
    Whenever in this Code or in any code adopted herein by reference, a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or establishment or for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person shall be subject to the requirement if, by himself or herself or through an agent, employee or partner, the person holds himself or herself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; so solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform any part of such business or occupation in the Town. (Prior code 6.01.01) 
Sec. 6-1-20. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this Section: 
    Business means and includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises and establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premises in this Town or anywhere else within its jurisdiction. 
    Casual sale means an individual, single or incidental transaction which in itself does not constitute the carrying on of business. 
    License or licensee, as used generally in this Chapter, means and includes, respectively, the word permit or permittee, or the holder for any use or period of time of any similar privilege wherever relevant to any provision of this Chapter or any ordinance of the Town. 
    Premises means and includes all lands, structures and places, and the equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any personal property which is either affixed to or is otherwise used in connection with any such business conducted on such premises. (Prior code 6.01.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-1-30. - License required for conduct of business. 
    It is unlawful for any person, whether as principal, agent, clerk or employee, either for himself or herself or for any other person, to commence or carry on any kind of lawful business, profession, vocation or occupation in the Town without first having procured the necessary license as required by this Chapter from the Town, or without complying with any and all regulations of such business, profession, vocation or occupation contained in this Chapter. (Prior code 6.01.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-1-40. - General requirements for license. 
    Every licensee under this Chapter shall: 
(1)  Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and regulations applicable to the licensed business. 
(2)  Avoid all illegal or unlawful practices or conditions which do or may affect the public health, safety, morals or welfare. 
(3)  Refrain from operating the licensed business on the premises after expiration of his or her license and during the period his or her license is revoked or suspended. (Prior code 6.01.04) 
Sec. 6-1-50. - Exempt activities. 
(a)  The provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the procurement of a license to conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation or activity, or to require the payment of any license fee from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable, municipal or public purposes from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person. In addition, a license shall not be required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects whenever the entire receipts from the same are to be appropriated to, or such projects are conducted under the auspices of, any church, school, government or religious, nonprofit or benevolent organization. A license shall also not be required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture whenever the receipts from the same are to be appropriated for the purposes and objects for which such association or organization was formed and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person. 
(b)  A license shall not be required of any person for any mere delivery in the Town where no intent by such person is shown to exist to evade the provisions of this Chapter. 
(c)  No newsperson selling magazines or newspapers on public streets or in public places shall be required to obtain a license. 
(d)  A license shall not be required for a casual sale, as defined in Section 6-1-20 of this Chapter. 
(e)  A license shall not be required of persons performing professional services within the Town who are licensed by the State, such as physicians, dentists, lawyers, accountants and engineers. (Prior code 6.01.05; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-1-60. - License applications. 
    The application for every license required by and issued under authority of the Town shall contain the following information stated in writing on a form prescribed by the Town Administrator/Clerk. 
(1)  The name of the person desiring such license. 
(2)  The residence and mailing address of such applicant, or if such applicant is a firm or corporation, of each individual member of such firm, or of each directing officer of such corporation and its principal place of business. 
(3)  The kind of license desired, stating the business, trade or profession to be performed, practiced or carried on. 
(4)  The street and mailing address, if any, where such business is to be carried on. 
(5)  The year for which such license is sought. 
(6)  Any other relevant information required by the terms of the provision pertaining to the particular license sought. (Prior code 6.01.06; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-1-70. - Duties of Town Administrator/Clerk. 
(a)  The Town Administrator/Clerk shall collect all license fees and issue licenses in the name of the Town to all persons qualified under the provisions of this Chapter, and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations necessary to the operation and enforcement of this Chapter. 
(2)  Adopt all forms and prescribe the information to be given in such forms as to character and other relevant matter for all necessary papers. 
(3)  Require applicants to submit to affidavits and oaths necessary to the administration of this Chapter. 
(4)  Submit all applications in a proper case to interested Town officials for their endorsements on such applications as to compliance by the applicant with all Town regulations which such officials have the duty of enforcing. 
(5)  Investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant for a license as required. 
(6)  Notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection of his or her application and, upon refusal of any license or permit, at the applicant's request, state in writing the reasons for such refusal and deliver them to the applicant. 
(b)  The Town Administrator/Clerk shall keep all information furnished or secured under the authority of this Chapter in strict confidence. The information shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents shall not become known except to the person charged with the administration of this Chapter. (Prior code 6.01.07; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-1-80. - Investigations. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit where any provision of this Code or any secondary code adopted by this Code, necessitates an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such permit or license, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall refer the application to the proper officer, board or commission for making such investigation within forty-eight (48) hours of the time of receipt of such application. The officer, board or commission charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the application or a copy thereof, shall conduct such investigation. Failure to comply with the time limits set forth herein shall not impair the validity of any action taken. 
(b)  The Town Administrator/Clerk may, in his or her discretion, make or cause to be made an inspection in regard to licenses connected with the care and handling of food, the prevention of nuisances and the spread of disease for the protection of health. The Building Inspector shall make or cause to be made any inspections relative to the construction of buildings or other structures. All other investigations, except where otherwise specifically provided, shall be made by a law enforcement officer or by another officer designated by the Town Administrator/Clerk. (Prior code 6.01.08; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-1-90. - Compliance with building and zoning regulations. 
    No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall be issued for anything or act if the premises and building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of this Code and any secondary code adopted by this Code. No license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or the performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning regulations of the Town. (Prior code 6.01.09; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-1-100. - Inspections. 
(a)  Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by this Code or any secondary code adopted herein, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any provision of this Code or any such secondary code or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the Town who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested. It is unlawful for such person to fail or refuse to admit such officer or employee for such purpose. 
(b)  Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any provision of this Code or any secondary code adopted herein or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee in the Town whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee of the Town requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon request. It is unlawful for such licensee to fail or refuse to give such samples to such officer of employee. 
(c)  Conviction of a violation of any provision of this Section shall automatically forfeit and revoke any license issued under this Chapter; provided that there shall be no violation of this Chapter unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises in the name of the Town stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection of or obtain the sample. (Prior code 6.01.10; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-1-110. - Term and fee proration. 
    In the absence of any specific provision to the contrary, all licenses shall be issued on a calendar year basis, and they shall expire with the calendar year for which they are issued; provided, however, that issuance and expiration of all classes of liquor licenses and all fermented malt beverage licenses shall be according to the laws of the State. In the absence of any specific provision to the contrary, for an applicant who has not engaged in the business until after the expiration of part of the current license year, fees may be prorated on a quarterly basis, with the applicant responsible for the entire fee for the quarter in which the application is made and each succeeding quarter up to and including the final quarter of the calendar year of the initial application. (Prior code 6.01.11) 
Sec. 6-1-120. - Issuance. 
    Upon the receipt of the application containing the information set forth in the preceding Section, proof that the annual fee therefor has been paid in advance, the execution and delivery of any bond or insurance that may be required, the approval of the application for license where the license is required and the fulfillment of all other specific requirements relating to the issuance of the particular license, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall issue and deliver to the applicant the license requested. (Prior code 6.01.12) 
Sec. 6-1-130. - Appeal of license denial. 
(a)  If an application for a license is denied by the Town Administrator/Clerk, the applicant may appeal such denial to the Town Administrator/Clerk. In authorizing the issuance of a license hereunder, the Town Administrator/Clerk may specify conditions, including hours of operation or manner of operation, which are intended to ensure that the place of business will not be unduly annoying to any residential areas in the vicinity. The Town Administrator/Clerk may deny the application the Town Administrator/Clerk determines that such business in the location requested will unreasonably disrupt the peace and quiet of any residential neighborhood in the Town. 
(b)  In the event that any application for a license hereunder is denied by the Town Administrator/Clerk or if the Town Administrator/Clerk will issue the license only upon conditions which are not acceptable to the applicant, the applicant may appeal the decision of the Town Administrator/Clerk to the Board of Trustees, provided that notice of such appeal is filed at least ten (10) days before the meeting of the Board of Trustees at which the applicant requests that the appeal be heard. Such appeal must be in writing with reasons for the appeal so stated. At the time of hearing the appeal, the applicant may submit to the Board of Trustees any material evidence relating to the application, and the Board of Trustees shall consider the same, together with the report of the Town Administrator/Clerk, and make a final determination upon the application. (Prior code 6.01.13; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-1-140. - Records posting, exhibition. 
    The Town Administrator/Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued, setting forth the name of every licensee, the place of business licensed, if any, and the kind of license issued. Every license for a business to be conducted at a particular street address shall be posted in a prominent place during the period such license is valid. It shall be the duty of each and every person to whom a license has been issued by the Town to exhibit the same upon the request of any law enforcement officer, inspector or other officer of the Town. (Prior code 6.01.14) 
Sec. 6-1-150. - Notice of change. 
    The location or nature of any licensed business or occupation or of any permitted act may be changed, provided that ten (10) days' notice of such change is given to the Town Administrator/Clerk, in the absence of any provision to the contrary, and provided that the building and zoning requirements of this Code and any secondary code adopted herein are complied with. (Prior code 6.01.15) 
Sec. 6-1-160. - Transfers. 
    No license may be transferred from one (1) person to another, or from one (1) place to another, except where permitted by state law or the provisions of this Code relating to the particular license, and then only by the Town Administrator/Clerk after written application therefor and the payment of a fee established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs for the transfer of such license. (Prior code 6.01.16; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-1-170. - Renewals. 
    Any licensee may make application for a new license for the succeeding year and pay the required fee therefore, on or before the expiration date of any license issued to the licensee for the current year Whenever any application and license fee payment therefore is not received on or before February 1 st for the current year, and the licensee continues to engage in business or activity for which the license was issued, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the license fee shall be imposed and collected and an additional five percent (5%) of the original fee shall be added on the last day of each calendar month after the expiration date. In addition to the above penalty provision, it is unlawful for a licensee to continue to engage in any business or activity after his or her license therefore has expired. (Prior code 6.01.17) 
(Ord. No. 2-2012 , § 1, 2-14-12) 
Sec. 6-1-180. - Revocation. 
    The Board of Trustees may, upon seven (7) days' written notice to a licensee stating the contemplated action and in general the grounds therefor, and after a reasonable opportunity to be heard, revoke any license issued by the Town if it finds that: 
(1)  The licensee has failed to pay the annual license fee; 
(2)  The licensee has failed to file any reports or furnish any other information that may be required by the provisions relating to the specific license; 
(3)  The licensee has violated any of the terms of the provisions pertaining to his or her license or any regulation or order lawfully made relating thereto; or 
(4)  Any fact or condition exists which, if it had existed or had been known to exist at the time of the application for such license, would have warranted the refusal of the issuance of such license. (Prior code 6.01.18) 
Sec. 6-1-190. - Return of fees. 
    Upon refusal of any license, the fee therefor paid in advance shall be returned to the applicant. In the event that any license is revoked, all moneys paid therefor shall be and remain the moneys of the Town and no refund shall be made to any licensee. (Prior code 6.01.19) 
Sec. 6-1-200. - Legal action for failure to pay fee. 
    The amount of any license fee imposed by this Chapter shall be deemed a debt to the Town, and any person carrying on any lawful business in the Town without having the necessary license from the Town to do so shall be subject to an action in the name of the Town in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of license fee imposed on such business. (Prior code 6.01.20) 
Sec. 6-1-210. - Conviction not exemption from fee payment. 
    The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting any business without the necessary license shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of such license fee due or unpaid at the time of such conviction. Nothing in this Section shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter. (Prior code 6.01.21) 
Sec. 6-1-220. - Each day of violation separate offense. 
    The carrying on of any business, profession, vocation or occupation as provided in this Chapter, without first having procured the necessary license from the Town to do so, or without complying with any and all regulations of such business, profession, vocation or occupation contained in this Chapter, shall be deemed a separate violation of this Chapter for each and every day that such business, profession, vocation or occupation is carried on. (Prior code 6.01.22) 
ARTICLE 2 - Business Licenses 
Division 1 - Generally 

Sec. 6-2-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article shall be to require the licensing and regulation of all business activities and enterprises conducted within the Town, except as exempted from this Chapter, and to provide the Town with necessary information concerning the business activities within the Town, including the nature of the business operation, the place of business and such other information relating to businesses and professions operating within the Town in order to protect the health, welfare and safety of its inhabitants. (Prior code 6.02.01) 
Sec. 6-2-20. - License required. 
    It is unlawful to carry on or engage in any business, profession or occupation within the Town, which business, profession or occupation consists in the selling of goods, wares or merchandise, or the performing or rendering of service, for charge, except as exempted from this Chapter, without first having obtained a license for each such business, profession or occupation so carried on or engaged in. (Prior code 6.02.02) 
Sec. 6-2-30. - Fee designated; term. 
(a)  The license fee for the license required by this Article shall be an amount established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs, and shall be paid to the Town Administrator/Clerk on or before February 1 st of each and every year. 
(b)  The license required by this Article is for the privilege of pursuing the business, profession, vocation or occupation until the next succeeding February 1 st for the following year. (Prior code 6.02.03; Ord. 19-1995 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 2-2012 , § 2, 2-14-12) 
Sec. 6-2-40. - Separate license for separate locations. 
    A separate license must be obtained for each branch, establishment or separate place of business in which the business is carried on, without payment of any additional fee. (Prior code 6.02.04) 
Sec. 6-2-50. - Liability of operator, manager. 
    The licensing provisions hereof shall apply to the owner of any business; provided, however, that where the owner is a firm or corporation, or where the owner is a nonresident or cannot be found, the operator or manager of such business shall be responsible for obtaining the necessary license and shall be liable for his or her failure to obtain such license. (Prior code 6.02.05) 
Division 2 - Sales and Use Tax Licenses 

Sec. 6-2-110. - License required. 
    Except as specifically allowed herein, it is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail, or to furnish certain services as herein specified, without first having obtained a license therefor. Such license shall be granted and issued by the Town Administrator/Clerk and shall be in force and effect until December 31 of the year in which it is issued, unless sooner revoked. (Prior code 3.06.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-2-120. - Application for license. 
    Such license shall be granted or renewed only upon application, on a form provided by the Town, stating the name and address of the person desiring such a license, the name and location of such business, and such other facts as the Town Administrator/Clerk may require. (Prior code 3.06.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-2-130. - Renewal of license. 
    It shall be the duty of each licensee on or before January 1 of each year to obtain a renewal of the license if the licensee remains in the retail business or liable to account for the sales or use tax imposed by this Code; however, nothing herein contained shall be construed to empower the Town Administrator/Clerk to refuse such renewal except revocation for cause of the licensee's prior license. (Prior code 3.06.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-2-140. - Multiple locations. 
    In case business is transacted at two (2) or more separate premises by one (1) person, a separate license for each place of business shall be required. (Prior code 3.06.03) 
Sec. 6-2-150. - Posting of license. 
    Each license shall be numbered and shall show the name, residence, place and character or business of the licensee, and shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which it is issued. No license shall be transferable. (Prior code 3.06.03) 
Sec. 6-2-160. - Commodities exempt. 
    No license shall be required for any person engaged exclusively in the business of selling commodities or providing services which are exempt from taxation under Chapter 4 of this Code. (Prior code 3.06.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-2-170. - License fee. 
    The annual fee for such license or renewal shall be an amount established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs, which shall accompany the application for license or renewal. (Prior code 3.06.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-2-180. - Revocation. 
    Any license may be revoked for cause as provided in Section 39-26-103, C.R.S., which provision is incorporated herein by this reference. (Prior code 3.06.03) 
ARTICLE 3 - Auctions and Peddling-Canvassing, Soliciting or Peddling for Residential Sales of Property or Operation of a Public Auction[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4-2015 , § 1, adopted March 10, 2015, amended article 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article 3, §§ 6-3-10-6-3-50, pertained to similar subject matter. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 6-3-10. - License required. 
    Any person, including any company, engaged in canvassing, soliciting or peddling in operating any Public Auction as defined in this Article shall be required to obtain from the Town a license therefore. It shall further be unlawful for any person or company: 
(a)  To sell any property at public auction in the Town without first having obtained a license therefor as provided in this Article. 
(b)  Sell, offer for sale or in any manner assist in or about any sale or offer of sale of any goods, wares or merchandise within the corporate limits of the Town by hawking or peddling the same without first having obtained a license therefor, as provided in this Article. 
(c)  Distribute indiscriminately to the public any cards, circulars, handbills, samples of merchandise or similar advertising matter on any public street or sidewalk or other public place in the Town, or by leaving the same at stores, offices, houses and residences in the Town, without first having secured a permit from the Town Administrator/Clerk. 
(d)  The provisions of this Article shall not apply to distribution of newspapers published and distributed on a regular basis, either daily, weekly or otherwise. 
    Each applicant for a License shall, not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15) days prior to the commencement of canvassing, solicitation or peddling, furnish the Town Administrator/Clerk with the following information on forms provided by the Town. 
(Ord. No. 4-2015 , § 1, 3-10-15) 
Sec. 6-3-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article: 
    "Canvassing," "soliciting" or "peddling," unless expressly provided for otherwise, means traveling from residence to residence within the Town, without having a previous appointment to visit the residence or residences visited for the purpose of hawking or exposing or offering for inspection or sale, goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs or any other property, tangible or intangible, or services, or for the purpose of taking or attempting to take orders for the purchase of services, goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs or other property, tangible or intangible for future delivery. "Canvassing," "soliciting" or "peddling" also means the soliciting of funds or other property for charitable or other purposes anywhere within the Town. 
    "Canvasser," "solicitor" or "peddler" means any person who engages in canvassing, soliciting or peddling. 
    "Public auction" means any auction sale occurring within the Town and open to the public, but does not include sales made under and by virtue of legal processes or under and by virtue of any power contained in mortgages, trust deeds or similar instrument. 
(Ord. No. 4-2015 , § 1, 3-10-15) 
Sec. 6-3-30. - License application. 
    Any application for a license under this section shall require but shall not necessarily be limited to the following information: 
(a)  Name, age and physical description of applicant or any person acting within the Town on behalf of the applicant. 
(b)  Complete permanent and local address of applicant and each person acting within the Town on behalf of the applicant. 
(c)  Name and address of the person, firm, corporation or association for whom the canvassing, soliciting or peddling is presently being made and any other person, firm, corporation or association for whom the applicant and each person acting within the Town on behalf of the applicant has solicited during the past three years. 
(d)  A general description of the nature of the business and the goods, services or wares to be sold, or otherwise sufficient to identify the subject matter of the canvassing, soliciting, peddling or public auction in which the applicant and any person acting within the Town on behalf of the applicant will engage. 
(e)  The names of all other municipalities in which the applicant and any person acting within the Town on behalf of the applicant has conducted canvassing, soliciting, peddling or public auction activities during the past twelve months. 
(f)  Whether the applicant or any person acting within the Town on behalf of the applicant has ever had a license issued under this article revoked, including the time and place of such revocation. 
(g)  Whether the applicant or person acting within the Town on behalf of the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony violation including the time and place of such conviction. 
(h)  The proposed dates and times of the canvassing, solicitation, peddling or public auction. 
(i)  The make, model, year, color and license plate number of automobile(s) used by the applicant or any person acting within the Town on behalf of the applicant during the period of canvassing, soliciting or peddling within the Town, and the number of applicant's driver's license and state of issuance. 
(j)  An identification badge, issued by the Town, to be worn by the applicant acting and any person acting within the Town canvassing, soliciting or peddling within the Town on behalf of the applicant in a conspicuous manner. 
(k)  Submission to fingerprinting, if requested, by applicable the law enforcement agency for law enforcement files and for the purpose of determining the criminal record, if any, of the applicant or any person acting within the Town on behalf of the applicant. 
(l)  Submission of information adequate to establish that applicable sales tax liability will be paid by applicant or any person acting within the Town on behalf of applicant. Information may include past proof of payment of sales tax obligations owed to the Town by the applicant/licensee. 
(Ord. No. 4-2015 , § 1, 3-10-15) 
Sec. 6-3-40. - Issuance of certificate; duration. 
(a)  Issuance of Certificate. Not more than five days after completion of the application form provided in Section 6-3-30 the Town Administrator/Clerk, shall, except as otherwise provided herein, issue an appropriate license to each applicant unless it is determined by the Town Administrator/Clerk: 
(1)  That the applicant or person designated as acting in the Town for the applicant has misrepresented his identity or intention or made a false, misleading or deceptive statement in providing the information required under Section 6-3-40. 
(2)  That the applicant or any person designated as acting in the Town for the applicant has been convicted, during five (5) years preceding the date of application, of a felony considered to be of a nature to present a danger to a Town resident. 
    The annual fee for a license issued in accordance with this Article shall be an amount established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs except that no fee shall be required for those persons excluded as a charitable, religious or educational organization under applicable Colorado law. And upon payment of the license will be valid for one year. The Board of Trustees may provide that the license fee for any license issued under this Chapter may be paid weekly, quarterly or annually. 
    Any person other than the person or the person acting for the applicant/licensee to whom issued and shall be valid for a period of the issued license. 
(Ord. No. 4-2015 , § 1, 3-10-15) 
Sec. 6-3-50. - Display of license; return. 
    Each applicant or person acting for such applicant who is canvassing, soliciting or peddling in the Town shall carry the license certificate or badge issued by the Town when engaged in the licensed activity and shall exhibit it to any resident or Town official upon request. Any person conducting a public auction shall post the license in a prominent place at the auction location while any auction activities are being conducted. At the conclusion of the period for which the license certificate was issued, the license certificate shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 4-2015 , § 1, 3-10-15) 
Sec. 6-3-60. - Trespassing in violation of posted signs. 
    No person while engaged in any for-profit or nonprofit canvassing, solicitation or peddling, shall knock at the door or ring the bell of any home, apartment, apartment building or other dwelling unit in the Town upon which is displayed at the entrance a notice indicates No Canvassers, No Solicitors or No Peddlers Allowed, or which otherwise clearly purports to prohibit canvassers, solicitors or peddlers on the premises, unless such canvasser, solicitor or peddler is, or has been invited upon the premises by the owner, lessee or occupant thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4-2015 , § 1, 3-10-15) 
Sec. 6-3-70. - Revocation of license. 
    A license issued under this Chapter shall be revoked by the Town Administrator/Clerk for any of the following causes: 
(a)  A determination that the applicant or any person acting on behalf of the applicant provided false, misleading or deceptive information in completing the application set forth in Section 6-3-30, or has violated the provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  The applicant or any person acting on behalf of the applicant is convicted of a felony violation considered to be of a nature to present a danger to a Town resident. 
(c)  The applicant or any person acting on behalf of the applicant convicted of a violation of any provision of this Chapter. 
(d)  Failure to pay applicable sales tax. 
    Notice shall be given to the applicant/license holder in person or by certified mail of such revocation of any license issued pursuant to this Article together with the reason for the revocation. 
(Ord. No. 4-2015 , § 1, 3-10-15) 
ARTICLE 4 - Mobile Home Parks 

Sec. 6-4-10. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Article, unless the context requires otherwise, the definitions in Chapter 16 of this Code are incorporated herein by this reference as if set out verbatim herein. In addition, the following words are defined as set forth herein: 
    Applicant means an individual who has applied to the Board of Trustees for a license to operate a mobile home park in the Town. 
    Licensee means the individual to whom a license to operate a mobile home park has been issued by the Board of Trustees. 
    Operate means to rent, lease or offer to rent or lease any land located within a mobile home park, or otherwise allow any such land to be occupied. 
    Operator means any person who operates a mobile home park. (Prior code 6.03.01) 
Sec. 6-4-20. - Scope; penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate a mobile home park within the Town except in accordance with this Article. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any occupant, owner, tenant or lessee of a mobile home located within the Town to violate Section 6-4-70 of this Article. 
(c)  Before any person shall operate a mobile home park within the Town, such person shall be the recipient of a license granted by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the terms of this Article. (Prior code 6.03.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-4-30. - License application. 
    Any individual may apply to the Board of Trustees for a license pursuant to this Article. Such application shall be made in writing, filed with the Town Administrator/Clerk and accompanied by: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Evidence of his or her financial responsibility, including personal financial statements and financial statements of all business entities in which the applicant has an equity interest of ten percent (10%) or more. Such statements shall include balance sheets and income statements, as well as other documentation of financial responsibility that may be required by the Board of Trustees in its discretion. 
(3)  An application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) plus five dollars ($5.00) for each unit in the mobile home park the applicant wishes to operate. 
(4)  The name of said mobile home park which the applicant wishes to operate. 
(5)  Evidence that said mobile home park has been located, designed and constructed in accordance with Chapter 16 of this Code. 
(6)  Submission of a bond in the amount set forth in Chapter 16 of this Code. 
(7)  In the event that the applicant is not the owner of the land upon which the mobile home park is located, the application shall also include: 
a.  The name of the owner of said mobile home park and the legal relationship of the applicant to the owner; and 
b.  Documentation of the authority granted to the applicant to operate the mobile home park on behalf of the owner. (Prior code 6.03.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-4-40. - Application review; issuance of license. 
(a)  After receiving an application, the Town Administrator/Clerk, within thirty (30) days, shall provide the Planning Commission with a written recommendation for approval or denial and the reasons for any recommendation of denial. Said recommendation shall be served on the applicant by certified mail at the address listed in his or her application. 
(b)  The Planning Commission, at its next regularly scheduled meeting, shall, after referral of the application by the Town Administrator/ Clerk, consider the application for a favorable or unfavorable recommendation to the Board of Trustees. The applicant shall appear before the Planning Commission and respond to questions presented by the Planning Commission to determine the applicant's knowledge of the operation of a mobile home park. The questions may be presented to the applicant in written form prior to the Planning Commission meeting. In any event, the applicant may appear before the Planning Commission to refute any adverse recommendation of the Town Administrator/ Clerk. Upon a majority vote of approval or denial, the Planning Commission shall refer said application to the Board of Trustees, along with a record of all matters concerning said application. Said referral and record shall be written and shall be served on the applicant by certified mail at the address listed in his or her application. 
(c)  The Board of Trustees, at its first regularly scheduled meeting following referral of the application by the Planning Commission, shall, by a majority vote, grant the application and issue a license to the applicant if it finds that: 
(1)  The application has been properly completed. 
(2)  The applicant is financially responsible, is adequately familiar with the laws and regulations under which the applicant must operate and, if not the owner of the mobile home park to be operated, is properly authorized by the owner to operate the mobile home park. (Prior code 6.03.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-4-50. - License term, renewal. 
(a)  Each license issued by the Board of Trustees shall not be assignable or transferable in any way and shall be in effect one (1) year or until the licensee no longer operates the mobile home park designated in his or her license. Upon the yearly written application of the licensee to the Board of Trustees, the license may be renewed for successive one (1) year periods if the Board of Trustees finds that: 
(1)  The licensee has complied with the provisions of this Article during the then current term of his or her license; and 
(2)  The licensee meets all requirements of this Section for issuance of new licenses under Section 6-4-40 above. 
(b)  The application for renewal shall list any changes in the information listed in the licensee's original application under Section 6-4-30 above, as well as any additional information which may be required by subsequent amendment of that Section. 
(c)  A duplicate copy of the application for renewal shall be submitted by the applicant to the Town Administrator/Clerk who, in his or her discretion, may recommend to the Board of Trustees its approval or denial of the application for renewal of the license. Said recommendation shall be served on the applicant by certified mail to the address listed on his or her application for renewal. 
(d)  The fee for renewal of the license shall be an amount established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs. 
(e)  At its second regularly scheduled meeting following the application for renewal, the Board of Trustees shall, by a majority vote, either deny or approve the application for renewal after considering the criteria set forth in Subsection 6-4-40(c) above. The applicant may be directed by the Board of Trustees to appear before the Board of Trustees in person. The applicant may appear in person to refute any adverse recommendation by the Town Administrator/Clerk. (Prior code 6.03.05; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-4-60. - Obligations of licensee. 
    It shall be the duty of each licensee to: 
(1)  Maintain the mobile home park in the condition provided in Chapter 16 of this Code. 
(2)  Keep a register containing the record of all mobile home owners and occupants located within the park. The register shall be submitted to the Town Administrator/Clerk on the first day of January, April, July and October of each year and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the owner of each mobile home; 
b.  The make, model, year and license number of each mobile home and Colorado Identification Plate number assigned by the Colorado Division of Housing, if any; 
c.  The state, territory or county issuing such license; and 
d.  The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home. The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officers, the Town Administrator/Clerk and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. 
(3)  Operate the mobile home park in compliance with this Article, as well as all other relevant federal, state or local statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(4)  Provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(5)  Ensure that the provisions of Section 6-4-70 below are complied with in the mobile home park which the licensee is licensed to operate. (Prior code 6.03.06) 
Sec. 6-4-70. - Mobile home park maintenance. 
(a)  All mobile homes shall be parked so that there will be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet between mobile homes. Mobile homes parked end-to-end shall have an end-to-end clearance of not less than fifteen (15) feet. Enclosed additions to mobile home structures shall be considered a part of the mobile home in measuring required yard distance. 
(b)  No mobile home shall be parked so that any part of such mobile home will obstruct any roadway or walkway in a mobile home park for a period of more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
(c)  No mobile home shall be occupied in a mobile home park unless the mobile home is situated on a mobile home space. 
(d)  All roadways, streets and walkways in a mobile home park shall be kept clear of snow, ice, standing water, dirt and debris. 
(e)  No abandoned, burned or derelict mobile home shall be allowed to occupy a space in a mobile home park. 
(f)  Mobile homes occupying spaces in a mobile home park operated by persons licensed under this Article shall be exempt from the provisions and requirements of the presently adopted Town building and housing codes. 
(g)  Skirting shall be placed around each mobile home in a mobile home park. Said skirting shall be equipped with doors or access panels to permit access to utilities connections, and shall be weatherproof, rigid, durable and finished in a manner compatible with the appearance of the mobile home. Such skirting must be in place within ninety (90) days after the mobile home is set on the mobile home space. 
(h)  Each mobile home shall be anchored or tied down in conformance with design criteria shown in Chapter 16 of this Code. 
(i)  No animal shall be permitted to run at large or commit any nuisance within a mobile home park. 
(j)  Each mobile home lot in the mobile home park shall be clearly defined and identified by numbers or letters. 
(k)  All mobile homes shall be parked with the mobile home hitch fronting on and directly accessible to a conforming park street. The access shall be at least ten (10) feet in width. 
(l)  The space directly beneath each mobile home shall be kept clean and free from refuse. Such space may be used as a storage area only when the ground is covered with an impervious material. 
(m)  Porches more than thirty (30) inches above grade and all stairs serving porches more than thirty (30) inches above grade shall be provided with a rail. 
(n)  Each mobile home space shall be clearly numbered with numbers of not less than six (6) inches in height and shall be clearly visible from the street. (Prior code 6.03.07; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-4-80. - Inspections. 
(a)  The Town Administrator/Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this Article and shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this Article. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of mobile home parks, or of the person in charge thereof, to give the Town Administrator/Clerk free access to such premises at reasonable times for the purpose of such inspections. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the owner thereof, or his or her agents or employees, access to any part of such repairs or alterations as may be necessary to effect compliance with this Article or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this Article. (Prior code 6.03.08; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-4-90. - Suspension; revocation; receivership. 
(a)  Upon the discovery of a violation of this Article in any mobile home park, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall give the operator thereof written notice of the violation. 
(b)  If, within ten (10) days of said notice, the violation has not been corrected, the Town Administrator/Clerk may temporarily suspend the operator's license. 
(c)  At the next regular meeting of the Board of Trustees, the suspension shall be terminated or shall be made a revocation of the operator's license. 
(d)  In the event the license is temporarily suspended by the Town Administrator/Clerk, the Town Attorney may immediately petition a court of competent jurisdiction for the appointment of a receiver who shall be empowered to do all things reasonable and necessary to operate a mobile home park, including but not limited to the collection of all revenues and the payment of expenses. 
(1)  In the event the temporary suspension is terminated, the receivership shall be terminated, and all properties in the control of the receiver shall be returned to the licensee, along with an accounting thereof. 
(2)  In the event the license is revoked, the receiver shall continue to operate the mobile home park until a new operator is licensed for the park or until the licensee's bond is forfeited and the mobile home park is closed. In either event, all properties in the control of the receiver shall be forfeited by the former licensee and the owner of the land upon which the mobile home park is located. (Prior code 6.03.09; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-4-100. - Enforcement. 
    In the event any mobile home or mobile home park or structure affiliated therewith is, or is proposed to be, constructed, altered, extended, maintained, used or operated in violation of any provision of this Article, or any amendment thereof, the Board of Trustees or any person, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful construction, alteration, extension, maintenance, use or operation. (Prior code 6.03.10) 
Sec. 6-4-110. - Bonding provisions. 
    The bonding provisions in Chapter 16 of this Code apply to the licensee in any mobile home park. (Prior code 6.03.11) 
Sec. 6-4-120. - Severability. 
(a)  If any provision of this Article is declared to be invalid by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that: 
(1)  The effect of such decision shall be limited to that provision which is expressly stated in the decision to be invalid; and 
(2)  Such decision shall not affect, impair or nullify this Article as a whole or any other part thereof, but the rest of this Article shall continue in full force and effect. 
(b)  If the application of any provision of this Article to any mobile home park, mobile home operator or mobile home park owner is declared to be invalid by a decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, it is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that: 
(1)  The effect of such decision shall be limited to that mobile home park, mobile home park operator or mobile home park owner immediately involved in the controversy, action or proceeding in which the judgment or decree of invalidity was rendered; and 
(2)  Such decision shall not affect, impair or nullify this Article as a whole or the application of any provision thereof to any other mobile home park, mobile home park operator or mobile home park owner. (Prior code 6.03.13) 
ARTICLE 5 - Pawnbrokers 

Sec. 6-5-10. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Section, the terms defined shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Pawnbroker means any person who engages in the business of lending money on the deposit or pledge of personal property, or who purchases personal property with an expressed or implied agreement or understanding to sell it back at a stipulated price. (Any pawnbroker may affect the purchase of secondhand personal property for resale purposes under the terms of this Article by acquiring any pawn ticket of his or her own issue by transfer.) A pawnbroker may supplement his or her business of pawnbroking by engaging in the sale of new or used merchandise purchased through ordinary channels of trade. 
    Pawnbroking means the business of a pawnbroker as defined in this Section. 
    Pledge means any article deposited with a pawnbroker as security for a loan in the course of his or her business. 
    Pledgor means a person who delivers a pledge into the possession of a pawnbroker; and if such person a disclosure that the person is acting for another, pledgor means the disclosed principal. (Prior code 6.06.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-5-20. - License, fee required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of pawnbroking, except as provided in and authorized by this Article and without first having obtained a license from the Town Administrator/Clerk and paying the annual license fee in an amount established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs. (Prior code 6.06.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-5-30. - Surety bond required. 
    The licensee or applicant shall furnish a good and sufficient bond with a surety to be approved by the Town Administrator/Clerk, in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), conditioned upon the faithful observance of the provisions of this Chapter regarding pawnbrokers and the safekeeping or return of all articles held in pledge by such pawnbroker. (Prior code 6.06.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-5-40. - Investigation; approval. 
    No license shall be issued by the Town Administrator/Clerk until the application for a license shall have been approved by the Board of Trustees upon recommendation of the Town Administrator/Clerk. No license shall be approved unless the Board of Trustees, after investigation, shall have found that the applicant possesses financial responsibility, character and general fitness so as to command the confidence of the public and to warrant belief that the business will be operated lawfully, honestly, fairly and efficiently for the purpose of this Article. Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of an application to renew a license issued hereunder, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall renew such license, provided that the designated law enforcement official, after investigation, has determined that the applicant has operated the business in such a manner as to fully effectuate the purposes of this Section. Licenses shall be limited to use at the premises specified in the application. Such license shall not be transferable. (Prior code 6.06.04) 
Sec. 6-5-50. - Records and inspection. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall keep books and records sufficient to identify each pledge, together with the pledgor's name, age, current address, sex or other pertinent information such as make and license number of his or her automobile and driver's license number, if any, as may be deemed necessary by the designated law enforcement officer to properly identify such pledgor. 
(b)  All transactions shall be entered in a book of numerical sequence in the order in which they occur, together with the date of each transaction, the amount, length and terms of the loan, the article pledged, and the serial number, name, make and model or other specific information as may be deemed necessary by the designated law enforcement officer in order to distinguish and assist in the identification of the article pledged. The books and records of the licensee shall also reveal the date on which each loan was terminated and whether it was redeemed, renewed or forfeited and sold. Further, all entries must be made in the English language in a legible manner, and shall be preserved and made accessible for inspection for a period of two (2) years after the redemption or forfeiture and sale of the pledge. 
(c)  Such books and records shall be open to the inspection of any law enforcement agent of the Town during regular business hours. Upon demand of any such agent, the pawnbroker shall exhibit for inspection by such agent any personal property or merchandise that may be in the pawnbroker's possession that has been purchased by or pawned to him or her. A copy of any pawn record required under this Article, together with a copy of the record of each purchase of personal property or merchandise by a pawnbroker, shall be made available to the designated law enforcement officer each day so that the designated law enforcement officer may maintain a complete record of all business transactions of the pawnbroker. No charge shall be made to the Town for furnishing such records, and it shall be the responsibility of the Town to pick up the copies from the pawnbroker. (Prior code 6.06.05) 
Sec. 6-5-60. - Pledgor signature required; copies of records. 
    The pawnbroker shall, at the time of making the loan, require the pledgor or his or her agent to write his or her signature on a pawnbook of duplicate pages bearing the serial number of the loan, and the pledgor shall then receive a copy of such transaction in its entirety as outlined in Section 6-5-50 above. The copy of each recorded pawn ticket or purchase of personal property or merchandise shall correspond with the original in every detail. If the same does not so correspond, the article referred to or described in such conflicting entry shall thereupon be surrendered by the pawnbroker to the designated law enforcement official of the Town. (Prior code 6.06.06) 
Sec. 6-5-70. - Allied purchases of property. 
    All property, notes, bonds or securities which are purchased outright by a pawnbroker shall be so shown on the records kept by the pawnbroker, with all information concerning the transaction set forth in such records. (Prior code 6.06.07) 
Sec. 6-5-80. - Release of pledges. 
    The holder of the pawn ticket shall be presumed to be the person entitled to redeem the pledge and, except as provided otherwise in this Article, the pawnbroker shall deliver the pledge to the person presenting the pawn ticket on payment of the principal and charges and upon surrender of the pawn ticket. (Prior code 6.06.08) 
Sec. 6-5-90. - Replacement of lost ticket. 
    If a pawn ticket is lost, destroyed or stolen, the pledgor or holder thereof shall so notify the issuing pawnbroker in writing immediately upon discovery of such loss. Before permitting the redemption of the pledge or issuing a duplicate ticket, the pawnbroker may, in addition to satisfying himself or herself of the validity of the claim, require the pledgor to make an affidavit of the alleged loss in writing, witnessed by two (2) reputable residents of the community in the presence of a notary public. Upon receipt of such affidavit in writing, the pawnbroker shall permit the holder of the pawn ticket to redeem the pledge or shall deliver to the pledgor or holder a duplicate ticket, and the pawnbroker shall incur no liability for so doing unless the pawnbroker has previously received written notice of an adverse claim. (Prior code 6.06.09) 
Sec. 6-5-100. - Adverse claims for pledges. 
    If more than one (1) person claims the right to redeem a pledge, the pawnbroker shall incur no liability for refusing to deliver the pledge until the respective rights of the claimants have been adjudicated. If no action is brought against the pawnbroker by either party prior to the expiration of the period for which the pawnbroker is required to hold the pledge, the pawnbroker may proceed to sell the pledge in accordance with the provisions of this Article. (Prior code 6.06.10) 
Sec. 6-5-110. - Maximum interest rates; commissions prohibited. 
    No pawnbroker shall ask, demand or receive any greater rate of interest, commission and compensation than the total rate of three percent (3%) per month or fractional part thereof, computed on the amount of money actually advanced; provided, however, that upon the first fifty dollars ($50.00) or any part thereof, there may be made a charge of not to exceed ten percent (10%) per month or fractional part thereof, and provided further than no loan of any amount less than ten dollars ($10.00) shall be made for less than the minimum compensation of one dollar ($1.00) per month or fraction thereof. No other charge shall be made by said pawnbroker upon renewal of any loan or at any other time. Any contract for the payment of a commission by the borrower for procuring the loan on personal property shall be null and void. (Prior code 6.06.11) 
Sec. 6-5-120. - Intermediate loan payments. 
    Pawnbrokers shall accept intermediate payments upon loans which have not matured when presented with the pawn ticket, provided that no payment need be accepted which is less than ten percent (10%) of the unpaid principal balance, together with accrued charges. The pawnbroker may elect to treat the amount tendered as a payment upon the existing loan, or the pawnbroker may elect to renew the loan, in which event a new pawn ticket in the reduced amount shall be issued. A receipt showing the date of the payment and the amount thereof shall be given for all moneys received on account of or in payment of pledged loans. (Prior code 6.06.12) 
Sec. 6-5-130. - Sale of unredeemed articles. 
    The pawnbroker shall retain the pledge in his or her possession thirty (30) days after maturity of said loan. If the pledgor shall fail or neglect for thirty (30) days after the maturity of said loan to redeem the pledge by repayment of the balance of the principal and payment of all accrued interest charges, the pawnbroker shall immediately thereafter mail a notice of the impending sale of the pledged article to the address shown on the pawn ticket. Ten (10) days shall be allowed from the date of notification for the pledgor or his or her agent to appear with the pawn ticket and reclaim the article or make satisfactory payments upon the same. If the person who obtained the loan fails to redeem said pawned and pledged property within the ten (10) days designated in said notice, all right and title and interest of, in and to such pawned and pledged property shall be forfeited to the pawnbroker, who shall thereby acquire absolute title to the same, and the debt thereof shall become completely satisfied. (Prior code 6.06.13) 
Sec. 6-5-140. - Hold orders. 
    Any designated law enforcement officer may order a pawnbroker to hold any article deposited with or in custody of any pawnbroker for purposes of further investigation by the law enforcement officer. No sale or other disposition may be made of any article held by any pawnbroker while said hold order remains outstanding. Any such hold order shall be effective for thirty (30) days only, unless a criminal prosecution is undertaken in reference to any such article within such thirty-day period, in which event the hold order shall be effective until said prosecution has been completed or dismissed. (Prior code 6.06.14) 
Sec. 6-5-150. - Deficiencies and setoffs prohibited. 
    The pawnbroker shall look to the property pledged for payment of the debt and in no event to the personal credit of the pledgor. No setoff shall be allowed against a surplus or deficit arising out of another loan transaction between the parties. (Prior code 6.06.15) 
Sec. 6-5-160. - Transactions with certain persons prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to accept any articles in pawn or purchase any secondhand personal property by acquiring a pawn ticket by transference from the following: 
(1)  Any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  Any person under the influence of alcohol or any narcotic drug or stimulant. 
(3)  Any person known to such pawnbroker to be a thief or to have been convicted of larceny or burglary, without first notifying the designated law enforcement officer of the Town. (Prior code 6.06.16; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-5-170. - Responsibility for stolen or lost property. 
(a)  A pawnbroker who accepts in pledge any article as security for loan from a pledgor who is not the owner thereof obtains no ownership in the article either by reason of the maturation of the loan or by the nonredemption of the pledge. Ignorance of the fact that the pledged article was lost or stolen shall not be construed to affect the question of title; and if the pawnbroker sells such article to a third person, the pawnbroker shall remain liable to the actual owner. 
(b)  In the event that any law enforcement officer of the Town determines that any article of personal property held by a pawnbroker is stolen or illegally obtained property, such officer shall take such article into his or her custody after giving the pawnbroker a receipt for the same which sets forth the reason for confiscation. (Prior code 6.06.17) 
Sec. 6-5-180. - Liability for pledged property. 
    A licensee shall be liable for the loss of a pledge or part thereof, or for injury thereto, whether caused by fire, theft, burglary or otherwise, resulting from his or her failure to exercise reasonable care in regard to it; however, the licensee shall not be liable, in the absence of an express agreement to the contrary, for the loss of a pledge or part thereof, or for injury thereto, which could not have been avoided by the exercise of such care. (Prior code 6.06.18) 
Sec. 6-5-190. - Single location of business. 
    A pawnbroker shall conduct his or her pawnshop business from only one (1) business location, which shall be the location listed on the pawnbroker's license. This provision shall not prohibit a pawnbroker from using warehouses or other storage locations away from the licensed place of business, but such other locations shall be used only if the pawnbroker submits notice to the Town Administrator/Clerk in writing of such off-site locations. In such event, such off-site locations shall be open to any law enforcement officer of the Town for inspection during regular business hours. (Prior code 6.06.19) 
Sec. 6-5-200. - Investigative authority. 
    For the purpose of discovering violations of this Article, the designated law enforcement officer may at any time investigate the business and examine the books, accounts, papers and records used therein, of: 
(1)  Any licensed pawnbroker in respect to such books, accounts, papers and records required to be kept hereunder. 
(2)  Any other person who engages in the business of a pawnbroker as defined in Section 6-5-10 of this Article or who participates in such business as principal, agent, broker or otherwise. (Prior code 6.06.20) 
ARTICLE 6 - Secondhand Dealers 

Sec. 6-6-10. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Article, the following term shall have the meaning indicated: 
    Secondhand dealer means every person who buys, sells, exchanges or deals in personal property that has been previously used, broken or disfigured. This definition, however, and the terms of this Article shall not apply to merchants who deal in new furniture, dishes or other regular household furnishings and accept such articles for credit on the purchase price of new or used articles sold contemporaneously which are of similar character to the goods so exchanged. (Prior code 6.04.01) 
Sec. 6-6-20. - License required; annual fee. 
    No person shall conduct any business as a secondhand dealer in the Town without a license therefor. The fee for said license shall be an amount established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs. The Town Administrator/Clerk, if satisfied that the applicant is a fit person to engage in or carry on such business, shall issue a license to the applicant upon payment of the fee herein specified. (Prior code 6.04.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-6-30. - Required records and inspections. 
(a)  Every dealer licensed under this Article shall keep at his or her place of business an accurate, detailed record of every article purchased by the dealer. Such record shall include the date of purchase, name of seller, amount paid and description of article, and such record shall be clean and legible. 
(b)  Every secondhand dealer shall, upon request during ordinary business hours, submit and exhibit the records herein required to a designated law enforcement officer of the Town and permit said officer to make a copy thereof. The secondhand dealer shall also, upon request, exhibit for the inspection of the above-named officer any personal property or merchandise that may be so received by the secondhand dealer. (Prior code 6.04.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-6-40. - Certain property to be held. 
    Every secondhand dealer shall keep all readily portable property purchased by said dealer for a period of five (5) days before the same is sold. (Prior code 6.04.04) 
Sec. 6-6-50. - Purchase from minors prohibited. 
    No secondhand dealer shall purchase any secondhand personal property or merchandise from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Prior code 6.04.05) 
Sec. 6-6-60. - Surrender of stolen or illegally obtained goods. 
    Any secondhand dealer who has accepted, obtained or bought any personal property or merchandise, either new or secondhand, from any person, not knowing the same to have been stolen or illegally obtained, shall deliver the same into the hands of the lawful owner when said owner has made a reasonably accurate and certain identification by means of number, description or otherwise, in the presence of the investigating law enforcement officer. (Prior code 6.04.06) 
ARTICLE 7 - Trash Collectors 

Sec. 6-7-10. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of collecting trash or garbage within the Town without first having made an application to the Town Administrator/Clerk for a license to do so. Each application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Name of the business. (Prior code 10.01.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-7-20. - Application fee; duration of license. 
    Application for a license shall be made in writing to the Town Administrator/Clerk who, after approval of the Board of Trustees, shall issue it upon payment of an annual license fee in an amount established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs. Such license shall expire on December 31 of each year and shall not be apportioned or prorated for the fraction of each year, except in the instance of a new business being started after July 1 of any year. In such case, the fee for the remainder of each year shall be five dollars ($5.00). (Prior code 10.01.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-7-30. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this Article, the term trash shall be held to include ashes, waste paper and cardboard, cans, bottles, glass, sawdust, leaves, grass cuttings, shrubbery and tree trimmings, wood shavings, packing materials, furniture, appliances, vehicles or parts thereof and garbage of a household nature, but not to include manure or dead animals. This definition shall also include all waste matter attending or resulting from the occupancy of a residence, apartment, hotel or other place or dwelling, together with all premises appurtenant thereto, and from the operation of any and all businesses. The term shall also include industrial waste or waste matter resulting from the construction, demolition or repair of a building or other structure. (Prior code 10.01.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-7-40. - Trash hauling trucks. 
    Trash hauling trucks operating within the Town shall be limited to tandem-axle, selfcompacting trash trucks. Exceptions include trucks used exclusively for the purpose of collecting recycled material and single-axle trucks used in the removal of debris from the construction, demolition or repair of a building or other structure. (Prior code 10.01.04; Ord. 25-1998 §1) 
Sec. 6-7-50. - Revocation of license. 
    The Board of Trustees, after a hearing, shall have the power to revoke at any time the license of the trash collector for failure to properly perform the terms and covenants of this Article or for other good cause shown by lack of services or operation. (Prior code 10.01.04) 
Sec. 6-7-60. - Route and collection days. 
    The trash hauler shall establish a definitive route of pick-up and regular pick-up days. (Prior code 10.01.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 6-7-70. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), together with costs of any suit. Each additional conviction for the same offense shall double the amount of fine paid for the prior conviction. (Prior code 10.01.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
CHAPTER 7 - Health, Sanitation and Animals 
ARTICLE 1 - Administration and Abatement of Nuisances 

Sec. 7-1-10. - Policy. 
    It is the policy of the Town, pursuant to Section 31-15-401(c), C.R.S., that every public nuisance shall be restrained, prevented, abated and perpetually enjoined. It is the duty of the Town Attorney to bring and maintain action, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, to restrain, prevent, abate and perpetually enjoin any such public nuisance. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as an amendment or repeal of any of the other criminal offenses of this Town, or the repeal of any of the criminal laws of the State, but the provisions of this Chapter, insofar as they relate to those laws, shall be considered a cumulative right of the people in the enforcement of such laws. (Ord. 13-1992 §1) 
Sec. 7-1-20. - Definitions. 
    When used in this Chapter, the following words shall be interpreted as follows, unless the context indicates otherwise: 
    Action to abate a public nuisance means any action brought in Municipal Court to declare and then restrain, terminate, prevent, abate or perpetually enjoin a public nuisance. 
    Administrative Officer means the Mayor, Town Administrator/Clerk or Enforcement Officer. 
    Brush means voluntary growth of bushes and such as are growing out of place at the location where growing, and shall include all cuttings from trees and bushes; and also high and rank shrubbery growth which may conceal filthy deposits. 
    Building means a dwelling, office building, store, warehouse or structure of any kind, whether or not the building is permanently affixed to the ground upon which it is located, and any trailer, semi-trailer, mobile home or any other vehicle designed or used for occupancy by persons for any purpose. 
    Inoperable vehicle means any automobile, truck, tractor, motorcycle or self-propelled vehicle which is in a condition of being junked, wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, discarded, abandoned or unable to perform the functions or purpose for which it was originally constructed. The existence of any of the following conditions shall raise the presumption that a vehicle is inoperable: 
a.  Absence of an effective registration plate upon such vehicle. 
b.  Placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks, blocks, chains or other supports. 
c.  Absence of one (1) or more parts of the vehicle necessary for the lawful operation of the vehicle upon the streets and highways. 
    Lawn grasses shall be considered to be those ornamental grasses that are commonly grown for ground cover as part of a lawn. 
    Litter means the scattering or dropping of rubbish, trash or other matter, organic or mineral. 
    Native grasses will not be considered as weeds or undesirable plants, and they may be permitted to grow on unimproved property larger than one (1) acre in size. Said grasses shall be buffalo grass, brome grass and other native grasses as approved by the Town Engineer and the Town Administrator/Clerk. 
    Public nuisance means the doing of, or failure to do, something that injuriously affects the safety, health or morals of the public, or works some substantial annoyance, inconvenience or injury to the public. 
    Refuse means and includes any grass clippings, leaves, hay, straw or manure; shavings, excelsior, paper or ashes; rubbish containers, boxes, glass, cans or bottles; garbage, waste or discarded materials such as used furniture, appliances and vehicle parts; animal remains such as unused wool, hides or limbs; discarded building and construction materials, including but not limited to plaster, broken concrete, bricks, cinder blocks, stones, rocks, wood, roofing material, wire or metal binding; sacks or loose discarded or unused material; all rubbish; and any other materials commonly known as rubbish of any kind or character or by any means known. 
    Rubbish means any type of debris, trash, waste or rejected matter. 
    Trash means any worn out, broken up or used refuse, rubbish, toppings, twigs, leaves of trees or worthless matter or material. 
    Undesirable plants means Russian, spotted and diffuse knapweed, leafy spurge, ragweed, poison ivy and other poisonous plants, which shall be controlled by this Article. 
    Weed means an unsightly, useless, troublesome or injurious growing herbaceous plant, and shall include all rank vegetable growth which exhales unpleasant and noxious odors and also high and rank vegetable growth that may conceal filthy deposits and which meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
a.  It aggressively invades or is detrimental to economic crops or native plant communities. 
b.  It is poisonous to livestock or humans. 
c.  It is a carrier of detrimental insects, diseases or parasites. 
d.  Its presence has a direct or indirect effect detrimental to the environmentally sound management of natural or agricultural ecosystems. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, weeds shall not include those agricultural crops purposely grown for beneficial use. (Prior code 10.01.05; Ord. 13-1992 §1; Ord. 18-1994 §11-401; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-1-30. - Common law nuisances. 
    Any nuisance which has been declared to be such by state courts or statutes or known as such at common law shall constitute a nuisance in the Town, and any person causing or permitting any such nuisance shall be in violation of this Article. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-1-40. - Author of nuisances. 
    Any state of things prohibited by this Article shall be deemed to be a nuisance, and any person who shall hereafter make or cause such nuisance to exist shall be deemed to be the author thereof. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-1-50. - Prohibition of nuisances. 
    No person being the owner, agent or occupant of, or having under his or her control, any building, lot, premises or unimproved real estate within the limits of the Town, shall maintain or allow any nuisance to be or remain therein. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-1-60. - Ascertaining nuisances. 
    Whenever the pursuit of any trade, business or manufacture or the maintenance of any substance or condition of things shall, upon investigation, be considered by the Town Administrator/Clerk dangerous to the health of any of the inhabitants of the Town, the same shall be considered a nuisance and shall be abated. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-1-70. - Constitution of separate offense. 
    In the case of any nuisance in or upon any street, alley or other public or private grounds, the author thereof shall be guilty of a separate offense for every period of forty-eight (48) hours' continuance thereof after notice has been given to abate the same. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-1-80. - Complaint of nuisance. 
    In addition to or in lieu of any procedure for abatement, a person may make a complaint of the existence of a public nuisance to a member of the Board of Trustees, the Town Administrator/Clerk, the Town Attorney or the Enforcement Officer. Such complaint shall include, whenever possible, the nature of the public nuisance, the location, including the address, the name of the owner, occupant or manager of the property, the duration of the nuisance and the name and address of the complainant. (Ord. 13-1992 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-1-90. - Abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  In all cases where a nuisance shall be found in any building or upon any grounds or other premises within the jurisdiction of the Town, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be given in writing, signed by the Town Administrator/Clerk, Town Attorney or Enforcement Officer, to the owner of said premises or the occupant or person in possession, charge or control of such building or other premises where he or she is known and can be found, to remove such nuisance. However, in cases where accumulated refuse or weeds have been deemed to be the nuisance, the Town Administrator/Clerk or Enforcement Officer shall require the removal of such accumulated refuse within fifteen (15) days of such notice. 
(b)  In case of any such nuisance in or upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, highway or public grounds in the Town, the Public Works Director may abate the same forthwith without such notice being given. 
(c)  Any administrative officer who shall be duly authorized to abate any nuisance specified in this Article shall have the authority to engage the necessary assistance and incur the necessary expense therefor. 
(d)  The expense incurred by the Town in abating any nuisance may be recovered from the author thereof as set forth in this Chapter. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 7-2013 , § 1, 6-11-13) 
Sec. 7-1-100. - Right of entry. 
    Whenever the Town Administrator/Clerk, any peace officer or the Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that a public nuisance exists, and that such public nuisance constitutes an emergency presenting imminent danger of serious injury to persons or property, the Town Administrator/Clerk, any peace officer or the Enforcement Officer may immediately enter into any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the Town for purposes of inspection or abatement. (Ord. 13-1992 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-1-110. - Summary abatement. 
    Whenever a public nuisance exists which constitutes an emergency presenting imminent danger of serious injury to persons or property, an administrative officer may order without notice or judicial action that the public nuisance be summarily abated by removal, destruction or mitigation. Summary abatement of a public nuisance shall not prevent an administrative officer from issuing a summons for violation of this Chapter. The cost of summary abatement may be assessed and collected as provided by Section 7-1-130 of this Chapter. (Ord. 13-1992 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-1-120. - Action to abate nuisance. 
    When a public nuisance has not been voluntarily abated within the time specified in the notice to abate, the following procedure shall apply: 
(1)  The Town may bring an action in Municipal Court to have the nuisance declared as such by the Court and for an order enjoining the public nuisance or authorizing its restraint, removal, termination or abatement by the owner, the person who caused the nuisance, the person who allowed the nuisance to be caused or to continue, an administrative officer or any person under contract with the Town to perform such services. 
(2)  The action to declare and abate a public nuisance shall be brought by the Town in the name of the People of the Town, by the filing of a complaint, which shall be verified or supported by an affidavit. A summons shall be issued and served as in civil cases, and any employee of the Town, who is over the age of eighteen (18), may serve the summons and verified complaint upon the respondent. Trial shall be to the Court. 
(3)  A notice of appearance shall be served with the summons and complaint. The appearance date shall be not less than twenty-one (21) days from the date of service of the summons and complaint. The trial shall be held upon the appearance date, unless the Court grants a continuance for good cause shown. 
(4)  The respondent shall file a response on or before the appearance date set forth in the notice of appearance. 
(5)  In the event the respondent does not answer and appear at the date and time set for appearance and trial, upon a showing by the Town Attorney that the respondent was properly served at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the appearance date, the Court shall enter a default judgment against the respondent. The Court shall order that enforcement by the Town be stayed for ten (10) days and that a copy of the Court's order be mailed to the respondent at his or her last known address. For good cause shown, and prior to enforcement, the Court may set aside an entry of default judgment and set the matter for trial. 
(6)  The judgment of the Municipal Court may be appealed to the Larimer County District Court. 
(7)  Any violation of any injunction or order issued by the Municipal Court in an action to abate a public nuisance may be punished as a contempt of court or by a fine as specified in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. Unless the violation by its nature cannot be corrected, each day's failure to comply with an injunction or order to abate shall constitute a separate violation, for which an additional penalty may be imposed. 
(8)  The remedies specified in this Section shall be in addition to all other remedies provided by law. (Ord. 13-1992 §1) 
Sec. 7-1-130. - Assessment and collection of costs of abatement. 
(a)  A person found by the Court to have caused a public nuisance or allowed the nuisance to be caused or to continue shall be liable for the costs specified in this Section. Such costs, including attorney's fees, may be collected by the Town in a civil action or assessed and filed as a lien against any property on which the abatement was performed as specified in this Section. 
(b)  If the cost of abatement has not been otherwise collected, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall prepare a statement stating the date of performance of the work, the nature of the work and demanding payment of the actual cost of abatement and collection plus five percent (5%) of the abatement costs for inspection and other incidental or additional administrative costs. The costs enumerated in this statement shall be a first and prior lien upon the property until paid, and shall have priority over all other liens, except general property taxes and prior special assessments, relating back to the date upon which the abatement was performed. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall send (i) by first class mail, postage prepaid, any abatement notice required for weed abatement, such notice shall be addressed to the property owner as shown on the records of the Larimer County Assessor, and (ii) shall send certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of any abatement notice for all other. (Ord. 13-1992 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 7-2013 , § 1, 6-11-13) 
ARTICLE 2 - Nuisances 

Sec. 7-2-10. - Accumulation to constitute nuisances. 
    Whenever there shall be in or upon any real property in the Town any inoperable vehicle, wrecked vehicle, refuse or junk of any type upon any private or public property, except in areas specifically allowed in this Code or otherwise designated by the Town for such purposes, the existence of any such material or items shall constitute a nuisance and shall be in violation of this Article. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-20. - Public or private places. 
    The following places shall be deemed a nuisance: 
(1)  Any place where people congregate, which encourages the disturbance of the peace or where the conduct of persons in or about that place is such as to annoy or disturb the peace of the occupants of or persons attending such place, the residents in the vicinity or the passers-by on the public streets or highways. 
(2)  Any public or private place or premises which encourages professional gambling, unlawful use of drugs, unlawful sale or distribution of drugs, furnishing or selling intoxicating liquor to minors, furnishing or selling fermented malt beverages to minors, solicitation of prostitution or trafficking in stolen property. (Ord. 5-1998 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-30. - Posting handbills, posters and placards. 
    Any handbill, poster, placard or painted or printed matter which shall be stuck, posted or pasted upon any public or private house or other building or upon any fence, power pole, telephone pole or other structure without the permission of the owner, agent or occupant of the house shall be deemed a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-40. - Streets, streams and water supply. 
(a)  No person shall throw, discharge, place or deposit, or cause or permit to be thrown, discharged, placed or deposited, any offensive water, liquid waste, refuse, offal composed of animal or vegetable substance or both, dead animal, excrement, garbage or other offensive matter of any kind upon any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter or public or private grounds. 
(b)  No person shall throw, discharge, place or deposit, or cause or permit to be thrown, discharged, placed or deposited anything specified in Subsection (a) above or any other substance that would tend to have a polluting effect into the water of any stream, wash, natural watercourse, ditch, canal, pond, well, cistern, trough or other body of water, whether artificially or naturally created, or so near any such place as to render the place of discharge offensive or likely to become so, or be liable to pollute the water thereof. 
(c)  No person shall cause, allow or permit any unlawful pollution or contamination of any surface or subsurface waters in the Town, or of the air or any water, substance or material intended for human consumption; however, no action shall be brought under this Section if the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, or any other agency of the State charged by and acting pursuant to statute or duly adopted regulation, has assumed jurisdiction by the institution of proceedings on said pollution or contamination. (Ord. 5-1998 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-50. - Stagnant ponds. 
    The permitting of stagnant water on any lot or piece of ground within the Town limits is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and every owner or occupant of a lot or piece of ground within the Town is hereby required to drain or fill up said lot or piece of ground whenever the same is necessary so as to prevent stagnant water or other nuisances from accumulating thereon, and it is unlawful for any such owner or occupant to permit or maintain any such nuisance. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-60. - Sanitary sewer facilities. 
(a)  No person shall have or maintain any toilet or sanitary sewer facilities not constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  No person shall maintain in the Town any cellar, vault, sewer, drain, place, property or premises within the Town which is damp, unwholesome, nauseous or filthy, which is covered for any portion of the year with stagnant or impure water, which is in such condition so as to produce unwholesome or offensive odors, or which is injurious to the public health. 
(c)  No person shall, in the Town, deposit in or throw into any sewer (sanitary or storm), sewer inlet or privy vault that shall have a sewer connection any article that might cause such sewer, sewer inlet or privy vault to become nauseous to others or injurious to public health. (Ord. 5-1998 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-70. - Obstruction of public facilities. 
(a)  No person shall obstruct, tend to obstruct, interfere with or render dangerous for passage any street or sidewalk, lake, stream, drainage canal, basin or any public park without first obtaining the written permission of the Town. 
(b)  No person shall impede the maintenance of any drainage system, canal, ditch, conduit or other water course of any kind or nature, natural or artificial, in a manner so that it becomes obstructed and causes the water to back up and overflow therefrom, or to become unsanitary. (Ord. 5-1998 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-80. - Nauseous liquids. 
    No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged out of or from or permit to flow from any house or property any foul or nauseous liquid or substance of any kind into or upon any adjacent ground or lot or into any street, alley or public place. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-90. - Stale matter. 
(a)  No person shall permit any garbage container to remain on a premises when it has become unclean or offensive or is injurious to the public health. 
(b)  No person shall allow vegetable or animal waste, garbage, litter, filth or refuse of any nature to accumulate within or upon any private alley, yard or area except when it is temporarily deposited for immediate removal. 
(c)  No person shall keep or collect any stale or putrid grease or other offensive matter. (Ord. 5-1998 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-100. - Foul conditions. 
    No person shall have or permit upon any premises any fly-producing or mosquito-producing condition. (Ord. 5-1998 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-110. - Drinking containers. 
    No person shall keep any drinking vessel for public use without providing a method of decontamination between uses. (Ord. 5-1998 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-120. - Garbage and manure. 
    No person shall permit the accumulation of manure in any stable, stall, corral, feed yard, yard or other building or area in which any animals are kept. (Ord. 5-1998 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-130. - Noisemakers. 
    The use of music, noisemakers or loudspeakers on the streets of the Town for the sale or vending of products, advertising or other commercial purposes is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited by the terms of this Chapter. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-140. - Junkyards and dumping grounds. 
    The storing of junk, trash and refuse on private property within the Town is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Prior code 8.01.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-150. - Storage and occupancy of trailers. 
(a)  The storage of more than two (2) camper coaches, camper trailers or trailer coaches for more than fourteen (14) days in a calendar year, on real property not approved for the conduct of a licensed business involving the sale, lease, rental or storage of said camper coaches, camper trailers or trailer coaches under Chapter 15 or 16 of this Code or on property not approved for the storage of such vehicles as part of a development plan approved under Chapter 15 or 16 is declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  The occupancy of a camper coach, camper trailer or trailer coach located on public or private property for more than fourteen (14) days in a calendar year except as provided below is declared to be a nuisance. 
(c)  Any person against whom strict application of this Section would be unfair and an undue burden because of unusual and extraordinary circumstances may apply to the Town Administrator/Clerk for a special camper occupancy permit. Such application shall be reviewed by the Board of Trustees and, if reasonable cause is found, the Board of Trustees shall authorize issuance of the permit upon such conditions and for such duration as it may determine to be justified. The permit application shall be accompanied by a processing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), which fee shall not be refundable. 
(d)  Definitions. 
    Camper coach means an item of mounted equipment, weighing more than five hundred (500) pounds, which, when temporarily or permanently mounted on a motor vehicle, adapts such vehicle for use as temporary living or sleeping accommodations. 
    Camper trailer means a wheeled vehicle having an overall length of less than twenty-six (26) feet, without motive power, which is designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle over the public highways and which is generally and commonly used for temporary living or sleeping accommodations. 
    Occupied or occupancy , for the purpose of this Section, means the camper coach, camper trailer or trailer coach is used as a residence or for eating or sleeping accommodations. 
    Stored or storage , for the purpose of this Section, means the camper coach, camper trailer or trailer coach is parked, placed on jacks or blocks or otherwise has remained on the same lot or parcel or at the same location for a period of twenty-four (24) hours. 
    Trailer coach means a wheeled vehicle having an overall width not exceeding eight (8) feet and an overall length, excluding towing gear and bumpers, of not less than twenty-six (26) feet and not more than thirty-two (32) feet, without motive power, which is designed and generally and commonly used for occupancy by persons for residential purposes, in either temporary or permanent locations, and which may occasionally be drawn over the public highways by a motor vehicle. (Ord. 11-1986 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-160. - Outside storage. 
(a)  No person shall permit any use of premises or building exteriors which are deleterious or injurious, noxious or unsightly, which includes, but is not limited to, keeping or depositing on, or scattering over the premises, lumber, junk, trash, debris or abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers. 
(b)  No person shall permit unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped and junked machinery, implements or personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of thirty (30) days or more within the Town. (Ord. 5-1998 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-170. - Maintenance of property. 
    No person shall own, lease, occupy, manage or have possession of any premises in the Town in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon: 
(1)  The premises are a detriment to public health, safety or general welfare. 
(2)  The premises are so defective, unsightly or in such condition of disrepair that they substantially diminish the value of surrounding property or are otherwise substantially detrimental to surrounding properties. Examples of this condition shall include, but shall not be limited to, the keeping on, disposing of on or scattering over the premises of any of the following: 
a.  Junk, trash or debris. 
b.  Abandoned, discarded or unusable objects or equipment such as furniture, stoves, hot water heaters, refrigerators, freezers or automobiles. 
c.  Stagnant water. 
d.  An excavation or an open foundation for which a building permit has expired. 
e.  Uncovered wells or cisterns. 
(3)  The premises are so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use, or property values of such adjacent properties. 
(4)  The premises are abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed or left unreasonably in a state of perpetual construction. 
(5)  Buildings have dry rot, warping or termite infestation. 
(6)  The premises have a substantial number of broken windows which cause hazardous conditions and invite trespassers and malicious mischief. 
(7)  The landscaping on the premises has not been maintained as follows: 
a.  Trees and shrubs have not been trimmed and are overhanging public rights-of-way. 
b.  Weeds have grown over eight (8) inches and have not been removed or cut. 
c.  Dead or diseased plantings have not been removed or replaced. 
(8)  The exterior of commercial establishments or multifamily buildings have not been maintained so as to present a neat and orderly appearance which is compatible with the area as follows: 
a.  A substantial number of windows are cracked or broken. 
b.  Painted surfaces are substantially cracked or peeling or the paint has deteriorated to the point where the bare surface is substantially exposed. 
c.  The building has otherwise not been substantially maintained. 
(9)  Any building is without domestic sewer or water service. 
(10)  Parking lots have not been repaired or cracks, potholes or other breaks in the parking lot surface have not been filled. (Ord. 5-1998 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-2-180. - Open burning. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to burn or permit to be burned on any open premises owned or controlled by him or her, or on any public street, alley or other land adjacent to such premises, any rubbish, waste paper, wood or other flammable material, within the Town, unless a permit therefor has first been obtained from the appropriate authority enforcing air pollution control standards. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any incinerator or other container for the burning of combustible trash, rubbish or waste within the Town unless the container, incinerator or other burning process has previously been approved by the Colorado Air Pollution Control Commission. (Prior code 10.01.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 3 - Weeds and Brush 

Sec. 7-3-10. - Undesirable Plant Management Advisory Commission designated. 
    The Board of Trustees is appointed to act as the Undesirable Plant Management Advisory Commission for the Town and shall have the duties and responsibilities as provided by state statute. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Editor's note- Section 35-5.5-101, C.R.S., establishes the requirements for undesirable plant management in the State. 
Sec. 7-3-20. - Nuisance declared. 
    It is unlawful for any person having control of any lot or parcel of land in the Town to permit or maintain on the lot or parcel of land, or on or along the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to the same between the property line and the curb or middle of the alley, or for ten (10) feet outside the property line if there is no curb, any growth of undesirable plants, or any growth of weeds or lawn grasses over six (6) inches in height. Such undesirable plants, weeds or lawn grasses are declared to be a public nuisance. Such action may be taken as is available for nuisance abatement under the laws of the State and the Town, and as the Board of Trustees, in its sole discretion, deems necessary. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-401; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 7-2013 , § 1, 6-11-13) 
Sec. 7-3-30. - Responsibility of owner. 
    Property owners within the Town shall be responsible for the elimination of undesirable plants, and weeds and lawn grasses over six (6) inches in height from their property. Such elimination shall be accomplished as often as may be necessary to comply with this Article, in an ecologically feasible and environmentally safe manner in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-401) 
(Ord. No. 7-2013 , § 1, 6-11-13) 
ARTICLE 4 - Animals 
Division 1 - Animal Treatment and Control 

Sec. 7-4-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms are defined as provided herein: 
    Animal means every nonhuman species of the animal kingdom, both domestic and wild. 
    Animal at large means any animal outside of a fence or other enclosure which restrains the animal to a particular premises, whether on public or private property, and not under the control, by leash or lead, of a person capable of controlling the animal. Animals tethered to a stationary object within reach of a street, sidewalk, alley, trail or other public right-of-way are deemed to be at large. 
    Animal Control Officer means any person designated by the Town government as a law enforcement officer, including the Enforcement Officer, for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Article. 
    Animal shelter means any facility operated by a humane society or municipal agency or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding animals under the authority of this Article or state law for care, confinement, return to owner, adoption or euthanasia. 
    Bite means to be seized by an animal with the teeth or jaws so that a person or animal has been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced. 
    Bodily injury means any physical injury that results in severe bruising, muscle tears, skin lacerations requiring professional medical treatment, or fracture of any bone or injury that requires corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
    Breeder, hobbyist, means any person who breeds animals as a hobby, producing not more than two (2) litters in any one (1) calendar year. 
    Breeder, professional means any person who breeds animals for profit or who produces more than two (2) litters of animals in any one (1) calendar year. 
    Cat means any member of the animal species Felis catus . 
    Commercial animal establishment means any pet shop, grooming shop, guard dog training facility, animal auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition, boarding or breeding kennel or other establishment which handles live animals for profit. 
    Control means an animal must be on a leash or lead not more than six (6) feet in length, physically controlled by a person capable of controlling the animal. 
    Corral means any uncovered and enclosed lot or parcel of land where animals are kept. 
    Dangerous dog means any dog that has: 
a.  Inflicted bodily or serious bodily injury upon or has caused the death of a person or domestic animal; 
b.  Demonstrated tendencies that would cause a reasonable person to believe that the dog may inflict injury upon or cause the death of any person or domestic animal; or 
c.  Engaged in or been trained for animal fighting. 
    Dog means any member of the animal species Canis familiaris. 
    Dog run means an area of one's property, one hundred forty-four (144) square feet or less, which is used exclusively to keep dogs. 
    Domestic animal includes dogs, cats, domesticated sheep, horses, cattle, goats, swine, fowl, ducks, geese, turkeys, confined domestic hares and rabbits, pheasants and other birds, and animals raised and/or maintained in confinement, including small, harmless pet animals, such as species of aquarium fish, cage birds and certain rodents, such as mice, hamsters and guinea pigs. 
    Euthanasia means a death brought about by any method which produces rapid loss of consciousness resulting in a painless death. 
    Hog means a wild or domestic swine weighing more than one hundred twenty (120) pounds. 
    Kennel or cattery means any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling dogs or cats. 
    Licensing Authority means the Board of Trustees or anybody designated by the Board of Trustees to have authority to promulgate rules pursuant to this Article and to enforce the provisions of this Article. 
    Livestock, hoofed includes but is not be limited to horses mules, sheep, goats, llamas or other similar hard-hoofed animals, but does not include swine. 
    Livestock, small includes but is not limited to rabbits, chinchillas and similar animals, and fowl including but not limited to chickens, ducks, geese and other domesticated fowl. 
    Owner means any person owning, keeping, harboring, possessing or having custody or control of one (1) or more animals. Harboring an animal includes providing food or shelter for three (3) consecutive days or more. 
    Pet means any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility, especially any animal of a species that has been bred and raised to live in or about the habitation of humans and is dependent on people for food and shelter. 
    Pet pig means a swine, typically a Vietnamese potbellied, Yucatan potbellied, African pigmy or miniature. 
    Pet shop means any establishment, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise, that buys, sells or boards any species of animal. 
    Pig means a young swine not yet sexually matured and weighing one hundred twenty (120) pounds or less. 
    Serious bodily injury means bodily injury which, either at the time of the actual injury or at a later time, involves a substantial risk of death; a substantial risk of serious permanent disfigurement; a substantial risk of protracted loss or impairment of function of any part or organ of the body; breaks or fractures; or burns of the second or third degree. 
    Stable means any building, structure or shed, whether or not entirely or partially enclosed by walls, in which animals are kept. 
    Vaccination means an injection of antirabies vaccine, made subcutaneously or otherwise, as approved by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
    Vicious animal means any animal that, without provocation, bites or attacks humans or other animals; approaches any person or other animal in a vicious or terrorizing manner or in apparent attitude of attack, whether or not the attack is consummated; or has acted in a manner that causes or should cause its owner to know that it is potentially vicious. 
    Wild animal means any animal, including those born or raised in captivity, other than human beings and domestic animals. 
    Zoological park means any facility operated by a person or government agency, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one (1) or more species of animals. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.01.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-20. - Commercial animal establishments prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate the following commercial animal establishments within the Town: guard dog training facility, animal auction, riding school or stable. It shall only be lawful for a kennel or cattery to operate if first approved by the Board of Trustees in accordance with Chapter 16 of this Code. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.01.02; Ord. 14-2003 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-30. - Hogs, pigs, roosters, ganders, peacocks and guinea fowl prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any hogs, pigs (except pet pigs), roosters, ganders, peacocks or guinea fowl within the Town. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.01.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 10-2010 , § 1, 11-23-10) 
Sec. 7-4-40. - Removal of dead animals required. 
    If any animal dies in the possession of any person in the Town, the dead animal shall be deemed a nuisance and it shall be duty of such person to remove the dead animal from the Town within twenty-four (24) hours after its death and cause it to be buried at a sanitary landfill or pet cemetery. It is unlawful to bury or cause to be buried any dead animal or fowl or part thereof within the Town. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.01.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-50. - Animals injured by motor vehicles. 
    Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner. In the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.01.05) 
Sec. 7-4-60. - Animal shelter established; operation. 
    The Town shall have the right to establish an animal shelter for the Town to be operated by Town personnel, or contract with a public or private person or organization for the operation of an animal shelter for and on behalf of the Town. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.01.06) 
Sec. 7-4-70. - Pet pigs. 
    It is unlawful for any person to keep, pasture, house, maintain or harbor a pet pig within the Town unless the owner registers said pig with the Town Administrator/Clerk in accordance with this Article within fourteen (14) days of first pasturing, keeping, housing, maintaining or harboring said pig and complies with the following requirements: 
(1)  Male pet pigs must be castrated prior to the age of four (4) months, and female pet pigs must be spayed prior to the age of four (4) months. 
(2)  Pet pigs must wear an identification tag at all times or be tattooed prior to the age of four (4) months. 
(3)  Notice of completion of the requirements of Paragraphs (1) and (2) above must be on file with the Animal Control Officer as a requirement of registration. 
(4)  All pet pigs must wear a harness except when inside the owner's home, dwelling or fenced yard. 
(5)  All regulations pertaining to hoofed animals shall also pertain to pet pigs. 
(6)  Violation of any of these provisions constitutes a nuisance as otherwise defined and controlled by this Chapter. 
(7)  No more than one (1) pet pig per lot shall be allowed. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.01.07; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-80. - Cruelty to animals. 
    No person shall knowingly, intentionally or maliciously kill, injure or inflict pain or suffering on any animal. No person shall permit, by neglect or inaction, the death of, injury to or infliction of pain or suffering on any animal. No person shall beat, cruelly treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse or kill an animal or cause, instigate or permit any fight between animals or between animals and humans, or attend such fights. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.05.01) 
Sec. 7-4-90. - Proper food and shelter. 
(a)  No owner or person with custody of an animal for more than twelve (12) consecutive hours shall fail to provide the animal with sufficient wholesome and nutritious food, water in sufficient quantities, proper air, shade or shelter space, protection from the weather, veterinary care as needed to maintain health and prevent suffering, and other humane care and treatment. 
(b)  For the purpose of this Section, the following words shall have the meanings set forth below: 
    Shade means protection from the direct rays of the sun during the months of June through September. 
    Shelter means a moisture-proof structure of suitable size to accommodate the animal and allow retention of body heat, made of durable material. Such structure shall be provided with a sufficient quantity of suitable bedding to provide insulation and protection against cold and dampness. 
(c)  All pens, yards, runs or other structures wherein any animal is kept shall be of such construction so as to be easily cleaned and shall be maintained in good repair. Fences which are intended as enclosures for any animal shall be securely constructed, adequate for the purpose and kept in good repair, in compliance with all ordinances of the Town. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.05.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-100. - Abandonment. 
    No person shall abandon any animal which he or she owns or is in his or her custody. In this context, abandon means to leave the animal unattended for more than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours, or without food, water or shelter for more than twelve (12) hours. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.05.01) 
Sec. 7-4-110. - Poisoning. 
    No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that a reasonable person would know or should know that such substance would probably cause animals to be attracted thereto, eat thereof and be poisoned thereby; provided, however, that this Section does not make unlawful the poisoning of rats or mice with commercial rat poison mixed with vegetable substances. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.05.01) 
Sec. 7-4-120. - Animals as prizes. 
    No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile or bird as a prize for or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition, as an inducement to enter any place of amusement or as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.05.01) 
Sec. 7-4-130. - Confinement in vehicles. 
    No person shall confine an animal within a parked, closed vehicle, without allowing cross-ventilation. No person shall confine any animal within a parked, enclosed vehicle if the ambient temperature is eighty (80) degrees Fahrenheit or greater. The Enforcement Officer or any peace officer observing an animal kept in violation of this Section may enter the vehicle and impound the animal. In addition to all other defenses and immunities provided by law, any such officer making entry for the purpose of this Section is immune from suit or liability, criminal or civil, for, caused by or arising out of such entry. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.05.01) 
Sec. 7-4-140. - Protective custody. 
(a)  Any animal found receiving inhumane treatment, as described in this Division, may be removed and impounded at the expense of the owner. 
(b)  Any animal whose life reasonably appears to be endangered may be so removed and impounded, whether or not in the presence of its owner. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.05.01) 
Sec. 7-4-150. - Exceptions. 
    No provisions contained in Sections 7-4-70 through 7-4-130 of this Division shall be deemed to prohibit any action by a licensed veterinarian done in accordance with accepted standards of veterinary medicine. Nothing in said Sections 7-4-70 through 7-4-110 above shall be interpreted as prohibiting any act done in self-defense or to defend another person. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.05.01) 
Sec. 7-4-160. - Running at large. 
(a)  General. It is unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal to permit such animal to be at large within the Town. Any such animal shall be deemed to be running at large when it is off the premises of such person and not under the physical control of a person capable of controlling the animal, or on the premises of the owner or keeper but not enclosed in a building or a securely fenced area or under the physical control of a person capable of controlling the animal. Any such animal may be impounded by the Town. 
(b)  Public places. No domestic animal shall be permitted in any public place, unless under the physical control of a person capable of controlling the animal. Public places include, but are not limited to: public common areas of private property, parking lots, churches, cemeteries, parks, schools and swimming areas. 
(c)  Escaped animals. Within one (1) hour after an animal escapes from either the owner or the person having custody of the animal, the owner or custodian of the animal shall report the escape of said animal to the Police Department or the Animal Control Officer. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.07.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-170. - Wild animals prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal or vicious animal for display or exhibition purposes, whether done gratuitously or for a fee; provided, however, that this Section does not apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions or circuses elsewhere regulated by the provisions of this Code and by state law. 
(b)  The Animal Control Officer has the authority to order any person or owner to release appropriately any wild animal kept or permitted to be kept in violation of this Section or to order the appropriate release of any infant wild animal under temporary care and deemed by such officer as capable of survival in the wild. Any person or owner refusing or neglecting to obey such order immediately is in violation of this Section. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.06.01) 
Division 2 - Livestock and Pet Housing 

Sec. 7-4-210. - Minimum area of enclosures or number of animals. 
(a)  Hoofed livestock. It is unlawful for any person to keep any hoofed livestock in the Town unless there is a sufficient area to keep such livestock which shall require both (i) a minimum of one (1) acre of ground and (ii) one half an acre of ground for each hoofed animal. Although the entire lot may be fenced, a corral must be provided where hoofed livestock will normally be penned and given supplemental feed, The corral area shall be adequate in size for the number of animals involved and shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross lot acreage or one-quarter (1/4) acre, whichever is less. All colts, calves, kids, lambs or young rabbits shall be removed from the premises within sixty (60) days after birth unless the space required for the same is available as provided for in this Section. All fences and corrals shall be sufficient to contain livestock. 
(b)  Small livestock, fowl. It is unlawful for any person to keep any small livestock or fowl in the Town unless the area enclosing the animal provides not less than nine (9) square feet of area (exclusive of shed, shelter or coop) for each animal, and the shed, shelter or coop provides an area of not less than two (2) square feet for each animal. Under no circumstances may more than twelve (12) small livestock or fowl be kept on any property. 
(c)  Exceptions. A greater number of livestock and/or fowl may be allowed as a nonconforming use for a 4-H youth livestock-raising project, provided that an application is made and approved by the Town Administrator/Clerk allowing temporary use of a property for a 4-H youth livestock-raising project. No such permit shall be allowed if the proposed use shall unreasonably interfere with any neighboring property owner or otherwise cause any unreasonable impact on the community. 
(d)  Maximum dogs, cats. It is unlawful to keep, house or maintain in or upon any lot, parcel of property or premises more than three (3) dogs or three (3) cats, or an aggregate of four (4) dogs and cats, over the age of four (4) months. These restrictions shall apply to each dwelling unit within a multiple-family dwelling unit. 
(e)  Exceptions. In the event of a hardship, including a property owner's family emergency, a property owner may maintain up to four (4) dogs on the owner's property upon application of the owner to the Town Administrator/Clerk and granting of a permit by the Town Administrator/Clerk allowing up to four (4) dogs on the approved property. No owner shall be granted a permit for more than thirty (30) days; however, any such permit shall be renewable for up to five (5) additional thirty-day periods. Any permit issued shall be terminated (i) on an immediate basis if the owner is cited by the Town for subsequent animal related violations or (ii) if the Town receives subsequent animal complaints from neighbors related to the permitted animals, three business days after the permittee receives notice. Notice of any termination may be posted on the permitted property if the permittee cannot be served by the Town at the property. If a permit is terminated the permittee may appeal the termination to the Board. If appealed, the Mayor may in his sole discretion stay termination pending the Town Board hearing. Any owner applying for a permit, including any permit extension, shall prior to issuance of the permit pay a permit fee in an amount established by resolution of the Board. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.02.01; Ord. 14-2002 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 5-2008 , § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 8-2010 , § 1, 9-28-10) 
Sec. 7-4-220. - Distance of enclosure or run from residence, public places. 
    It is unlawful to maintain any dog house, dog run, hoofed or small livestock or fowl within or about any building, structure, pen or enclosure of any type within twenty-five (25) feet of any building used for residential purposes by anyone other than the person maintaining such dog house, livestock or fowl enclosure; within twenty-five (25) feet of any public way other than an alley; or within twenty-five (25) feet of any church, school, hospital, public building or municipal park. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.02.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-230. - Distance of corrals and stables. 
    It is unlawful for any person to keep any hoofed livestock in any corral or stable within the Town, any part of which is within fifty (50) feet of any building used for residential purposes by anyone other than the person maintaining such corral or stable; within twenty-five (25) feet of any public way other than an alley; or within fifty (50) feet of any church, school, hospital, public building or municipal park. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.02.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-240. - Sanitation of premises. 
(a)  The bases and floors of lots, pens, cages, stables and corrals shall be cleaned daily by removal of manure and other material soiled by animal wastes. Every place, property or premises in the Town where dogs, hoofed and small livestock or fowls are kept shall be clean, sanitary, free of obnoxious odors and maintained in such a manner as will effectively prevent reproduction of flies in or about such places or premises. 
(b)  It is unlawful to permit any decaying food or any refuse of any kind to remain in such yard. Refuse from such yard shall, when swept up or collected, be kept in airtight containers until disposed. 
(c)  Every dog house or fowl or small livestock enclosure shall be adequately enclosed so as to be impenetrable to rats or other rodents. The presence of any rats in any small livestock and fowl enclosures, dog houses and runs, corrals, stables or animal premises shall be prima facie evidence that such place is maintained in violation of the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.02.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Division 3 - Animal Licensing and Permits 

Sec. 7-4-310. - License requirement. 
    Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of any dog or cat over six (6) months of age within the Town must obtain a license as herein provided. The Town will recognize a current County dog license as fulfilling this requirement for dogs and cats. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.03.01) 
Sec. 7-4-320. - Application. 
    Written application for licenses, which shall include name and address of the applicant, description of the animal, the appropriate fee and a rabies certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian or antirabies clinic, shall be made to the Town. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.03.01) 
Sec. 7-4-330. - License period. 
    If not revoked, licenses for the keeping of dogs and cats shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the month of licensing. Such a license shall be renewed annually. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.03.01) 
Sec. 7-4-340. - Application circumstances. 
    Applications for licenses must be made within thirty (30) days after obtaining a dog or cat six (6) months of age or older, or when a cat or dog in a person's possession becomes six (6) months of age. This requirement does not apply to a nonresident keeping a dog or cat within the Town for sixty (60) days or less. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.03.01) 
Sec. 7-4-350. - Exceptions. 
    License fees shall not be required for certified governmental police dogs, seeing eye dogs, hearing dogs or other certified dogs that are trained to assist the physically handicapped. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.03.01) 
Sec. 7-4-360. - Tags. 
    Upon acceptance of the license application, fee and agreement by the applicant to follow all applicable regulations, the Licensing Authority shall issue a durable tag, stamped with an identifying number and the year of issuance. Dogs and cats must wear the identification tags issued for them, and not that of any other at all times when off their owners' premises. The Town shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers of all tags issued and shall make this record available to the public during normal business hours. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.03.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-370. - Duplicate licenses. 
    A duplicate license may be obtained upon payment of a replacement fee established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.03.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-380. - License limitation. 
    No person may use any license for any animal other than the animal for which it was issued. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.03.01) 
Sec. 7-4-390. - Additional regulations. 
    The Licensing Authority may establish other regulations governing the issuance of licenses. Such regulations may include requirements for humane care of animals and other requirements consistent with this Article and other applicable law. The Licensing Authority may amend such regulations from time to time as is deemed desirable for the preservation of the public health and welfare and to prevent animal cruelty. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.03.01) 
Division 4 - Disease Control 

Sec. 7-4-410. - Diseased animals. 
    No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place whereby the health of man or animal may be affected. It is the duty of the Animal Control Officer to secure disposition of any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread of the contagion or infection, except in cases where the Colorado Director of Public Health and Environment is empowered to act. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.04.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-420. - Vaccination. 
    It is the duty of every owner of a dog or cat over three (3) months of age harbored in the Town to have such dog or cat vaccinated for the diseases required under state statutes by a licensed veterinarian or animal health clinic. The owner of such dog or cat shall present a copy of the vaccination certificate with the dog or cat license application required by Division 3 above verifying a current vaccination administered as authorized by the Department of Public Health and Environment. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.04.02) 
Sec. 7-4-430. - Vaccination exemption. 
    If a veterinarian licensed by the State issues a certificate that inoculation would be harmful to a specific dog or cat, and that failure to inoculate such animal shall not create a danger to humans or other animals, that dog or cat shall be exempt from the inoculation prescribed by this Division. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.04.03) 
Sec. 7-4-440. - Report of animal bites. 
(a)  Any owner whose animal bites a person shall immediately notify the Animal Control Officer or Police Department. 
(b)  It is the duty of every physician and medical practitioner to report to the Animal Control Officer or the Police Department the name and address of any person treated for bites or wounds inflicted by an animal, together with all available information necessary for rabies control. 
(c)  It is the duty of every veterinarian to report to the Animal Control Officer or the Police Department the name and address of the owner of any animal treated for bites or wound inflicted by any other animal, together with all available information necessary for rabies control. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.04.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-450. - Quarantine of suspected animals. 
    Animals suspected of having rabies or having bitten any person or animal and having an uncertain vaccination status shall be impounded in solitary confinement and kept under observation for a period of ten (10) days. An attempt shall be made by the Animal Control Officer to discover whether the animal has been vaccinated against rabies. If it is found that the animal has not been effectively vaccinated or there is any doubt whether the animal has in fact been vaccinated, then such animal shall be vaccinated on the last day of the observation period. The Town may cause any animal which has rabies to be destroyed humanely and an autopsy performed. All expenses in connection with the provisions of this Section shall be borne by the owner of the animal. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.04.05) 
Sec. 7-4-460. - Destruction of certain animals. 
    If any vicious or dangerous animal suspected of or having rabies, found at large, cannot be safely taken up and impounded, the animal may be destroyed by any Animal Control Officer or police officer. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.04.06) 
Division 5 - Dangerous Animals 

Sec. 7-4-510. - Vicious animals. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any vicious animal within the Town. It shall be an affirmative defense to charges under this Section that the actual or intended victim of any attack has made an unlawful entry into the dwelling of the animal's owner or is threatening or attacking the owner, or immediate family or guest of the owner of the animal. 
(b)  The Animal Control Officer or any police officer may impound any animal which is reasonably believed to be vicious. Within ten (10) days of such impounding, the Animal Control Officer must conduct a full investigation, including an opportunity for the animal's owner to present evidence of the animal's character, or release the animal to the custody of its owner. If the animal is determined to be vicious, it must be either removed from the Town or destroyed. If the animal is found not to be vicious, it must be released to the custody of its owner. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.08.01) 
Sec. 7-4-520. - Unlawful ownership of dangerous dog. 
(a)  A person commits ownership of a dangerous dog if such person owns, possesses, harbors, keeps, has financial or property interest in, or has custody or control over a dangerous dog. 
(b)  An affirmative defense to the violation of this Section shall be: 
(1)  That, at the time of the attack by the dangerous dog which causes injury or death of a domestic animal, the domestic animal was at large, was a stray, and entered upon the property of the owner and the attack began, but did not necessarily end, upon such property; 
(2)  That, at the time of the attack by the dangerous dog which causes injury to or death of a domestic animal, said animal was biting or otherwise attacking the dangerous dog or its owner; 
(3)  That, at the time of the attack by the dangerous dog which causes injury to or death of a person, the victim of the attack was committing or attempting to commit a criminal offense, other than a petty offense, against the dogs' owner, and the attack did not occur on the owner's property; 
(4)  That, at the time of the attack by the dangerous dog which causes injury to or death of a person, the victim of the attack was committing a criminal offense, other than a petty offense, against a person on the owner's property or the property itself and the attack began, but did not necessarily end, upon such property; or 
(5)  That the person who was the victim of the attack by the dangerous dog tormented, provoked, abused or inflicted injury upon the dog in such an extreme manner which resulted in the attack. 
(c)  The affirmative defenses set forth in this Subsection (b) above shall not apply to any dog that has engaged in or been trained for animal fighting. 
(d)  Upon taking an owner into custody for an alleged violation of this Section or the issuing of a summons and complaint to the owner, the owner's dangerous dog shall be taken into custody and placed in a public animal shelter, at the owner's expense, pending final disposition of the charge against the owner. In addition in the event the court sets bail for an owner's release from custody pending final disposition, the court shall require, as a condition of bond, that the owner's dangerous dog be placed at the at the owner's expense in a public animal shelter, licensed boarding facility or veterinarian's clinic of the owner's choosing, pending final disposition of the alleged violation of this Section. The owner shall be liable for the total cost of board and care for a dog placed pursuant to this Subsection. 
(e)  The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  To any dog that is used by a peace officer while the officer is engaged in the performance of peace officer duties; 
(2)  To any dog that inflicts bodily or serious injury to any veterinary health care worker, dog groomer, humane agency personnel, professional dog handler, trainer or dog show judge, each acting in the performance of his or her respective duties; or 
(3)  To any dog that inflicts injury upon or causes the death of a domestic animal while the dog was working as a hunting dog, herding dog or predator control dog on the property of or under the control of the dog's owner and the injury or death was to a domestic animal naturally associated with the work of such dog. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.08.02) 
Sec. 7-4-530. - Wild and dangerous animals. 
(a)  Unlawful to own or possess. It is unlawful for any person to own, possess, harbor, sell or in any other manner traffic in any wild and various animals, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  All poisonous snakes and other poisonous reptiles, and all nonpoisonous snakes with a length greater than six (6) feet; 
(2)  All species of primates; and 
(3)  All species of canine, feline, bear and other carnivorous animals other than dogs and cats, as defined in this Article. 
(b)  Exceptions. The provisions of this Section shall not be applicable to any bona fide zoological park, wildlife sanctuary or circus licensed by the Town., 
(c)  At large. The Animal Control Officer shall have the authority to apprehend any wild animal that may be at large. Such wild animal may be impounded, released in wild areas outside the Town which are representative of the animal's natural habitat, or humanely destroyed as the Animal Control Officer in his or her sole discretion shall determine in accordance with state law. The Animal Control Officer is authorized to use any tranquilizer gun or other firearm to subdue or destroy any wild or dangerous animal. 
(d)  Costs paid by responsible persons. Any reasonable costs incurred by the Town in seizing, impounding and confining any dangerous or wild animal shall be charged against the owner of such animal. Such charge shall be in addition to any other fine or penalty provided for violating this Article. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.08.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-540. - Destruction of animal too dangerous to capture. 
    Any dangerous animal subject to impoundment under the provisions of this Division, or any other animal which because of its disposition or diseased condition is subject to impoundment and is deemed too dangerous to apprehend, may be destroyed by the Animal Control Officer or a police officer. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.08.05; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Division 5.5 - Beekeeping 

Sec. 7-4-550. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section: 
    Apiary shall mean a place where bee colonies are kept. 
    Bee shall mean any stage of the common domestic honey bee, apis mellifera species. 
    Colony shall mean a hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including bees, comb, honey, pollen and brood. 
    Hive shall mean a structure intended for the housing of a bee colony. 
    Tract shall mean a contiguous parcel of land under common ownership. 
    Undeveloped property shall mean any idle land that is not improved or actually in the process of being improved with residential, commercial, industrial, church, park, school or governmental facilities or other structures or improvements intended for human use or occupancy, and the grounds maintained in association therewith. The term shall be deemed to include property developed exclusively as a street or highway or property used for commercial agricultural purposes. 
(Ord. No. 8-2014 , § 1, 4-22-14) 
Sec. 7-4-551. - Certain conduct declared unlawful. 
(a)  The general purpose of this Division is to establish certain requirements of sound beekeeping practices, which are intended to avoid problems that may otherwise be associated with the keeping of bees in populated areas. 
(b)  Notwithstanding compliance with the various requirements of this Division, it shall be unlawful for any beekeeper to keep any colony or colonies in such a manner or of such disposition as to cause any unhealthy condition, interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of human or animal life of others, or interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of any public property or property of others. 
(Ord. No. 8-2014 , § 1, 4-22-14) 
Sec. 7-4-552. - Hives. 
    All bee colonies shall be kept in hives with moveable combs, which shall be kept in sound and usable condition. 
(Ord. No. 8-2014 , § 1, 4-22-14) 
Sec. 7-4-553. - Fencing of flyways. 
    In each instance in which any colony is situated within twenty-five (25) feet of a public or private property line of the tract upon which the apiary is situated, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line, the beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at least six (6) feet in height consisting of a solid wall, fence, dense vegetation or combination thereof that is parallel to the property line and extends ten (10) feet beyond the colony in each direction so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six (6) feet above ground level over the property lines in the vicinity of the apiary. It is a defense to prosecution under this Section that the property adjoining the apiary tract in the vicinity of the apiary is undeveloped property for a distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet from the property line of the apiary tract. 
(Ord. No. 8-2014 , § 1, 4-22-14) 
Sec. 7-4-554. - Water. 
    Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is available at all times to the bees so that the bees will not congregate at swimming pools, bibcocks, pet water bowls, birdbaths or other water sources where they may cause human, bird or domestic pet contact. 
(Ord. No. 8-2014 , § 1, 4-22-14) 
Sec. 7-4-555. - General maintenance. 
    Each beekeeper shall ensure that no bee comb or other materials that might encourage robbing are left upon the grounds of the apiary site. Upon their removal from the hive, all such materials shall promptly be disposed of in a sealed container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 8-2014 , § 1, 4-22-14) 
Sec. 7-4-556. - Queens. 
    In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusually aggressive characteristics by stinging or attempting to sting without due provocation or exhibits an unusual disposition towards swarming, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to requeen the colony. Queens shall be selected from stock bred for gentleness and nonswarming characteristics. 
(Ord. No. 8-2014 , § 1, 4-22-14) 
Sec. 7-4-557. - Colony densities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to keep more than the following number of colonies on any tract within the Town, based upon the size or configuration of the tract on which the apiary is situated: 
(1)  One-quarter (1/4) acre or less tract size-One (1) colonies; 
(2)  More than one-quarter (1/4) acre but less than one-half (1/2) acre tract size-Two (2) colonies; 
(3)  More than one-half (1/2) acre but less than one (1) acre tract size-Three (3) colonies; 
(4)  One (1) acre or larger tract size-Four (4) colonies; and 
(5)  Regardless of tract size, where all hives are situated at least two hundred (200) feet in any direction from all property lines of the tract on which the apiary is situated, there shall be no limit to the number of colonies. 
(b)  For each two (2) colonies authorized under colony densities, Subsection (a) above, there may be maintained upon the same tract one (1) nucleus colony in a hive structure not exceeding one (1) standard nine-and-five-eighths-inch depth, ten-frame hive body with no supers attached as required from time to time for management of swarms. Each such nucleus colony shall be disposed of or combined with an authorized colony within sixty (60) days after the date it is acquired. 
(Ord. No. 8-2014 , § 1, 4-22-14) 
Sec. 7-4-558. - Marking hives, presumption of beekeeping. 
(a)  In apiaries, the name and telephone number of the beekeeper shall be branded, painted or otherwise clearly marked upon the structure of at least two (2) hives and placed at opposite ends of the apiary. Instead of marking the hives, the beekeeper may conspicuously post a sign setting forth the name and telephone number of the beekeeper. It is a defense to prosecution under this Subsection that a colony is kept on the same tract upon which the owner resides. 
(b)  Unless marked in accordance with Subsection (a), it shall be presumed for purposes of this Division that the beekeeper is the person or persons who own or otherwise have the present right of possession and control of the tract upon which a hive or hives are situated. The presumption may be rebutted by a written agreement authorizing another person to maintain the colony or colonies upon the tract setting forth the name, address and telephone number of the other person who is acting as the beekeeper. 
(Ord. No. 8-2014 , § 1, 4-22-14) 
Sec. 7-4-559. - Inspection and registration 
    Any keeper of an apiary shall register such apiary annually with the Town Administrator/Clerk and shall obtain a business or other modified apiary business license established by the Town shall and provide such reasonable information relative to the operation of the apiary as the Town Administrator/Clerk reasonably require and the Town Administrator/Clerk or the Town Administrator/Clerk's designee shall have the right to inspect any apiary between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Where practicable, prior notice shall be given to the beekeeper if he or she resides at the apiary or if his or her name is marked on the hives. 
(Ord. No. 8-2014 , § 1, 4-22-14) 
Secs. 7-4-560-7-4-609. - Reserved. 
Division 6 - Abatement of Animal Nuisances 

Sec. 7-4-610. - Nuisances generally. 
    No animal owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his or her animal to prevent such animal from becoming a public nuisance. A public nuisance includes any of the occurrences listed in this Division, as well as any other occurrence determined by the Board of Trustees or a court of competent jurisdiction or law. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.09.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-620. - Sanitation. 
    If any of the premises described in Section 7-4-240 above are not kept in a clean and sanitary condition or become dangerous or detrimental to human health, it shall be declared a nuisance and abated as such. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.09.01) 
Sec. 7-4-630. - Noise. 
    Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., no animal owner shall permit any animal to cause annoyance, alarm or noise disturbance for more than ten (10) minutes at any time of the day or night, by repeated barking, whining, screeching, howling, braying or other like sounds which can be heard beyond the boundary of the owner's property. Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., no animal owner shall permit any animal to cause annoyance, alarm or noise disturbance for more than five (5) minutes at any time of the day or night, by repeated barking, whining, screeching, howling, braying or other like sounds which can be heard beyond the boundary of the owner's property. (Ord. 4-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-640. - Habitually barking dogs. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Habitually barking dog means any dog which barks, howls or makes any other offensive noise which disturbs the peace and enjoyment of adjacent property for a period in excess of the time frames set forth in Section 7-4-630 above. 
    Harboring or keeping means occupying the premises on which a dog is kept or to which it customarily returns daily for food and care. 
    Owner, for the purpose of this Section, means any person who owns, keeps, harbors, possesses or otherwise has custody or control of a dog. 
(b)  The owning, keeping, harboring or possessing of a habitually barking dog is hereby declared a nuisance. 
(c)  Any owner of a habitually barking dog in violation of this Section shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. (Prior code 8.01.05; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-650. - Property damage. 
    It is unlawful for an owner to allow an animal to injure or destroy any real or personal property of any description belonging to another. A judge may, in addition to any other penalty, order the defendant to make restitution to the party injured. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.09.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-660. - Excrement removal. 
    No person shall appear with an animal upon the public ways, within public places or upon the property of another, absent that person's consent, without some means for the removal of excrement, nor shall any person fail to remove any excrement deposited by such animal. This Section shall not apply to a blind person while walking a guide dog. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.09.01) 
Sec. 7-4-670. - Female animals in heat. 
    All female animals in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure or upon leash in such manner that the animal cannot come into contact with a male animal except for planned breeding. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.09.01) 
Sec. 7-4-680. - Beekeeping. 
    It is unlawful to keep or harbor any bees in the Town except in strict compliance with Division 5.5 of this Chapter 7 of the Town Code, is declared to be a menace to the health and safety of the residents of the Town and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited and subject to abatement. Any bee colony not residing in a hive structure intended for beekeeping, or any swarm of bees, or any colony residing in a standard or homemade hive which, by virtue of its condition, has obviously been abandoned by the beekeeper, is hereby declared to be a menace to the health and safety of the residents of the Town and is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Any bee colonies kept in the Town not in compliance with this Division or otherwise declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Section may be summarily destroyed or removed from the Town by the Town Administrator/Clerk, the Town's Code Enforcement officer or any designee of the Town Administrator/Clerk. In each instance in which a bee colony is destroyed, all usable components of the hive structure that are not damaged or rendered unhealthy by the destruction of the bees shall upon the beekeeper's request be returned to the beekeeper, provided that the beekeeper agrees to bear all transportation expenses for their return. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.09.01) 
(Ord. No. 8-2014 , § 1, 4-22-14) 
Sec. 7-4-690. - Abatement procedures. 
(a)  Hearing and impoundment. Any person owning or having in his or her possession or under his or her control any animal or premises constituting a nuisance in violation of this Article may be summoned before the Municipal Court to show cause why such animal should not be confined, disposed of or removed, or the nuisance otherwise abated. Upon hearing and a finding that the animal or premises constitutes a public nuisance in violation of this Article, the Municipal Court shall order the animal in question either to be confined, to be disposed of or to be removed, or such other relief as the court deems appropriate. 
(b)  Cost of impoundment. Any person who owns any animal that has been adjudged a nuisance or has been taken into custody pursuant to this Article shall be responsible for the costs of disposal, removal or impoundment. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.09.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Division 6.5 - Prairie Dog Restrictions 

Sec. 7-4-700. - Rodents; nuisance defined. 
(a)  The following rodents are declared to be detrimental and injurious to the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants and property, both public and private, of the Town, and they are determined and declared a public nuisance: 
Prairie dogs. 
(b)  Nothing contained in Subsection (a) above shall be construed or intended to include within the definition of a public nuisance any animal designated by a state or federal agency as an endangered animal under state or federal law. 
(c)  Nothing contained in Subsection (a) above shall be construed or intended to authorize the destruction or removal of an animal declared a public nuisance in violation of any state or federal law, rule or regulation related to any threatened or endangered animal. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009 , § 1, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 7-4-710. - Control of infestation; defined. 
(a)  No owner of property within the Town, nor any tenant or agent in charge thereof, shall allow or permit said property to become or remain infested with prairie dogs or prairie dog nests or burrows; provided, however, that where such nests or burrows are necessary for the maintenance of wildlife listed as threatened or endangered by any state or federal law, rule or regulation, such nests or burrows may be maintained in accordance with such state or federal law, rule or regulation. 
(b)  For the purpose of this Section, infestation shall mean the presence of more than one (1) prairie dog burrow or nest per nine hundred (900) square feet of ground. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009 , § 1, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 7-4-720. - Nuisance; abatement; notice. 
(a)  If an owner of any property within the Town, or any tenant or agent in possession or in charge thereof, fails or refuses to remove or eliminate rodent infestations or rodent nests or burrows as required in Section 7-4-710 above within thirty (30) days after being served notice to do so by an agent or employee of the Town, the Town may have the rodents, nests or burrows removed and abated by an employee of the Town or by a private firm or individual as provided in this Section and charge the cost thereof to such owner, tenant or agent, together with an additional five percent (5%) for inspection, administration, and other costs. In the event that the Health Department or other public health official identifies the presence of a communicable disease, abatement shall occur within such shorter time as specified by the Health Department or official. 
(b)  Notices as required by this Section shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Specify the time and date by which the owner, tenant or agent must abate the nuisance; 
(3)  Specify that, unless abated, the Town may undertake to abate the nuisance and charge the cost thereof, plus five percent (5%), to the owner, tenant or agent; 
(4)  Specify that unless promptly made, payment of abatement costs may be compelled through legal court action; 
(5)  Specify that failure to make payment for abatement costs will cause a lien to be placed against the property upon which the abatement occurred; and 
(6)  Specify that all procedures and acts undertaken to abate said nuisance shall conform to all municipal, state and federal law and regulations governing the taking, trapping, killing and disposal of wildlife and wildlife nests and burrows. 
(c)  If it is determined that employees of the Town are not available to abate the nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this Section, the Town may solicit bids from properly licensed individuals or firms to undertake the necessary abatement, retaining the lowest qualified bidder to accomplish the abatement. 
(d)  If a private person or firm accomplishes the abatement as provided in this Section, the Town shall provide a copy of the lowest bid with the notice for payment served on any owner, tenant or agent as provided in Section 7-4-730 below. 
(e)  In order to encourage the provision of services to protect the public health and safety and to allow the Town to allocate its limited fiscal resources, nothing contained in this Section shall be intended or construed to impose any duty of care, liability or obligation on the Town or any of its employees or agents where none otherwise existed. 
(f)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed or intended to authorize the destruction or removal of an animal declared a public nuisance in violation of any state or federal law, rule or regulation related to any threatened or endangered animal. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009 , § 1, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 7-4-730. - Payment of abatement costs; notice. 
    If the Town undertakes the abatement as provided in Section 7-4-720, a written notice for payment shall be provided the owner, tenant or agent in charge of the lot, block or parcel upon which the nuisance was abated. This notice shall be sent by certified mail and contain the amount owed and a statement that it shall be paid to the Town Treasurer within thirty (30) days after the mailing of the same by the Director of Finance. A copy of the lowest bid as provided in Section 7-4-720(d) shall be attached. Such notice shall be a condition precedent to the maintenance of any action at law to recover the Town's abatement costs. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009 , § 1, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 7-4-740. - Failure to pay assessment. 
    Failure to pay an assessment as provided for in Sections 7-4-720 through 730 within thirty (30) days shall cause such assessment to become a lien against the lot, block or parcel of land upon which abatement occurred and shall have priority over all liens, except general taxes and prior special assessment, and the same may be certified at any time after such failure to so pay by the Town Treasurer to the County Treasurer, to be placed upon the tax list for the current year and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with a ten-percent penalty to defray the cost of collection, as provided by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009 , § 1, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 7-4-750. - Nuisance abatement to conform to law. 
    Any person, firm, business or contractor undertaking to remove, eliminate or abate any nuisance as provided under Sections 7-4-700 through 7-4-730 of this Chapter shall comply with all municipal, state and federal regulations and laws governing the taking, trapping, killing and disposal of wildlife and wildlife nests or dens. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009 , § 1, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 7-4-760. - Permit required. 
    Any relocation, removal, or extermination of prairie dogs from private land requires a permit issued by the Town. For relocation or removal to a wildlife recovery program, a permit issued by the Colorado Department of Wildlife may be required. 
(Ord. No. 7-2009 , § 1, 10-27-09) 
Division 7 - Enforcement 

Sec. 7-4-810. - General procedures. 
    Whenever there is any violation of any provision of this Article, the administrative officer, the Town Attorney or an authorized licensing authority agent of the Licensing Authority finding such violation may, except as otherwise provided herein, issue a summons and complaint or citation to the owner of or person responsible for the animal to appear in Municipal Court. Any hearing on the summons and complaint or citation shall be held no sooner than five (5) days after the notice. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.10.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-820. - Impoundment of animals. 
    Whenever there is any violation of any provision of this Article, the Animal Control Officer, any police officer or any authorized agent of the Licensing Authority may impound any animal when such officer reasonably considers such impoundment to be in the best interest of the animal or of the public. It is lawful for an administrative officer or other authorized person to go upon private property for the purpose of catching any animal for impoundment and to use any means reasonably available to effect such impoundment. Impoundment shall be in the animal shelter designated from time to time by the Town. 
(1)  Notice to owner of impoundment. As soon as practicable after the date of impoundment, the Animal Control Officer or the authorized agent of the Licensing Authority shall cause to be posted in a conspicuous place in the Town for seventy-two (72) consecutive hours a notice of impoundment. The notice herein provided shall describe the animal, state the date of impoundment and set forth the location from which the animal was taken. 
(2)  Redemption of animal; impoundment charges. Any owner of an animal desiring to redeem such animal from the animal shelter shall pay a redemption fee as established by the animal shelter, unless an amount is established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs. In addition, if such dog or cat is unlicensed, the owner must license the dog or cat pursuant to the provisions of this Article prior to the animal's release. If such dog or cat is licensed but the license has been lost, the license tag must be replaced prior to the release of the dog or cat. 
(3)  Sale or other disposal of impounded animals. Any animal not reclaimed by the owner shall be held by the animal shelter for a minimum of five (5) days after acquisition by the animal shelter before it may become available for adoption or otherwise disposed of at the discretion of the animal shelter; except that an animal shelter supervisor may determine that an animal without identification, including but not limited to a microchip or collar, may be disposed of in three (3) days if the animal shelter supervisor determines that the animal shelter has no additional resources for such animal or determines that such animal is dangerous. For purposes of this Subsection, days means the days during which the animal shelter is open to the public. Animals which, in the opinion of a veterinarian or the animal shelter supervisor if a veterinarian is not available, are experiencing extreme pain or suffering, may be disposed of immediately by the animal shelter through euthanasia after the animal shelter has exhausted reasonable efforts to contact the owner; however, for animals with identification, the animal shelter shall exhaust reasonable efforts to contact the owner for up to twenty-four (24) hours. 
(4)  Liability for accident or subsequent disease from impoundment. The Town, its officers and employees, the animal shelter and its employees, the designated agent, any police officer or any other person enforcing the provisions of this Article shall not be held responsible for any accident or any subsequent disease in connection with the impoundment of an animal. 
(5)  Optional animal-at-large procedure. In lieu of impounding an animal found at large, any police officer or Animal Control Officer may issue to the owner of such animal a notice of Code violation. Such notice shall impose upon the owner a civil fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and order that such fine be paid to the Licensing Authority within seventy-two (72) hours in full satisfaction of the assessed penalty. In the event that such fine is not paid within the time period prescribed, a summons shall be issued in accordance with Section 7-4-810 of this Article. This optional procedure is available only for the first offense by an owner; second and subsequent offenses require a summons and court appearance. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.10.01; Ord. 3-2002 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-830. - Nuisance and animal-at-large violations. 
    Any person found guilty of permitting an animal to be at large, as defined in Section 7-4-160 above or a nuisance as defined in this Article shall be guilty of a petty offense and fined: 
(1)  Not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the first offense. Any person may enter a guilty plea and pay the minimum fine prior to arraignment in Municipal Court. 
(2)  Not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the second offense within a twelve-consecutive-month period. The Animal Control Officer may afford any person the opportunity to enter a guilty plea and pay the minimum fine. 
(3)  Not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for all offenses subsequent to the second offense within a twelve-consecutive-month period. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.10.02; Ord. 18-2004 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-840. - Vicious animal and dangerous dog violations. 
    Any person found guilty of keeping or maintaining a wild animal, dangerous animal or vicious animal, as defined in Section 7-4-10 above, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and: 
(1)  Shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and 
(2)  Shall be ordered to remove such animal from the Town within twenty-four (24) hours of such order, or within twenty-four (24) hours after the end of any required rabies observation period. Refusal to comply with this order may result in impoundment and disposal of the animal; and 
(3)  In addition to or in lieu of the foregoing, may be sentenced to up to ninety (90) days in jail. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.10.02; Ord. 18-2004 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 7-4-850. - Other violations. 
    Any person violating any other provision of this Article shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 20-1998 §9.10.02) 
CHAPTER 8 - Vehicles and Traffic 
ARTICLE 1 - Model Traffic Code 

Sec. 8-1-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Parts 1 and 2, and Title 30, Article 15, Part 4, C.R.S., there is hereby adopted by reference Articles I and II, inclusive, of the 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code, promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, EP 700, Denver, Colorado 80222. The subject matter of the Model Traffic Code relates primarily to comprehensive traffic control regulations for the Town. The purpose of this Article and the code adopted herein is to provide a system of traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the State and the Nation. Three (3) copies of the Model Traffic Code adopted herein are now filed in the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours. The 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code is adopted as if set out at length. (Ord. 8-1996 §1; Ord. 2-2004 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 12-2014 , § 1, 6-24-14) 
Sec. 8-1-20. - Amendments. 
    The revised 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code (the "MTC)") is adopted as set out at length save and except the following articles and/or sections which are declared to be inapplicable to this municipality and are therefore expressly deleted. 
(1)  Section 1203 of the MTC related to Ski area signs is not adopted. 
(2)  Section 711 of the MTC related to driving on mountain highways is not adopted. 
(3)  Section 713 of the MTC related to yielding the right-of-way to transit busses is not adopted. 
(4)  Section 1011 of the MTC related to use of runaway vehicle ramps is not adopted. 
(5)  Section 1012 of the MTC related to HOV and HOT lanes is not adopted. 
(6)  Section 1013 of the MTC related to Passing Lanes is not adopted. 
(7)  Section 1409(9) of the MTC related to division of fines for violation of compulsory insurance is not adopted. 
(8)  The definitions section contained in the Appendices section of the code is specifically adopted. 
(9)  Section 1101 of the MTC is amended to reflect that speed limits set forth at subsection (2) are adopted unless other speeds have been posted by the Town as allowed by Sections 1102 and 105 of the MTC, including speed limits and postings established within the Town prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
(10)  Section 509 and 510 of the MTC related to weighing of vehicles and permits for excess size and weight and for manufactured homes are adopted, subject to requirements imposed by the Town at Section 8-1-30 of the Town Code. 
(11)  The following is added as a section of the Model Traffic Code: 
Section "1212. Engine Idling. 
"(1) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to idle or permit the idling of the motor of any stationary motor vehicle for a prolonged or unreasonable period of time, determined herein to be ten minutes. 
"(2) This section shall not apply when the engine of a motor vehicle must be operated in the idle mode for safety reasons, including but not limited to the operation of cranes and forklifts. 
"(3) The time required by a diesel-powered motor vehicle while operating in a stationary position to achieve a temperature of one hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit and an air pressure of one hundred (100) pounds per square inch shall not be included in the computation of the ten minutes determined herein to be a prolonged or unreasonable period of time. The temperature and air pressure as indicated on the vehicle's gauges may be used for determining the diesel engine's temperature and air pressure and may dictate idling time for both warm-up and cool-down. 
"(4) The time during which transportation vehicles are actively loading or discharging passengers shall not be included in the computation of the ten minutes determined herein to be a prolonged or unreasonable period of time. A transportation vehicle shall be defined for the purposes of this section to mean motor vehicles designed to transport a minimum of sixteen (16) persons. 
"(5) Emergency vehicles are exempt from the above engine-idling restrictions." 
(Ord. 2-2004 §§2, 3; Ord. 24-2004 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 12-2014 , § 2, 6-24-14) 
Sec. 8-1-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-2008 , § 2, adopted August 12, 2008, and Ord. No. 2-2009 , § 2, adopted April 28, 2009 repealed § 8-1-30, which pertained to parking restrictions. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for complete derivation. 
Sec. 8-1-40. - Application. 
    This Article shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park and every other public way, place or parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of the Town, the use of which the Town has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. The provisions of sections 1401, 1402, 1413 and Part 16 of the adopted Model Traffic Code, respectively concerning reckless driving, careless driving, eluding a police officer and accidents and accident reports, shall apply not only to public places and ways but also throughout the Town. (Ord. 8-1996 §1; Ord. 2-2004 §5) 
Sec. 8-1-50. - Interpretation. 
    This Article shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to conform with the State's uniform system for the regulation of vehicles and traffic. Article and section headings of this Article and the adopted Model Traffic Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. (Ord. 8-1996 §4; Ord. 2-2004 §8) 
Sec. 8-1-60. - Violation; penalty. 
    The following penalties, set forth in current Town Code Section 8-1-60 shall apply to this ordinance and violations of the MTC as adopted by this ordinance: 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Article or the Model Traffic Code as adopted herein. 
(2)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision in this Article or the Model Traffic Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 8-1996 §1; Ord. 2-2004 §4; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 12-2014 , § 4, 6-24-14) 
ARTICLE 2 - Abandoned Vehicles 

Sec. 8-2-10. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Article: 
    Abandoned vehicle means: 
a.  Any vehicle left unattended on private property for a period of seventy-two (72) hours without the consent of the owner or lessee of such property or his or her legally authorized agent; or 
b.  Any vehicle left unattended on public property, including any portion of a highway, street, alley or other right-of-way, for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or longer unless the owner or driver has conspicuously affixed thereto a dated notice indicating his or her intention to return or has otherwise notified the Town Administrator/Clerk of his or her intention to remove the same within seventy-two (72) hours. 
    Junked vehicle means any vehicle which: 
a.  Does not bear valid, unexpired license plates, unless of a type specifically exempted from motor vehicle licensing by state law; 
b.  Is wrecked, damaged or substantially dismantled to the extent that such vehicle is inoperable; or 
c.  If designed to be capable of moving itself when in proper repair, is incapable of being moved under its own power in its existing, condition, or does not have all tires inflated. 
    Property means any real property within the Town which is not a street or highway. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power, and includes campers, trailers and other equipment designed to be carried upon or towed behind such powered vehicle, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides or upon such vehicle, and transport persons or property or pull machinery; and shall include, without limitation, automobile, airplane, truck, trailer, camper, motorcycle, motor scooter, tractor, buggy and wagon. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-501; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 8-2-20. - Removal of vehicles; authorization. 
    Any person duly authorized by the Board of Trustees or any peace officer is authorized to remove or have removed a vehicle to the nearest place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the Police Department or by the Town, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, causeway or viaduct, or in any subway or underpass, where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(2)  When a vehicle upon a street is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic, or the person in charge of the vehicle is, by reason of physical injury or otherwise, incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody and removal. 
(3)  When a vehicle is found being driven upon the streets and is not in proper condition to be driven. 
(4)  When a vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic or proper street or highway maintenance. 
(5)  When a vehicle constitutes a violation of this Chapter under the provisions of Section 8-2-40 below. 
(6)  When the driver of such vehicle is taken into custody by any person duly authorized by the Board of Trustees or the Police Department and such vehicle would thereby be left unattended upon a street. 
(7)  When removal is necessary in the interest of public safety because of fire, flood, storm or other emergency reason. 
(8)  When a vehicle is situated on public property and constitutes a violation of this Chapter. 
(9)  Any vehicle failing to display number plates or failing to display the proper number plate or plates assigned to such vehicle under the provisions of Chapter 42, C.R.S., or displaying number plates in such a manner as to reasonably indicate a violation of any provision of said Chapter 42 or any other provisions of state law with respect to motor vehicle number plates, while parked, attended or unattended, or traveling upon the streets, highways or roadways of the Town. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-501; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 8-2-30. - Storage and disposal. 
    Whenever an officer removes and impounds or stores a vehicle as authorized in Section 8-2-20 above, such vehicle will be stored or disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Section 42-4-1103, C.R.S. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-501) 
Sec. 8-2-40. - Abandonment prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to abandon any vehicle. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-501; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 8-2-50. - Junked vehicles prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to permit any junked vehicle to be left upon any public property or, being the owner or tenant in possession of any real property in the Town, to cause or permit any junked vehicle to be put upon or kept upon any real property in the Town, except that this Section shall not apply to the following conditions, which shall constitute an affirmative defense hereunder: 
(1)  The vehicle is located upon the premises of a lawfully approved vehicle repair or vehicle storage business. 
(2)  The vehicle is stored within a completely enclosed structure. 
(3)  A maximum of one (1) vehicle only per lot or parcel of real property shall be permitted if said vehicle is entirely covered with a one-piece opaque heavy tarp or commercial car cover, securely fastened at all times. 
(4)  In nonresidential areas, said vehicle is screened by a concealing fence not less than six (6) feet in height and otherwise complying with Town ordinances applicable to such fence, rendering the vehicle not visible to persons on adjacent private or public property to the extent that such concealment can be reasonably obtained under the conditions of topography and other attendant circumstances. 
(b)  A maximum of one (1) vehicle per lot or parcel of real property is permitted if the vehicle is currently undergoing repair or is awaiting the settlement of an insurance claim, provided that the vehicle is removed or brought into compliance within ninety (90) days. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-501; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 8-2-60. - Storage restrictions; ownership. 
    The storage of junked vehicles as authorized by Section 8-2-50 above shall be permitted only as to vehicles owned by the occupant of the premises upon which such vehicle is located, or by members of the immediate family of the occupant. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-501) 
Sec. 8-2-70. - Investigation authorized; notice. 
    Any person duly authorized by the Board of Trustees or any peace officer or environmental protection officer is authorized to investigate any circumstance and enforce this Article relating to any vehicle left at any place within the Town which reasonably appears to be in violation of this Article, lost, stolen or unclaimed. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-501; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 8-2-80. - Public tow; hearing requested by owner. 
(a)  In the event that any vehicle is towed or removed pursuant to the direction and authority of any person duly authorized by the Board of Trustees or any peace officer in the enforcement of this Article, the person duly authorized or the peace officer shall, in addition to other notification requirements applicable to motor vehicles under state law, within five (5) regular business days of the Town after receipt of the report from the Colorado Department of Revenue or ascertainment of ownership of vehicles not subject to state reporting procedures, notify by certified mail or personal service the owner of record, if ascertained, of the opportunity to request a hearing concerning the legality of the towing or removal of the abandoned or junked vehicle, and the location of the appropriate Town office to submit a request for hearing. Such request shall be made in writing within ten (10) days of the mailing of such notice. 
(b)  The Police Department shall transmit each such request for hearing to the Municipal Court. The Municipal Court Clerk shall schedule a hearing on the matter within thirty (30) days of the date of the requested hearing, and the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with due process standards applicable to administrative proceedings. 
(c)  In the event it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was illegally towed or removed pursuant to the direction of the Police Department in disregard of the standards for junked and abandoned vehicles set forth in this Article, all towing and removal charges and storage fees assessed against the vehicle shall be forgiven or paid by the Town; however nothing herein shall relieve the owner from mitigating the costs involved by prompt retrieval or disposal of the property. 
(d)  In the event that the Municipal Court sustains the legality of the towing or removal, an administrative hearing fee established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs shall be assessed against the owner requesting the hearing. 
(e)  All appeals of the decision of Municipal Court shall be prosecuted in conformance with Rule 106(a)(4), C.R.C.P. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-501; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 8-2-90. - Violation; penalty. 
    In addition to any fines and costs that may be imposed pursuant to Section 1-4-20 of this Code, any such vehicle found on any property within the Town to be in violation of the provisions hereof shall constitute a public nuisance, and the Town Attorney shall be authorized to bring a civil action before any court of competent jurisdiction to secure abatement thereof. All costs incurred by the Town in securing the abatement, including impoundment and storage expenses and reasonable attorney's fees, shall be assessed against the person owning said vehicle and otherwise having occupancy of the private property affected or custody of the junked or abandoned vehicle involved. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-501) 
ARTICLE 3 - Hazardous and Radioactive Materials Transportation 

Sec. 8-3-10. - Legislative intent. 
    In order to service the public health, safety and general welfare, it is the declared purpose of this Article to prohibit, to the extent permitted by law, the transportation of hazardous and radioactive materials by motor vehicle within the Town, a heavily populated area, except for the purpose of making pickups and/or deliveries within the Town. (Ord. 4-1996 §13.02.01) 
Sec. 8-3-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Radioactive material means any material defined as a radioactive material in 49 C.F.R § 173.403, but does not include nuclear materials as defined in Article 2.2 of Title 40, C.R.S. 
    Transporter includes the driver of a motor vehicle and his or her employer. (Ord. 4-1996 §13.02.02) 
Sec. 8-3-30. - Adoption of federal rules and regulations. 
    The following portions of the Code of Federal Regulations are hereby adopted and shall be in full force and effect within the Town. Such regulations or any part thereof shall automatically be amended, modified or repealed without further action by the Board of Trustees whenever the corresponding federal provisions are amended, modified or repealed: 
(1)  Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49, Parts 101-173, 177 and 178 of the Department of Transportation Regulations, as from time to time amended, relating to packaging, marking, labeling, loading, placarding and transporting hazardous materials, as such materials are defined therein. 
(2)  Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49, Parts 390-397 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations, as from time to time amended, relating to the safe operation and maintenance of motor vehicles by motor carriers. 
(3)  Code of Federal Regulations, Title 10, Part 71 of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission Regulations, as from time to time amended, relating to the packaging and transportation of radioactive materials. (Ord. 4-1996 §13.02.03) 
Sec. 8-3-40. - Transportation restrictions by motor vehicle. 
(a)  Hazardous materials required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R Part 172, as amended, may not be transported by motor vehicle within the Town by any person except for the purpose of making pickups and/or deliveries within the Town; provided, however, that if the Fire Department designates a route within the Town for the transportation of such materials, such route may be used. 
(b)  Radioactive materials subject to regulation under 10 C.F.R §71.5, as amended, may not be transported by motor vehicle within the Town by any person except for the purpose of making pickups and/or deliveries within the Town unless such routing is consistent with the requirements set forth in 49 C.F.R § 177.825; provided, however, that if the Fire Department designates a route within the Town for the transportation of such materials, such route may be used. 
(c)  If no practicable alternative route exists, a transporter subject to the provisions of Subsection (a) or (b) above may apply for an exemption pursuant to Section 8-3-50 below. 
(d)  Motor vehicles carrying such hazardous and radioactive materials which are making local pickups and/or deliveries must be operated over the safest and most direct route to and from the origination or destination point. Such routes shall not pass through residential areas unless there is no practicable alternative. In all instances, such vehicles shall comply with local truck routine and weight limitation restrictions and prohibitions. 
(e)  Signs shall be posted on all major streets leading into the Town at or near the Town limits giving notice of the restrictions on the transportation of hazardous and radioactive materials by motor vehicle within the Town imposed by Subsections (a) and (b) above. (Ord. 4-1996 § 13.02.04) 
Sec. 8-3-50. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this Article shall not apply to vehicles exempted from registration requirements pursuant to Section 42-3-103, C.R.S. 
(b)  The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any vehicle transporting gasoline or diesel fuel in tanks with a capacity of five hundred (500) U.S. gallons or less, except for those provisions relating to the placarding of loads, spills and operation of motor vehicles as set out in Section 8-3-60 below. However, the provisions of this Article shall apply to any such vehicle if it is also transporting hazardous and radioactive materials in amounts which require placarding. 
(c)  Application may be made to the Fire Department for an exemption from the provisions of Subsection 8-3-40(a) or (b) where no practicable alternative exists to the transporter's preferred route through the Town. The burden of proving that no practicable alternative exists shall be on the applicant. Operating convenience is not a basis for determining that there is no practicable alternative. Exemptions may be requested on a single trip or annual basis. The decision of the Fire Department shall be final. Written notice of approval or denial of the application shall be given to the applicant. If the application is approved, an exemption document shall be issued, stating the name of the applicant, the expiration date of the exemption, the authorized route, a general description of the categories of materials likely to be transported and any other relevant information. A copy of the exemption must be carried by the transporter while passing through the Town pursuant to such exemption. Notwithstanding the fact that an exemption has been granted, transporters shall comply with the remaining provisions of this Article, including Subsection 8-3-40(d) above. In the event of any violation of this Article by such transporters, the granting of an exemption may be suspended or revoked by the Fire Department by giving written notice of the terms thereof to the applicant. 
(d)  The Fire Department may temporarily exempt all motor vehicles from the provisions of Subsection 8-3-40(a) or (b) above when, in the opinion of the Fire Department, no practicable alternative exists to a route through the Town due to road, weather, traffic or other hazardous conditions on routes which would otherwise be practicable alternatives. Such an exemption shall be granted for a specific period of time and notice thereof shall be given to the public in the manner specified in Section 8-3-80 below. (Ord. 4-1996 §13.02.05; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 8-3-60. - Motor vehicle operation. 
    The following requirements shall apply to motor vehicle transportation within the Town of hazardous materials required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Part 172, as amended, and radioactive materials subject to regulation under 10 C.F.R. 71.5, as amended: 
(1)  Transporters of hazardous and radioactive materials shall operate their motor vehicles at all times with their headlights illuminated. 
(2)  Transporters of hazardous and radioactive materials shall not create a hazard to the public by the location or condition of their motor vehicles which contain such materials. (Ord. 4-1996 §13.02.06; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 8-3-70. - Reporting requirements. 
    Incidents involving hazardous and radioactive materials are required to be reported immediately to the Fire Department by the transporter by telephone using the 911 number or by any other effective means. The Fire Department shall file a standing request with the Office of Hazardous Materials Transportation of the Research and Special Programs Administration, United States Department of Transportation, for routine mailing to the Fire Department of a copy of the written report required by 49 C.F.R. § 171.16. (Ord. 4-1996 §13.02.07; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 8-3-80. - Suspension of motor vehicle operations. 
    The Fire Department may temporarily suspend the operation within the Town of some or all motor vehicles carrying hazardous and radioactive materials whenever road, weather, traffic or other hazardous circumstances warrant that action. In such event, the Town shall immediately endeavor to notify the public of the same by one (1) or more of the following means of communication: newspaper, television, radio or notification to appropriate law enforcement agencies. Written confirmation of such action will be provided by the Town upon request. (Ord. 4-1996 §13.02.08; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 8-3-90. - Discharging hazardous and radioactive materials. 
    Transporters of hazardous and radioactive materials shall not permit or cause to be permitted the discharge of such materials into or upon any street, highway, sanitary sewer, drainage canal or ditch, storm drain or flood control channel, or upon the ground, including private property, except when such discharge is expressly permitted by the property owner and is otherwise legal. (Ord. 4-1996 §13.02.09; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 4 - Semi-Truck Parking 

Sec. 8-4-10. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Article: 
    Parked. A parked semi-vehicle means a semi-vehicle parked within the Town, but does not include a vehicle parked in traffic. 
    Semi-truck means and as includes: 
a.  A semi-tractor with three (3) axles and a total configuration of ten (10) wheels, two (2) wheels on the front axle and four (4) wheels each on the rear drive axles (or configured with what are commonly known as "super tires" on the rear axles); designed to transport a semitrailer. 
b.  A road tractor as defined by Section 42-1-102(84), C.R.S., and to the extent that such road tractor was originally designed or is currently configured to draw semi-trailers. 
c.  A truck tractor as defined by Section 42-1-102(109) and (109.5), C.R.S. 
d.  A concrete mixer or pumper truck. 
e.  A semi-truck shall not include a truck which, without a semi-trailer, is configured to independently be operated as a dump truck, trash truck, bus or tow truck. 
    Semi-trailer means and includes: 
a.  A cargo trailer designed to be equipped with eight (8) wheels with two (2) tandem axles at the rear, each of which rear axle has dual wheels or is configured with what are commonly known as "super tires," and which trailer has a length of forty (40) feet or more. 
b.  A trailer with a length of twenty-eight and one-half feet (28.5) or more, designed to be towed behind a semi-truck and semi-trailer, sometimes known as a "pup." 
c.  A semi-trailer as defined by Section 42-1-102(89), C.R.S. 
    Semi-vehicle means a semi-truck or a semi-tractor. 
    Unattended. A semi-truck shall be deemed unattended if the operator of the vehicle is not present within two hundred (200) feet of the semi-truck. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 9-2011 , 8-9-11) 
Sec. 8-4-20. - Violation for unlawful parking of semi-vehicle. 
(a)  Except as set forth in this Article, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a semi-vehicle on either public or private property within the Town, to leave a semi-vehicle unattended within the Town or to allow a semi-vehicle to be parked on private property within the Town. 
(b)  Exceptions. The following shall serve as exceptions to the prohibitions set forth in this Article: 
(1)  A semi-vehicle parked or otherwise located on private property with authorization of the owner in the industrial (I) or light industrial (LI) zoning district. 
(2)  Properties which have applied for and been granted a permit allowing truck parking as a conditional use within zones other than residential zones where proper parking facilities exist for truck parking and access. 
(3)  Semi-vehicle loading/unloading to the extent the owner is able to establish that unloading is scheduled to occur at a business location within the Town within twelve (12) hours. 
(4)  Semi-vehicles temporarily inoperable. 
(5)  Semi-vehicles currently engaged in construction at sites located within the Town. 
(6)  Semi-vehicles owned by any governmental entity, including the State. 
(7)  A semi-vehicle issued a permit by the Town Administrator/Clerk authorizing the semi-vehicle to be located within the Town at a specific location for a period of not more than forty-eight (48) hours. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 9-2011 , 8-9-11) 
Sec. 8-4-30. - Presumptions. 
    The following presumptions shall exist in the application of this Article: 
(1)  A certified copy from the State of the registration of any semi-vehicle shall be prima facie evidence of the semi-vehicle's owner. 
(2)  A certified copy from the issuing governing body showing a semi-vehicle's Public Utility Commission or Interstate Commerce Commission registration identification or other registration number, and the registered owner of the semi-vehicle Registered under such number shall be prima facie evidence of the semi-vehicle's owner. 
(3)  A prima facie presumption shall exist that any registered owner of an unlawfully maintained semi-vehicle was the person who allowed the semi-vehicle to be unlawfully maintained in the Town. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 9-2011 , 8-9-11) 
CHAPTER 10 - General Offenses 
ARTICLE 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 10-1-10. - Legislative purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this Code to provide for the public health, safety and welfare of the Town. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-102) 
Sec. 10-1-20. - Local question. 
    It is the intention of the Board of Trustees that the ordinances and provisions of this Chapter deal with matters of "local" and "mixed" state and local concern and that no provision of this Chapter is to be construed expressly or by implication to permit conduct that is illegal under the laws of the State or to prohibit conduct that is expressly permitted by the laws of the State. The provisions of this Chapter are to be construed to apply to misdemeanors and other minor and petty offenses only and are not to be interpreted to apply to conduct that is defined as a felony under state law. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-103) 
Sec. 10-1-30. - Application. 
(a)  A person is subject to prosecution in the Municipal Court for a violation committed through the conduct of such person or through the conduct of another for whom such person is legally accountable, if: 
(1)  The conduct constitutes a violation and is committed either wholly or partly within the Town; 
(2)  The conduct outside the Town constitutes an attempt, as defined by this Chapter, to commit a violation within the Town; 
(3)  The conduct outside the Town constitutes a conspiracy to commit a violation within the Town, and an act in furtherance of the conspiracy occurs in the Town; or 
(4)  The conduct within the Town constitutes an attempt, solicitation or conspiracy to commit in another jurisdiction a violation prohibited under the laws of this Town and such other jurisdiction. 
(b)  Whether a violator is in or outside the Town is immaterial to the commission of a violation based on an omission to perform a duty imposed by the law of the Town. 
(c)  Town, as used in this Section and in any summons, summons and complaint or complaint alleging a violation of this Code or any ordinance, includes both the area within the territorial limits of the Town, and also those areas over which extraterritorial police power has been granted by state statutes. It is the intent of the Board of Trustees to extend the territorial jurisdiction of the Municipal Court as widely as possible. However, where specific sections of this Code require that the violation occur "within the Town" then the offense is limited to the territorial limits of the Town. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-105) 
Sec. 10-1-40. - Violations. 
(a)  Any act or omission declared to be a violation, unlawful, required or prohibited by the phrase no person shall or similar mandatory language in or by this Code, any ordinance of the Town or any rule promulgated thereunder constitutes a violation. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code, an ordinance of the Town or a rule promulgated thereunder, every day of a violation of this Code, ordinance or rule constitutes a separate violation. 
(c)  The following sections of this Code are designated noncriminal violations. Any person charged with violating any provision of this Code so designated shall not be subject to incarceration upon conviction. Further, such person shall not be entitled to a trial by jury. 
Code § Violation 6-3-10 Failure to obtain canvassing, soliciting or peddling for residential sales of property or operation of a public auction 7-4-80 Cruelty to animals 7-4-160 Running at large 7-4-170 Prohibition on keeping wild animals 7-4-310 License Requirement 7-4-420 Vaccination 7-4-530 Wild and dangerous animals 8-2-50 Junk or abandoned vehicles 10-2-10 Criminal attempt (where the violation attempted is noncriminal) 10-2-20 Conspiracy (where the conspiracy involves a noncriminal violation) 10-2-30 Complicity (where the complicity involves a noncriminal violation) 10-2-40 Accessory to crime (where the violation is noncriminal) 10-3-70 False reporting to authorities 10-3-90 Compounding 10-4-10 Unlawful conduct on public property 10-4-20 Trespass or interference in public buildings 10-4-30 Hindering transportation 10-5-30 Desecration of venerated objects 10-5-50 Graffiti 10-5-60 Defacing posted notice 10-5-80 Littering of public and private property 10-5-90 Bottles, littering in parks 10-5-100 Use of noxious substance 10-5-130 Theft by receiving 10-5-140 Obtaining control over any stolen thing of value 10-5-150 Concealment of goods 10-5-170 Tampering and unauthorized connections 10-6-20 Disrupting lawful assembly 10-6-50 Throwing missiles at vehicles 10-6-110 Storage of flammable liquids 10-6-130 Abandoned containers and appliances 10-6-150 Unlawfully using slugs 10-6-160 Public urination 10-7-20 Encouraging delinquency 10-7-30 False statement; false credentials 10-7-40 Services of others 10-7-60 Curfew 10-8-20 License to manufacture, sell 10-8-30 Alcohol-selling establishments 10-8-40 Disturbances 10-8-50 Display of cards 10-8-60 Possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages in public 10-8-110 Open containers; permits 10-8-120 Possession of drug paraphernalia 10-8-130 Possession of marijuana 10-8-140 Abusing toxic vapors 10-10-10 Unreasonable noise 10-10-20 Sirens, whistles, gongs and red lights 10-10-30 Disturbance, breach of peace 10-11-10 Gambling 10-11-20 Burning 10-11-30 Motorbikes  
(d)  The following sections of this Code are designated criminal violations. Any person charged with violating any provision of this Code so designated may be subject to incarceration, in addition to fines and costs, upon conviction. Further, such person may be entitled to a trial by jury upon meeting the requirements of Section 2-4-200 of this Code: 
Code § Violation 7-4-510 Vicious animals 10-2-10 Criminal attempt (where the violation attempted is criminal) 10-2-20 Conspiracy (where the conspiracy involves a criminal violation) 10-2-30 Complicity (where the complicity involves a criminal violation) 10-2-40 Accessory to crime (where the violation is criminal) 10-3-20 Impersonating a public servant 10-3-30 Obstructing government operations 10-3-40 Obstructing a peace officer or firefighter 10-3-50 Resisting arrest 10-3-60 Escape 10-3-80 Refusing to aid a peace officer 10-5-10 Criminal mischief 10-5-20 Damaging or destroying public property 10-5-40 Damaging or destroying private property 10-5-70 Criminal trespass 10-5-110 Theft 10-5-120 Theft of rental property 10-5-160 Motor vehicle theft 10-5-180 Second degree criminal tampering 10-5-190 Fourth degree arson 10-6-10 Disorderly conduct 10-6-30 Harassment 10-6-40 Loitering 10-6-60 Reckless endangerment 10-6-70 False imprisonment 10-6-80 Menacing 10-6-90 Assault 10-6-100 False alarms 10-6-120 Explosives 10-6-140 Fraud by check 10-6-170 Indecent exposure 10-7-10 Child abuse 10-8-70 Sale of malt, vinous, spirituous liquors 10-8-80 Alcohol-related violations 10-8-90 Illegal possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by an underage person 10-9-20 Carrying concealed weapon 10-9-30 Carrying concealed weapon or possessing weapon on school grounds 10-9-40 Prohibited use of weapons 10-9-60 Selling weapons to intoxicated persons  
(Ord. 18-1994 §1-108; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 4-2015 , § 2, 3-10-15) 
Sec. 10-1-50. - Statute of limitations. 
    No person shall be prosecuted, tried or punished for any violation under this Code or any ordinance unless the action for said violation is instituted within one (1) year of the date of the alleged violation, but the statute of limitations within which a prosecution must be instituted shall be tolled for any period in which a prosecution is pending against the accused for the same conduct, even if the summons, the complaint or the summons and complaint that commence the prosecution is quashed or the proceedings thereon are set aside or reversed on appeal. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-109) 
Sec. 10-1-60. - Penalties not released by repeal. 
(a)  The repeal, revision, amendment or consolidation of any section of this Code does not constitute a bar to the prosecution and punishment of an act already committed in violation of the section so repealed, unless the repealing, revising, amending or consolidating ordinance expressly so provides. 
(b)  Any such section so repealed, amended, revised or consolidated shall remain in full force and effect for the purpose of sustaining all actions, suits, proceedings and prosecutions brought thereunder that arose before the effective date of the repeal, amendment, revision or consolidation. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-110) 
Sec. 10-1-70. - Authority. 
(a)  Authority to detain temporarily. 
(1)  A police officer may stop any person who the officer reasonably suspects is committing, has committed or is about to commit a violation of this Code or any ordinance of the Town, and may require that person to give his or her name, address and an explanation of his or her actions. 
(2)  When a police officer has stopped a person for questioning pursuant to this Subsection (a) and reasonably suspects that the officer's personal safety requires it, the officer may conduct a pat-down search of that person for weapons. 
(3)  A police officer may stop and temporarily detain a person for the purpose of issuing or serving a summons or summons and complaint. 
(b)  Authority to charge. A peace officer may issue a summons and complaint or sign a complaint against any person for any violation of this Code or any ordinance of the Town if: 
(1)  The violation has been or is being committed by a person in the officer's presence; or 
(2)  The officer has probable cause to believe that a violation has been or is being committed by the person and that the person has been or is committing it. 
(c)  Authority to arrest and incarcerate. 
(1)  A police officer may arrest a person for a violation of this Code or any ordinance of the Town if: 
a.  The violation has been or is being committed by a person in the officer's presence; or 
b.  The officer has probable cause to believe that a violation has been or is being committed by the person and that the person has been or is committing it. 
(2)  Whenever any police officer is authorized by this Code to arrest any person, the officer has the authority to incarcerate that person if the officer has probable cause to believe that one (1) or more of the following conditions exist: 
a.  The person is not likely to desist from the conduct alleged to constitute a violation after issuance of a summons; 
b.  The person is unlikely to appear in Municipal Court in response to a summons (but the fact that the defendant does not reside in the Town is not alone such probable cause); 
c.  The person refuses or is unable to post the bond required by this Code; 
d.  The person refuses service of a summons; 
e.  The person refuses to sign the promise of appearance, if any, on the summons; 
f.  The person refuses to identify himself or herself by giving a complete name and address verifiable by reasonable supporting data; or 
g.  The person falsely identifies himself or herself. 
(3)  A police officer shall incarcerate any person when the officer has a warrant or writ commanding that such person be arrested or has received information, which the officer reasonably believes to be reliable, that such warrant or writ exists. 
(d)  Use of force. An arrest may be made on any day and at any time of the day or night. All necessary and reasonable force may be used in making an arrest. All necessary and reasonable force may be used to effect an entry upon any building or property or part thereof to make an authorized arrest. 
(e)  Town Attorney as prosecutor. The Town Attorney shall act as the prosecutor and represent the Town in all Municipal Court proceedings as appropriate, with all the privileges, immunities, powers and duties of such office. (Ord. 18-1994 §1-206) 
ARTICLE 2 - Attempt, Conspiracy, Complicity and Accessory 

Sec. 10-2-10. - Criminal attempt. 
(a)  A person commits criminal attempt if, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for commission of an offense, he or she engages in conduct constituting a substantial step toward the commission of the offense. A substantial step is any conduct, whether act, omission or possession, which is strongly corroborative of the firmness of the actor's purpose to complete the commission of the offense. Factual or legal impossibility of committing the offense is not a defense if the offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the actor believed them to be, nor is it a defense that the crime attempted was actually perpetrated by the accused. 
(b)  A person who engages in conduct intending to aid another to commit an offense commits criminal attempt if the conduct would establish his or her complicity under Section 18-1-603, C.R.S., were the offense committed by the other person, even if the other is not guilty of committing or attempting the offense. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this Section that the defendant abandoned his or her effort to commit the crime or otherwise prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting the complete and voluntary renunciation of this criminal intent. (Ord. 18-1994 §2-101) 
Sec. 10-2-20. - Conspiracy. 
(a)  A person commits conspiracy to commit a crime if, with the intent to promote or facilitate its commission, he or she agreed with another person that they, or one (1) or more of them, will engage in conduct which constitutes a crime or an attempt to commit a crime, or he or she agreed to aid the other person in the planning or commission of a crime or of an attempt to commit such crime. 
(b)  No person may be convicted of conspiracy to commit a crime, unless an overt act in pursuance of that conspiracy is proved to have been done by him or her or by a person with whom he or she conspired. 
(c)  If a person knows that one with whom he or she conspires to commit a crime has conspired with another person to commit the same crime, he or she is guilty of conspiring to commit a crime with the other person, whether or not he or she knows the other person's identity. 
(d)  If a person conspires to commit a number of crimes, he or she is guilty of only one (1) conspiracy so long as such multiple crimes are part of a single criminal episode. (Ord. 18-1994 §2-201; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-2-30. - Complicity. 
    A person is legally accountable as principal for the behavior of another constituting a criminal offense if, with the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of the offense, he or she aids, abets or advises the other person in planning or committing the offense. (Ord. 18-1994 §2-301) 
Sec. 10-2-40. - Accessory to crime. 
(a)  A person is an accessory to crime if, with intent to hinder, delay or prevent the discovery, detection, apprehension, prosecution, conviction or punishment of another for the commission of a crime, he or she renders assistance to such person. 
(b)  Render assistance means to: 
(1)  Harbor or conceal the other; 
(2)  Warn such person of impending discovery or apprehension; except that this does not apply to a warning given in an effort to bring such person into compliance with the law; 
(3)  Provide such person with money, transportation, weapon, disguise or other thing to be used in avoiding discovery or apprehension; 
(4)  By force, intimidation or deception, obstruct anyone in the performance of any act which might aid in the discovery, detection, apprehension, prosecution or punishment of such person; or 
(5)  Conceal, destroy or alter any physical evidence that might aid in the discovery, detection, apprehension, prosecution, conviction or punishment of such person. (Ord. 18-1994 §2-401) 
Sec. 10-2-50. - Aiding and abetting. 
    Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit, aids or abets in the commission of any act declared herein to be in violation of the ordinances of the Town, whether individually or in connection with one (1) or more persons, as a principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense, and every person who fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any ordinance of the Town is likewise guilty of such offense. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 3 - Government and Public Officers 

Sec. 10-3-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed hereafter: 
    Government includes any branch, subdivision, institution or agency of the government of this Town. 
    Governmental function includes any activity which a public servant is legally authorized to undertake on behalf of a government. 
    Public servant means any officer or employee of the government, whether elected or appointed, and any person participating as an advisor or consultant, engaged in the service of process or otherwise performing a governmental function, but the term does not include witnesses. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-3-20. - Impersonating a public servant. 
(a)  A person commits impersonating a public servant if he or she falsely pretends to be a public servant other than a peace officer and performs any act in that pretended capacity. 
(b)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this Section that the office the actor pretended to hold did not in fact exist. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-3-30. - Obstructing government operations. 
(a)  It is unlawful to obstruct government operations. 
(b)  A person commits obstructing government operations if he or she intentionally obstructs, impairs or hinders the performance of a governmental function by a public official, employee or servant, by using or threatening to use violence, force or physical interference or obstacle. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense that: 
(1)  The obstruction, impairment or hindrance was of unlawful action by a public servant; 
(2)  The obstruction, impairment or hindrance was of the making of an arrest; or 
(3)  The obstruction, impairment or hindrance was by lawful activities in connection with a labor dispute with the government. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-3-40. - Obstructing a peace officer or firefighter. 
(a)  No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer made or given in the discharge of the police officer's duties. 
(b)  No person shall, in any way, interfere with or hinder any police officer who is discharging or apparently discharging the duties of the position. 
(c)  It is unlawful to obstruct a peace officer or firefighter. 
(d)  A person commits obstructing a peace officer or firefighter when, by using or threatening to use violence, force or physical interference or obstacle, he or she knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders the enforcement of the law or the preservation of the peace by a peace officer, acting under color of his or her official authority, or knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders the prevention, control or abatement of fire by a firefighter, acting under color of his or her official authority. 
(e)  To assure that animals used in law enforcement or fire prevention activities are protected from harm, a person commits obstructing a peace officer or fireman when, by using or threatening to use violence, force, physical interference or obstacle, he or she knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders any such animal. 
(f)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this Section that the peace officer or firefighter was acting in an illegal manner, if the peace officer or firefighter was acting under color of his or her official authority as defined in Section 10-3-50(c) of this Code. 
(g)  This Section does not apply to obstruction, impairment or hindrance of the making of an arrest. (Ord. 18-1994 §8-102; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-3-50. - Resisting arrest. 
(a)  It is unlawful to resist arrest. 
(b)  A person commits resisting arrest if he or she knowingly prevents or attempts to prevent a peace officer, acting under color of his or her official authority, from effecting an arrest of the actor or another by: 
(1)  Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the peace officer or another; or 
(2)  Using any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing physical injury to the peace officer or another. 
(c)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this Section that the peace officer was attempting to make an arrest which in fact was unlawful, if the peace officer was acting under color of his or her official authority, and in attempting to make the arrest, he or she was not resorting to unreasonable or excessive force giving rise to the right of self-defense. A peace officer acts under color of his or her official authority when, in the regular course of assigned duties, he or she is called upon to make, and does make, a judgment in good faith based upon surrounding facts and circumstances that an arrest should be made by him or her. 
(d)  The term peace officer, as used in this Section, means a peace officer in uniform or, if out of uniform, one who has identified himself or herself by exhibiting his or her credentials as such peace officer to the person whose arrest is attempted. (Ord. 18-1994 §8-101; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-3-60. - Escape. 
    A person commits escape if, while being in custody or confinement and held for or charged with but not convicted of a misdemeanor or petty offense, he or she knowingly escapes from said custody or confinement. (Ord. 18-1994 §8-201) 
Sec. 10-3-70. - False reporting to authorities. 
    It is unlawful for a person to falsely report to authorities. A person commits false reporting to authorities if he or she: 
(1)  Knowingly causes a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be transmitted to or within an official or volunteer fire department, ambulance service or any other government agency which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property; 
(2)  Makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities of a crime or other incident within their official concern when he or she knows that it did not occur; 
(3)  Makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities pretending to furnish information relating to an offense or other incident within their official concern when he or she knows that he or she has no such information or knows that the information is false; 
(4)  Knowingly gives false information to any law enforcement officer with the purpose of implicating another; or 
(5)  Gives a false name or address to a law enforcement officer with the intent of concealing or hiding one's own real name, address and/or age. (Ord. 18-1994 §8-105; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-3-80. - Refusing to aid police officer. 
    A person eighteen (18) years of age or older commits refusing to aid a peace officer when, upon command by a person known to him or her to be a peace officer, he or she unreasonably refuses or fails to aid the peace officer in effecting or securing an arrest or preventing the commission by another of any offense. (Ord. 18-1994 §8-103) 
Sec. 10-3-90. - Compounding. 
    A person commits compounding if he or she accepts or agrees to accept any pecuniary benefit as consideration for: 
(1)  Refraining from seeking prosecution of an offender; or 
(2)  Refraining from reporting to law enforcement authorities the commission or suspected commission of any crime or information relating to a crime. (Ord. 18-1994 §8-104) 
ARTICLE 4 - Streets and Public Places 

Sec. 10-4-10. - Unlawful conduct on public property. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any public building or on any public property or to conduct himself or herself in or on the same in violation of any order, rule or regulation concerning any matter prescribed in this Section limiting or prohibiting the use, activities or conduct in such public building or on such public property, issued by any officer or agency having the power of control, management or supervision of the building or property. In addition to any authority granted by any other law, each such officer or agency may adopt such orders, rules or regulations as are reasonably necessary for the administration, protection and maintenance of such public buildings and property, specifically, orders, rules and regulations upon the following matters: 
(1)  Preservation of property, vegetation, wildlife, signs, markers, statues, buildings, grounds, other structures and any object of scientific, historical or scenic interest; 
(2)  Restriction or limitation of the use of such public buildings or property as to time, manner or permitted activities; 
(3)  Prohibition of activities or conduct within public buildings or on public property which may be reasonably expected to substantially interfere with the use and enjoyment of such places by others or which may constitute a general nuisance; 
(4)  Necessary sanitation, health and safety measures adopted by any applicable governmental authority; 
(5)  Camping and picnicking, public meetings and assemblages and other individual or group usages, including the place, time and manner in which such activities may be permitted; 
(6)  Use of all vehicles as to place, time and manner of use; and 
(7)  Control and limitation of fires and designation of places where fires are permitted. 
(b)  No conviction may be obtained under this Section unless notice of such limitations or prohibitions is prominently posted at all public entrances to such building or property or such notice is actually first given to the person by the officer or agency, including any agent thereof, or by any law enforcement officer having jurisdiction or authority to enforce this Section. 
(c)  Any person who violates this Section is guilty of unlawful conduct on public property. (Ord. 9-2000 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-4-20. - Trespass or interference in public buildings. 
(a)  No person shall so conduct himself or herself at or in any public building owned, operated or controlled by the Town as to willfully deny to any public official, public employee or invitee on such premises the lawful rights of such official, employee or invitee to enter, to use the facilities of or to leave any such public building. 
(b)  No person shall, at or in any public building, willfully impede any public official or employee in the lawful performance of duties or activities through the use of restraint, abduction, coercion or intimidation or by force and violence or threat thereof. 
(c)  No person shall willfully refuse or fail to leave any such public building upon being requested to do so by the Town officer charged with maintaining order in such public building, if the person has committed, is committing, threatens to commit or incites others to commit any act which did, or would if completed, disrupt, impair, interfere with or obstruct the lawful missions, processes, procedures or functions being carried on in the public building. 
(d)  No person shall, at any meeting or session conducted by any judicial, legislative or administrative body or official at or in any public building, willfully impede, disrupt or hinder the normal proceedings of such meeting or session by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of the body or official conducting the meeting or session or by any act designed to intimidate, coerce or hinder any member of such body or official engaged in the performance of duties at such meeting or session. 
(e)  No person shall, by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of any executive body or official at or in any public building, willfully impede, disrupt or hinder the normal proceedings of such body or official. 
(f)  The term public building, as used in this Section, includes any premises being temporarily used by a public officer or employee in the discharge of his or her official duties. 
(g)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Section commits an unlawful act. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-4-30. - Interfering with use of streets or sidewalks; hindering transportation. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, alone or in a group or assemblage of persons, whose standing, remaining or congregating on any public highway, street, alley or sidewalk in the Town shall obstruct, interfere with or prevent the free, unobstructed and reasonable use of that public highway, street, alley or sidewalk by any other person, to fail or refuse to yield to the reasonable use or passage of any other person on that public highway, street, alley or sidewalk or to fail or refuse to move on, disperse or cease such obstruction or interference immediately upon being so ordered by any police officer of the Town or other authorized peace officer. 
(b)  A person commits hindering transportation if he or she knowingly and without lawful authority forcibly stops and hinders the operation of any vehicle used in providing transportation services of any kind to the public or to any person, association or corporation. (Ord. 18-1994 §9-106; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-4-40. - Damage or removal of street signs. 
    It is unlawful for any person without proper authorization to remove, deface, damage or destroy any street sign or sign erected or placed in or adjacent to any street indicating the name of such street. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 5 - Public, Private and Personal Property 

Sec. 10-5-10. - Criminal mischief. 
    It is unlawful to commit criminal mischief. A person commits criminal mischief if he or she knowingly damages the real or personal property of one (1) or more other persons in the course of a single criminal episode where the aggregate damage to the real or personal property is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 18-1994 §4-301; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-5-20. - Damaging or destroying public property. 
    No person shall damage, move, remove, destroy or injure in any manner whatsoever or cause to be damaged, moved, removed, destroyed or injured any grass, tree, shrub, plant, flower, railing, bridge, culvert, sign, building or any other property whatsoever belonging to the Town or under the possession and control of the Town, unless done pursuant to a written permit or contract from the Town. (Ord. 18-1994 §4-306) 
Sec. 10-5-30. - Desecration of venerated objects. 
(a)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly desecrates any public monument, structure or place of worship or burial or desecrates in a public place any other object of veneration by the public or a substantial segment thereof. 
(b)  The term desecrate means defacing, damaging, polluting or otherwise physically mistreating in a way that the defendant knows will outrage the sensibilities of persons likely to observe or discover his or her action or its result. (Ord. 18-1994 §9-105) 
Sec. 10-5-40. - Damaging or destroying private property. 
    It is unlawful for any person to either willfully, maliciously or wantonly damage or destroy real property or improvements thereto, or moveable or personal property, belonging to any person. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-5-50. - Graffiti. 
    It is unlawful for any person to deface or cause, aid in or permit the defacing of public or private property without the consent of the owner by painting, drawing or writing, by use of paint, spray paint or ink, or any other method of defacement. Upon conviction of this Section, the Court may order the person so convicted to personally repair any property damaged or properties similarly damaged, if possible. (Ord. 18-1994 §4-307) 
Sec. 10-5-60. - Defacing posted notice. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly mar, destroy or remove any posted notice authorized by law. (Ord. 18-1994 §4-308; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-5-70. - Trespassing. 
(a)  Second degree criminal trespass. A person commits the crime of second degree criminal trespass if he or she unlawfully enters or remains in or upon premises which are enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or are fenced, or if he or she knowingly and unlawfully enters or remains in or upon the premises of a hotel, motel, condominium or apartment building. 
(b)  Third degree criminal trespass. A person commits the crime of third degree criminal trespass if he or she unlawfully enters or remains in or upon the premises of another. (Ord. 18-1994 §§4-302, 4-303; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-5-80. - Littering of public and private property. 
(a)  Any person who deposits, throws or leaves any litter on any public or private property or in any waters commits littering. 
(b)  The term litter, as used in this Section, means all rubbish, waste material, refuse, garbage, trash, debris or other foreign substances, solid or liquid, of every form, size, kind and description. 
(c)  The phrase public or private property, as used in this Section, includes, but is not limited to, the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse, including frozen areas or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground or building; any refuge, conservation or recreation area; and any residential, farm or ranch properties or timberlands. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense that: 
(1)  Such property is an area designated by law for the disposal of such material, and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use the property; or 
(2)  The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on such property for that purpose; or 
(3)  Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or he has first obtained written consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or the act is done under the personal direction of said owner or tenant. 
(e)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle in violation of this Section, the operator of said motor vehicle is presumed to have caused or permitted the litter to be so thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped therefrom. (Ord. 18-1994 §4-309) 
Sec. 10-5-90. - Bottles, littering in parks. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to bring or to have in his or her possession any glass bottle in any park or other public area in the Town. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to bring in and dump, deposit or leave any bottles or other containers made of glass, any broken glass, ashes, papers, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash in or upon any park or other public area in the Town. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person utilizing the facilities of any park or other public area in the Town to leave such area or facility without first completely extinguishing fires, after placing all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans or other containers, garbage and other refuse in the possession of such person in disposal receptacles, where provided. If no disposal receptacle is available, then such person shall carry away said refuse or trash in his or her possession from the area, to be disposed of in a proper and legal manner elsewhere. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-403; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-5-100. - Use of a noxious substance. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to deposit on the land or in the building or vehicle of another, without his or her consent, any stink bomb or device, irritant or offensive-smelling substance with the intent to interfere with another's use or enjoyment of the land, building or vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense that a peace officer in the performance of his or her duties reasonably used a noxious substance. (Ord. 18-1994 §4-310; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-5-110. - Theft. 
    It is unlawful for a person to commit theft. A person commits theft when he or she knowingly obtains or exercises control over anything of another without authorization or by threat or deception when the value of the thing is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and he or she: 
(1)  Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value; or 
(2)  Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value in such manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; or 
(3)  Uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value intending that such use, concealment or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use and benefit; or 
(4)  Demands any consideration to which he or she is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person. (Ord. 18-1994 §4-201; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 8-2013 , § 1, 6-25-13) 
Sec. 10-5-120. - Theft of rental property. 
    It is unlawful for a person to commit theft of rental property. A person commits theft of rental property if he or she: 
(1)  Obtains the temporary use of personal property of another, which is available only for hire, by means of threat or deception or knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the personal property; 
(2)  Having lawfully obtained possession for temporary use of the personal property of another which is available only for hire, knowingly fails to reveal the whereabouts of or to return the property to the owner thereof or his or her representative or to the person from whom he or she has received it within seventy-two (72) hours after the time at which he or she agreed to return it; and 
(3)  The value of the property involved is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 8-2013 , § 1, 6-25-13) 
Sec. 10-5-130. - Theft by receiving. 
    It is unlawful to commit theft by receiving. A person commits theft by receiving when he or she receives, retains, loans money by pawn or pledge on or disposes of anything of value of another, knowing or believing that said thing of value has been stolen, and when he or she intends to deprive the lawful owner permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value, where the value of such thing is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 18-1994 §4-204; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 8-2013 , § 1, 6-25-13) 
Sec. 10-5-140. - Obtaining control over any stolen thing of value. 
    Every person who obtains control over any stolen thing of value, knowing the thing of value to have been stolen by another, may be-tried, convicted and punished whether or not the principal is charged, tried or convicted. (Ord. 18-1994 §4-202) 
Sec. 10-5-150. - Concealment of goods. 
    If any person willfully conceals unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise valued at less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or other mercantile establishment, whether the concealment is on his or her own person or otherwise and whether on or off the premises of the store or mercantile establishment, such concealment constitutes prima facie evidence that the person intended to commit the crime of theft. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 8-2013 , § 1, 6-25-13) 
Sec. 10-5-160. - Motor vehicle theft. 
    It is unlawful to commit motor vehicle theft. A person who knowingly obtains or exercises control over the motor vehicle of another without authorization or by threat or deception commits motor vehicle theft. (Ord. 18-1994 §4-203; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-5-170. - Tampering and unauthorized connection. 
(a)  It is unlawful to commit tampering and unauthorized connection. 
(1)  Any person who connects any pipe, tube, stopcock, wire, cord, socket, motor or other instrument or contrivance with any main, service pipe or other medium conducting or supplying gas, water or electricity to any building without the knowledge and consent of the person supplying such gas, water or electricity commits tampering and unauthorized connection. 
(2)  Any person who in any manner alters, obstructs or interferes with the action of any meter provided for measuring or registering the quantity of gas, water or electricity passing through said meter without the knowledge and consent of the person owning said meter commits tampering and unauthorized connection. 
(b)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to apply to any licensed electrical or plumbing contractor while performing usual and ordinary services in accordance with recognized customs and standards. (Ord. 18-1994 §4-305; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-5-180. - Second degree criminal tampering. 
    Except as provided in Subsection 10-5-170(b), a person commits the crime of second degree criminal tampering if he or she tampers with property of another with intent to cause injury, inconvenience or annoyance to that person or to another, or if he or she knowingly makes unauthorized connection with property of a utility. (Ord. 18-1994 §4-304) 
Sec. 10-5-190. - Fourth degree arson. 
    A person who knowingly or recklessly starts or maintains a fire or causes an explosion, on his or her own property or that of another, and by so doing places any building or occupied structure of another in danger of damage commits fourth degree arson. (Ord. 18-1994 §4-101) 
ARTICLE 6 - Public Peace, Order and Decency 

Sec. 10-6-10. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  A person commits disorderly conduct if he or she intentionally, knowingly or recklessly: 
(1)  Makes a coarse and obviously offensive utterance, gesture or display in a public place and the utterance, gesture or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(2)  Abuses or threatens a person in a public place in an obviously offensive manner; 
(3)  Makes unreasonable noise in a public place or near a private residence that he or she has no right to occupy; 
(4)  Fights with another in a public place except in an amateur or professional contest of athletic skill; 
(5)  Not being a peace officer, displays a deadly weapon in a public place except when engaged in lawful target practice or hunting; or 
(6)  Not being a peace officer, displays a deadly weapon in a public place in a manner calculated to alarm. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(2) of this Section that the actor had significant provocation for his or her abusive or threatening conduct. (Ord. 18-1994 §9-101; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-6-20. - Disrupting lawful assembly. 
    It is unlawful to commit disrupting lawful assembly. A person commits disrupting lawful assembly if, intending to prevent or disrupt any lawful meeting, procession or gathering, he or she significantly obstructs or interferes with the meeting, procession or gathering by physical action, verbal utterance or any other means. (Ord. 18-1994 §9-102; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-6-30. - Harassment. 
(a)  A person commits harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, he or she: 
(1)  Strikes, shoves, kicks or otherwise touches a person or subjects him or her to physical contact; 
(2)  In a public place directs obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to or at another person; 
(3)  Follows a person in or about a public place; 
(4)  Initiates communication with a person, anonymously or otherwise by telephone, in a manner intended to harass or threaten bodily injury or property damage, or makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal by telephone which is obscene; 
(5)  Makes a telephone call or causes a telephone to ring repeatedly, whether or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate conversation; 
(6)  Makes repeated communications at inconvenient hours that invade the privacy of another and interfere in the use and enjoyment of another's home or private residence or other private property; or 
(7)  Repeatedly insults, taunts or challenges another in a manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response. 
(b)  As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires, obscene means a patently offensive description of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not said ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus or excretory functions. 
(c)  Any act prohibited by Subparagraph (a)(4) above may be deemed to have occurred or to have been committed at the place at which the telephone call was either made or received. (Ord. 18-1994 §9-103; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-6-40. - Loitering. 
(a)  The word loiter means to be dilatory, to stand idly around, to linger, delay or wander about, or to remain, abide or tarry in a public place. 
(b)  A person commits a Class 1 petty offense, if he or she: 
(1)  Resrved; 
(2)  Loiters for the purpose of unlawful gambling with cards, dice or other gambling paraphernalia; 
(3)  Loiters for the purpose of engaging or soliciting another person to engage in prostitution or deviate sexual intercourse; 
(4)  With intent to interfere with or disrupt the school program or with intent to interfere with or endanger schoolchildren, loiters in a school building or on school grounds or within one hundred (100) feet of school grounds when persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present in the building or on the grounds, not having any reason or relationship involving custody of, or responsibility for, a pupil or any other specific, legitimate reason for being there, and having been asked to leave by a school administrator or his or her representative or by a peace officer; or 
(5)  Loiters with one (1) or more persons for the purpose of unlawfully using or possession of a controlled substance, as defined in Section 10-8-10 of this Chapter. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense that the defendant's acts were lawful and he or she was exercising his or her rights of lawful assembly as a part of peaceful and orderly petition for the redress of grievance, either in the course of labor disputes or otherwise. (Ord. 18-1994 §9-104; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 12-2018 , 9-11-18) 
Sec. 10-6-50. - Throwing stones or missiles. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly project any missile at or against any vehicle or equipment designed for the transportation of persons or property. 
(b)  No person shall throw or shoot any stone or other missile at or upon any person, animal, public or private property, building, structure, tree or shrub. (Ord. 18-1994 §9-107; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-6-60. - Reckless endangerment. 
    It is unlawful to commit reckless endangerment. A person who recklessly engages in conduct which creates a substantial risk of serious bodily injury to another person commits reckless endangerment. (Ord. 18-1994 §3-102; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-6-70. - False imprisonment. 
    It is unlawful to commit false imprisonment. Any person who knowingly confines or detains another without the other's consent and without proper legal authority commits false imprisonment. This Section shall not apply to a peace officer acting in good faith within the scope of his or her duties. (Ord. 18-1994 §3-103; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-6-80. - Menacing. 
    It is unlawful to commit menacing. A person commits the crime of menacing if, by any threat or physical action, he or she knowingly places or attempts to place another person in fear of imminent serious bodily injury. (Ord. 18-1994 §3-101; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-6-90. - Assault. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of assault if he or she intentionally, knowingly or recklessly causes bodily injury to another; except that this provision shall not apply if such bodily injury is inflicted by means of a deadly weapon. 
(b)  It is unlawful to assault, beat, strike, wound, imprison or inflict violence on another. (Ord. 18-1994 §3-104; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-6-100. - False alarms. 
    It is unlawful for any person to intentionally make or give a false alarm of fire shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-6-110. - Storage of flammable liquids. 
    It is unlawful to store or cause to be stored or parked, except for delivery, any tank vehicle carrying flammable liquids or gases upon any streets, ways or avenues of the Town or in any other part of the Town, except those areas zoned for such uses. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-6-120. - Explosives. 
    It is unlawful for any person to store within the Town limits or within one (1) mile thereof any amount of gunpowder, blasting powder, nitroglycerine, dynamite or other high explosive in excess of one (1) fifty-pound box or in excess of five hundred (500) caps or other devices used for the detonation of such high explosives. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-6-130. - Abandoned containers and appliances. 
    It is unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, structure or dwelling under his or her control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator, washer, dryer, freezer or other container or appliance which has a door, lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing said door, lid, snap lock or other locking device. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-6-140. - Fraud by check. 
(a)  As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Check means a written, unconditional order to pay a certain sum in money, drawn on a bank, payable on demand and signed by the drawer. Check, for the purposes of this Section only, also includes a negotiable order of withdrawal and a share draft. 
    Drawee means the bank upon which a check is drawn or a bank, savings and loan association, industrial bank or credit union on which a negotiable order of withdrawal or a share draft is drawn. 
    Drawer means a person, either real or fictitious, whose name appears on a check as the primary obligor, whether the actual signature is that of himself or herself or of a person authorized to draw the check on himself or herself. 
    Insufficient funds means not having a sufficient balance in account with a bank or other drawee for the payment of a check or order when the check or order is presented for payment and it remains unpaid thirty (30) days after such presentment. A check dishonored for "no account" shall also be deemed to be dishonored for insufficient funds. 
    Issue. A person issues a check when he or she makes, draws, delivers or passes it or causes it to be made, drawn, delivered or passed. 
    Negotiable order of withdrawal and share draft means negotiable or transferable instruments drawn on a negotiable order of withdrawal account or a share draft account, as the case may be, for the purpose of making payments to third persons or otherwise. 
    Negotiable order of withdrawal account means an account in a bank, savings and loan association or industrial bank, and share draft account means an account in a credit union, on which payment of interest or dividends may be made on a deposit with respect to which the bank, savings and loan association, industrial bank or credit union, as the case may be, may require the depositor to give notice of an intended withdrawal not less than thirty (30) days before the withdrawal is made, even though in practice such notice is not required and the depositor is allowed to make withdrawal by negotiable order of withdrawal or share draft. 
(b)  A person commits fraud by check, which is unlawful, if he or she issues or passes a check or similar sight order for the payment of money for a sum less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the payment of services, wages, salary, commissions, labor, rent, money, property or other thing of value, knowing that the issuer does not have sufficient funds in or on deposit with the bank or other drawee for the payment in full of the check or order as well as all other checks or orders outstanding at the time of issuance. 
(c)  Any person, having acquired rights with respect to a check which is not paid because the drawer has insufficient funds, shall have standing to file a complaint under this Section, whether or not he or she is the payee, holder or bearer of the check. 
(d)  Any person who opens a checking account, negotiable order of withdrawal account or share draft account using false identification or an assumed name for the purpose of issuing fraudulent checks commits fraud by check, which is unlawful. 
(e)  This ordinance does not relieve the prosecution from the necessity of establishing the required knowledge by evidence. However, for purposes of this Section, the issuer's knowledge of insufficient funds is presumed, except in the case of a postdated check or order, if: 
(1)  He or she has no account upon which the check or order is drawn with the bank or other drawee at the time he or she issues the check or order; or 
(2)  He or she has insufficient funds upon deposit with the bank or other drawee to pay the check or order, on presentation within thirty days after issuance. 
(f)  If deferred prosecution is ordered, the court as a condition of supervision may require the defendant to make restitution on all checks issued by the defendant which are unpaid as of the date of commencement of the supervision in addition to other terms and conditions appropriate for the treatment or rehabilitation of the defendant. 
(g)  A bank savings and loan association, industrial bank or credit union shall not be civilly or criminally liable for releasing information relating to the issuer's account to a sheriff, deputy sheriff, undersheriff, police officer, district attorney, assistant district attorney, deputy district attorney or authorized investigator for a district attorney investigating or prosecuting a charge under this Section. (Ord. 18-1994 §5-201; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-6-150. - Unlawfully using slugs. 
(a)  A person commits unlawfully using slugs if: 
(1)  With intent to defraud the vendor of property or a service sold by means of a coin machine, he or she knowingly inserts, deposits or uses a slug in such machine or causes the machine to be operated by any other unauthorized means; or 
(2)  He or she makes, possesses or disposes of a slug or slugs with intent to enable a person to use it or them fraudulently in a coin machine. 
(b)  Slug means any object or article which, by virtue of its size, shape or any other quality, is capable of being inserted, deposited or otherwise used in a coin machine as an improper but effective substitute for a genuine coin, bill or token and of thereby enabling a person to obtain without valid consideration the property or service sold through the machine. (Ord. 18-1994 §5-101) 
Sec. 10-6-160. - Public indecency; public urination. 
(a)  It is unlawful to commit public indecency. Any person who performs any of the following in a public place or where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public commits public indecency: 
(1)  An act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse; 
(2)  A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of any person; or 
(3)  A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person. 
(b)  No person shall urinate or defecate while in any park within the Town limits, or on any property zoned for residential uses without the express permission of the owner, or within any portion of the Town zoned for business, industrial or public uses, unless such voiding is made into a receptacle that has been provided for that purpose that stores or disposes of the wastes in a sanitary manner and that is enclosed from the view of the general public. (Ord. 18-1994 §9-109; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-6-170. - Indecent exposure. 
    It is unlawful to commit indecent exposure. A person commits indecent exposure if he or she knowingly exposes his or her genitals to the view of any person under circumstances in which such conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm to the other person. (Ord. 18-1994 §7-101; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-6-180. - Fireworks, explosives and firearms. 
(a)  The maintenance, sale, purchase, transfer, gift, detonation or use of any form of fireworks is prohibited in the Town. This subsection shall not be held to prohibit exhibitions of fireworks given under the authority of the Town on July 4, or any public holiday, at any public park or other area in the Town or the possession, transfer or gift (other than by sale) or ignition of dipped sticks and sparklers, the total pyrotechnic composition of which does not exceed one hundred (100) grams, of which the composition of any chlorate or perchlorate shall not exceed five (5) grams shall not be prohibited by the terms of this section between the June 30 and July 5 th of each year when the party possessing or igniting such is over the age of sixteen years or is under supervision of a person over the age of sixteen years. 
(b)  The firing of any cannon, gun or BB gun or firearm of any description, or the exploding of any fire cracker, roman candle, rocket or other thing containing powder or other combustible material is hereby prohibited within the Town, except by law enforcement or authorized Town employees and further except that permission may be granted by the Town Administrator for the shooting of BB or air guns for the removal and elimination of doves, sparrows, pigeons or other birds or animals that may become nuisances, but the killing of which is not contrary to Federal or State laws which permit shall be limited as to person, time and place by the Town Administrator. 
(c)  Except when occurring in events approved by the Town Administrator/Clerk or Town Board with appropriate supervision, the shooting of bows and arrows and sling shots is hereby prohibited within the Town. 
(d)  The term "Fireworks" shall include any composition or device designed to produce a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, and that meets the definition of articles pyrotechnic, permissible fireworks, or display fireworks as defined by Colorado Law, including at 12-28-101 (1), (1.5) and (8), C.R.S. 
(Ord. No. 11-2008 , 7-22-08; Ord. No. 7-2011 , 6-14-11; Ord. No. 13-2016 , 6-14-16) 
ARTICLE 7 - Minors 

Sec. 10-7-10. - Child abuse. 
(a)  A person commits child abuse if he or she causes an injury to a child's life or health or permits a child to be unreasonably placed in a situation which poses a threat of injury to the child's life or health. 
(b)  In this Section, child means a person under the age of sixteen (16) years. 
(c)  The statutory privilege between patient and physician and between husband and wife shall not be available for excluding or refusing testimony in any prosecution for a violation of this Section. 
(d)  No person, other than the perpetrator, complicitor, co-conspirator or accessory, who reports an instance of child abuse to law enforcement officials shall be subjected to criminal or civil liability for any consequence of making such report unless he or she knows at the time of making it that it is untrue. 
(e)  Deferred prosecution is authorized for a first offense under this Section. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-201; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-7-20. - Encouraging delinquency. 
    It is unlawful for any person, by any act or neglect, to encourage, aid or cause a child to come within the purview of the juvenile authorities, and it shall likewise be unlawful for any person, after notice that a driver's license of any child has been suspended or revoked, to permit such child to operate a motor vehicle during the period that such driver's license is suspended. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-7-30. - False statement; false credentials. 
    It is unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to make false statements, to furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or false registration card, identification card, note or other document for any unlawful purpose, or to furnish, present or exhibit such document or documents issued to a person other than the one presenting the same for the purpose of gaining admission to prohibited places for the purpose of procuring the sale, gift or delivery of prohibited articles, including beer, liquor, wine or fermented malt beverages as defined in this Chapter. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-7-40. - Services of others. 
    It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to engage or utilize the services of any other person, whether for remuneration or not, to procure any article which the minor is forbidden by law to purchase. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-7-50. - Loitering and other acts around schools. 
    It is unlawful for any person to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in, about or on any public, private or parochial school, college or seminary grounds or buildings, either on foot or in or on any vehicle, without having some lawful business therein or thereabout or in connection with such school or the employees thereof, or for any person to: 
(1)  Annoy, disturb or otherwise prevent the orderly conduct of classes and activities of any such school; 
(2)  Annoy, disturb, assault or molest any student or employee of any such school, college or seminary while in any such school building or on any school grounds; 
(3)  Conduct himself, or herself in a lewd, wanton or lascivious manner in speech or behavior in or about any school building or school grounds; or 
(4)  Park or move a vehicle in the immediate vicinity of or on the grounds of any such school, college or seminary for the purpose of annoying or molesting the students or employees thereof or in an effort to induce, entice or invite students into such vehicles for immoral purposes. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-7-60. - Curfew. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having care or custody of any child under the age of eighteen (18) years to allow or permit any such child to loiter or remain upon any street, alley or other public place, on foot or in or upon a vehicle, subsequent to the hour of 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday, and 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday, or prior to 6:00 a.m. Sunday through Saturday, except for lawful employment, school, church or other organized activity, or unless such child is accompanied by the parent, guardian or other person of the age of twenty-one (21) years having permission of the parent or guardian to have the custody or care of such child. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any child under the age of eighteen (18) years to loiter or remain upon any street, alley or public place, on foot or within or upon a vehicle, subsequent to the hour of 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday, and 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday, or prior to 6:00 a.m. Sunday through Saturday, except for lawful employment, school, church or other organized activity, or unless such child is accompanied by the parent, guardian or other person of the age of twenty-one (21) years having permission of the parent or guardian to have the custody or care of such child. 
(c)  Any person found guilty of violating this Section shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) but not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-301; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-7-70. - Prohibition of sale to or possession of tobacco products by minors. 
(a)  No person shall, within the Town give, sell, distribute or offer for sale to any person who is under eighteen years of age any cigarettes or tobacco products. 
(b)  No person under eighteen years of age shall, within the Town, possess any cigarettes or tobacco products. 
(c)  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  "Cigarette" shall have the same meaning as set forth in § 39-28-202(4), C.R.S. 
(2)  "Possession" means that a person: 
a.  Has or holds any amount of cigarettes or tobacco products anywhere on his or her person; 
b.  Owns or has custody of cigarettes or tobacco products; or 
c.  Has cigarettes or tobacco products within his or her immediate presence and control. 
(3)  "Tobacco product" shall have the same meaning as set forth in § 18-13-121(5), C.R.S. 
(d)  Violations. Section 10-1-40 of the Town Code is amended to provide that a violation of the forgoing section 10-7-50 shall be a noncriminal violation. 
(Ord. No. 15-2008 , 10-28-08) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 15-2008 , adopted October 28, 2008, set out provisions intended for use as § 10-7-50. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 10-7-70. 
ARTICLE 8 - Alcoholic Beverages and Drugs 

Sec. 10-8-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Section, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed hereafter: 
    Alcoholic beverages or alcoholic liquors means malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
    Controlled substance means a drug or other substance or an immediate precursor which is declared to be a controlled substance under this Article and also includes marijuana, marijuana concentrate and cocaine. 
    Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing, injecting, investing, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state law. Drug paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances under circumstances in violation of state law; 
b.  Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
c.  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana; 
d.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
e.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
f.  Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; or 
g.  Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
1.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls; 
2.  Water pipes; 
3.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
4.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
5.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
6.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine veils; 
7.  Chamber pipes; 
8.  Carburetor pipes; 
9.  Electric pipes; 
10.  Air-driven pipes; 
11.  Chillums; 
12.  Bongs; or 
13.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
    Establishment means a business, firm, enterprise, service or fraternal organization, club, institution, entity, group or residence, and any real property, including buildings and improvements connected therewith and including any members, employees and occupants associated therewith. 
    Ethyl alcohol means any substance which is or contains ethyl alcohol. 
    Fermented malt beverage means any beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any similar product or any combination thereof in water containing not less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) and not more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight. 
    In public means: 
a.  In or upon any public highway, street, alley, walk, parking lot, building, park or other public property or place, whether in a vehicle or not; 
b.  In or upon those portions of any private property upon which the public has an express or implied license to enter or remain; or 
c.  In or upon any other private property without the express or implied permission of the owner or person in possession and control of such property or such person's agent. 
    Malt liquors includes beer and shall be construed to mean any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination thereof, in water containing more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) of alcohol by weight. 
    Opened container means any container other than an original closed container as sealed or closed for sale to the public by the manufacturer or bottler of the liquor or beverage. If an original container has been unsealed, undone or opened in any manner, it is an opened container for purposes of this Section. 
    Possession of ethyl alcohol means that a person has or holds any amount of ethyl alcohol anywhere on his person, or that a person owns or has custody of ethyl alcohol, or has ethyl alcohol within his immediate presence and control. 
    Private property means any dwelling and its curtilage which is being used by a natural person or natural persons for habitation and which is not open to the public, and privately owned real property which is not open to the public. Private property does not include: 
a.  Any establishment which has or is required to have a license pursuant to Articles 46, 47 or 48 of Title 12, C.R.S.; 
b.  Any establishment which sells ethyl alcohol or upon which ethyl alcohol is sold; or 
c.  Any establishment which leases, rents or provides accommodations to members of the public generally. 
    Public place means any place commonly or usually open to the general public or to which members of the general public may resort, or accessible to members of the general public. By way of illustration, such public places include but are not limited to public ways, streets, buildings, sidewalks, alleys, parking lots, shopping centers, shopping center malls, places of business usually open to the general public, and automobiles or other vehicles in or upon any such place or places, but shall not include the interior or enclosed yard area of private homes, residences, condominiums or apartments. 
    Spirituous liquors means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation, mixed with water and other substances in solution, and includes among other things brandy, rum, whiskey, gin and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing at least one-half of one percent (0.5%) alcohol and which is fit for use for beverage purposes. Any liquid or solid containing beer or wine in combination with any other liquor except malt liquors and vinous liquors shall be construed to be spirituous liquor. 
    Vinous liquors means wine and fortified wines which contain not less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) and not more than twenty-one percent (21%) of alcohol by volume and shall be construed to mean alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar contents of fruits or other agricultural products containing sugar. (Ord. 18-1994 §§6-101, 11-101, 11-102, 11-106, 11-107, 11-108 and 11-404; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-8-20. - License to manufacture, sell. 
    It is unlawful for any person to manufacture for sale, sell, barter, trade or offer to do so any fermented malt beverage without first having obtained a license therefor in accordance with state law. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-102) 
Sec. 10-8-30. - Conduct of alcohol-selling establishments. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Lewd or indecent displays means performing acts of or acts which simulate: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals; 
c.  The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals; or 
d.  The displaying of the post-pubertal human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola or the displaying of the post-pubertal human female breast where the nipple only, or the nipple and areola only, are covered. 
    Nudity means uncovered or less than opaquely covered post-pubertal human genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only, or the nipple and the areola only, are covered. 
(b)  Generally. Each licensee shall conduct his or her establishment in a decent, orderly and respectable manner and shall not permit within or upon the licensed premises the loitering of habitual drunkards or intoxicated persons, lewd or indecent displays, profanity, rowdiness, undue noise or other disturbance or activity offensive to the senses of the average citizen or to the residents of the neighborhood in which the establishment is located. 
(c)  Begging drinks or beverages. No licensee, manager or agent shall permit, upon any licensed on-sale premises, anyone to loiter in or about the premises for the purpose of begging and soliciting any patron or customer of or visitor in such premises to purchase any drinks or beverages, of any type or nature whatsoever, for the one soliciting or begging. 
(d)  Consumption when sale unlawful. No licensee shall permit the consumption of malt, vinous or spirituous beverages or fermented malt beverages on the licensed premises at any time when the sale of such beverages is prohibited by laws. 
(e)  Employee solicitation of drinks or beverages. No licensee, manager or agent shall employ or permit, upon any liquor licensed onsale premises, any employee waiter, waitress, entertainer, host or hostess to mingle with patrons and personally beg, procure or solicit the purchase or sale of drinks or beverages for the use of the one begging, procuring or soliciting, or for the use of any other employee. 
(f)  Gambling. No licensee for the sale of spirituous, vinous or malt beverages or fermented malt beverages shall install, maintain or operate, or permit the installation, maintenance or operation of, within or upon the licensed premises, any gambling table, establishment, device, machine, apparatus or other thing contrary to this Article or to the laws of the State, or which is kept or used for the purpose of gambling, either directly or indirectly. This Article shall not be construed to prohibit the use of bona fide amusement devices which do not and cannot be adjusted to pay anything of value, and which may not be used for gambling, directly or indirectly, and for the scoring, achievement, use or operation of which no prize, reward or thing of value is offered or paid by any person. 
(g)  Nudity. No licensee for retail sale by the drink of spirituous, vinous or malt beverages or fermented malt beverages shall permit any person or persons to appear in a state of nudity within or upon the premises. 
(h)  Showing depictions of prohibited acts. No licensee for retail sale by the drink of spirituous, vinous or malt beverages or fermented malt beverages shall permit the showing of film, still pictures, electronic reproductions or other visual reproductions depicting any act or live performance prohibited by this Article. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-108; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-8-40. - Disturbances. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any licensee to permit any disturbance, undue noise or unlawful or disorderly act or conduct by any person or group of persons upon the premises. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any licensee, in any manner, to encourage or participate in any disturbance or unlawful act or disorderly conduct upon the premises; provided, however, that such licensee may use such lawful means as may be proper to protect his or her property or person from damage or injury. 
(c)  Any licensee shall immediately report to the police authority of the Town any unlawful or disorderly act, disorderly conduct or disturbance committed on the premises. Failure to so report shall be a violation of this Section. 
(d)  It shall not be a defense that the licensee was not personally present on the premises at the time of any violation of this Section, provided, however, that an agent, servant or employee of the licensee shall not be liable under this Section when absent from the premises while not on duty. (Prior code 3.04.23; Ord. 18-1994 §11-109; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-8-50. - Display of cards. 
    Every licensee of a place where fermented malt beverages are sold shall display at all times in a prominent place a printed card, with a minimum height of fourteen (14) inches and a width of eleven (11) inches, with each letter to be of a minimum height of one-half (1/2) inch, which shall read as follows: 
WARNING 
WELLINGTON LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITIES MUST BE NOTIFIED OF ALL DISTURBANCES IN THIS ESTABLISHMENT. 
(Prior code 3.04.23) 
Sec. 10-8-60. - Possession and consumption in public. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to consume, sell or serve within the Town limits any malt, vinous or spirituous liquors in or upon any street, alley, highway, public way and/or public building, except that this provision shall not apply to any place duly licensed pursuant to this Section for the sale of such liquors. 
(b)  Except as provided in Section 10-8-120 of this Article, no person within the Town limits shall possess an opened container of or consume any malt, vinous or spirituous liquor or fermented malt beverage in public, except upon premises licensed for consumption of the liquor or beverage involved. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge of violating this Section that the premises were licensed by the Town or by the State for the consumption of the liquor or beverage involved, and any judge shall take judicial notice of the official records of such license and dismiss forthwith any charge to which this defense applies. If such dismissal is ex parte, the judge shall notify the Town Attorney, who may petition the court for permission to refile the charge. 
(d)  It is a specific defense to a charge of violating this Section that: 
(1)  The owner of the property involved or the owner's agent gave express permission to the accused or to members of the accused's class to perform the acts complained of; or 
(2)  The accused was transporting the liquor or beverage from one (1) place where it could be lawfully consumed directly and without delay to another such place, and the container was at all times during the transportation capped, corked or otherwise reclosed with a firmly affixed waterproof lid. When the liquor or beverage was being transported in a motor vehicle, this defense is only available if the container was in the trunk or was not otherwise immediately accessible to the driver or any passenger. (Prior code 3.04.08; Ord. 18-1994 §11-107; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-8-70. - Sale of malt, vinous, spirituous liquors. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any licensed person to sell at retail fermented malt beverage, malt, vinous or spirituous liquors to any person under the age of twenty-one years, to a habitual drunkard or to an intoxicated person, or to permit any fermented malt beverage, malt or vinous liquors to be sold or dispensed by a person under eighteen (18) years of age, or spirituous liquors to be sold or dispensed by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age, or to permit any such person to participate in the sale or dispensing thereof. If a person who, in fact, is not twenty-one (21) years of age exhibits a fraudulent proof of age, any action relying on such fraudulent proof of age shall not constitute grounds for the revocation or suspension of any license issued under this Section. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person licensed to sell, serve or distribute any malt, vinous or spirituous liquors at any time other than the following: 
(1)  For consumption on the premises, on any Monday through Saturday and on any Sunday which falls on December 31, beginning each day at 12:00 midnight until 2:00 a.m. and from 7:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight; 
(2)  For consumption on the premises, on any Sunday, other than any Sunday which falls on a December 31, and on Christmas, beginning at 12:00 midnight until 2:00 a.m. and from 8:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m.; 
(3)  Notwithstanding Subparagraphs (1) and (2) of this Section, for consumption on the premises on the day following Christmas, beginning at 7:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight; or 
(4)  Notwithstanding hotel and restaurant licensees, beer and wine licensees, tavern licensees, club licensees and arts licensees, upon the payment of an additional annual fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to the local licensing authority, must have obtained a special license to sell, serve or distribute malt, vinous and spirituous liquors by the drink after the hour of 8:00 p.m. and until 12:00 midnight on any Sunday other than a Sunday which falls on a December 31, and Christmas. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-103; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-8-80. - Alcohol-related violations. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to represent himself or herself to be over the age of twenty-one (21) years for the purpose of purchasing within the Town any fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to attempt to purchase, purchase or obtain, either directly or through an intermediary, any fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by misrepresentation or any other means. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to possess or consume, whether actual or constructive, fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
(d)  It is unlawful to sell fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, or to permit any fermented malt beverage, malt or vinous liquors to be sold or dispensed by a person under eighteen (18) years of age, or spirituous liquors to be sold or dispensed by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age, or to permit any such person to participate in the sale or dispensing thereof. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person, whether for remuneration or not, to procure for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age any fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
(f)  It is unlawful in any place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed upon the premises, for any person to beg or to solicit any patron or customer of or visitor in such premises to purchase any alcoholic beverage for the one begging or soliciting. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-104; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-8-90. - Illegal possession or consumption by an underage person. 
(a)  Any person under twenty-one (21) years of age who possesses or consumes ethyl alcohol anywhere in the State commits illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person. Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person is a strict liability offense. 
(b)  Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person is a Class 2 petty offense and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). The court, upon sentencing a defendant pursuant to this paragraph, may, in addition to any fine, order that the defendant perform up to twenty-four (24) hours of useful public service, subject to the conditions and restrictions of Section 18-1.3-507, C.R.S., and may further order that the defendant submit to and complete an alcohol education program or an alcohol treatment program at such defendant's own expense. The penalty assessment provisions of Section 18-1.3-503, C.R.S., shall not apply to any charge under this Section. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the offense described in Subsection (a) above that the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age under the following circumstances: 
(1)  While such person was legally upon private property with the knowledge and consent of the owner or legal possessor of such private property, and the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed with the consent of his or her parent or legal guardian who was present during such possession or consumption; 
(2)  When the existence of ethyl alcohol in a person's body was due solely to the ingestion of a confectionery which contained ethyl alcohol within the limits prescribed by Section 25-5-410(1)(i)(II), C.R.S., or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed or intended primarily for a purpose other than oral human ingestion, or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed or intended solely for medicinal or hygienic purposes, or solely from the ingestion of a beverage which contained less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of ethyl alcohol by weight. 
(d)  The possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol shall not constitute a violation of this Section if such possession or consumption takes place for religious purposes protected by the first amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(e)  Prima facie evidence of a violation of Subsection (a) above shall consist of: 
(1)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and possessed or consumed ethyl alcohol anywhere in this State; or 
(2)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with ethyl alcohol intoxication or impairment while present anywhere in this State. 
(f)  During any trial for a violation of Subsection (a) above, any bottle, can or any other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can or other container shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can or other container were composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can or other container as "beer," "ale," "malt beverage," "fermented malt beverage," "malt liquor," "wine," "champagne," "whiskey" or "whisky," "gin," "vodka," "tequila," "schnapps," "brandy," "cognac," "liqueur," "cordial," "alcohol" or "liquor" shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can or other container was composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. 
(g)  A parent or legal guardian of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age or any natural person who has the permission of such parent or legal guardian, may give or permit the possession and consumption of ethyl alcohol to or by a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years under the conditions described in Subsection (c)(1) above. This Subsection shall not be construed to permit any establishment which is or is required to be licensed pursuant to Articles 46, 47 or 48 of Title 12, C.R.S., or any members, employees or occupants of any such establishment to give, provide, make available or sell ethyl alcohol to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-106; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-8-100. - Alcoholic beverages in certain places. 
(a)  No person shall carry or have any open containers of alcoholic beverages on any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place, in any automobile or on the grounds or in the facilities of any public or private school, college or university except where authorized by the governing authority of such institution. 
(b)  No person shall drink any alcoholic beverages in or on any of the above enumerated places. 
(c)  The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply to any place duly licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-8-110. - Open containers; permits. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to serve, consume or have any open container or keg of alcoholic beverage or fermented malt beverage in any municipal park in the Town, or any other public place, except by permit. 
(b)  Organized groups and family gatherings may obtain a one-day permit for 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, excepting the prohibitions of Subsection (a) above and regulations contained in this Article, by making application for same, with payment of the required fee to the Town Administrator/Clerk at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such use. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to possess or consume by open container any alcoholic beverage, whether such possession is actual or constructive, in any public place as defined in Section 10-8-10 of this Chapter, upon property owned, operated, leased or maintained by the State or any political subdivision or agency thereof, or upon property owned, operated, leased or maintained by the Town; provided, however, that it shall not be a violation of this provision to store or consume any alcoholic beverage in conformance with, and pursuant to the terms of, any validly issued permit or license. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-404; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-8-120. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  A person commits possession of drug paraphernalia if he or she possesses drug paraphernalia and knows or reasonably should know that the drug paraphernalia could be used under circumstances in violation of state law. 
(b)  Any person who commits possession of drug paraphernalia commits a Class 2 petty offense. 
(c)  In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the Court, in its discretion, may consider, in addition to all other relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
(2)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
(3)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; and 
(4)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the knowledge of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, or evidence that such person reasonably should know, that it will be delivered to persons who he or she knows or reasonably should know, could use the object to facilitate a violation of state law. (Ord. 18-1994 §6-102; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-8-130. - Possession of marijuana. 
(a)  Cannabis or marijuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or its resin, but does not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from its stalks, oil or cake or the sterilized seed of such plant, which is incapable of germination. The term cannabis concentrate means hashish, tetrahydrocannabinols or any alkaloid, salt derivative, preparation, compound or mixture, whether natural or synthesized, of tetrahydrocannabinols. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to possess not more than one (1) ounce of cannabis or cannabis concentrate, and upon conviction thereof, or plea of guilty or no contest thereto, punishment shall not be by imprisonment, but shall be by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  It is unlawful openly and publicly to display or consume not more than one (1) ounce of cannabis concentrate, and upon conviction thereof, or a plea of guilty or no contest thereto, punishment shall be as set out in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(d)  The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any person who possesses or uses cannabis or cannabis concentrate pursuant to Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution and applicable Colorado Law or the Dangerous Drugs Therapeutic Research Act. (Ord. 18-1994 §6-201; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 6-2010 , § 1(B), 7-13-10) 
Sec. 10-8-140. - Abusing toxic vapors. 
(a)  As used in this Section, the term toxic vapors means the following substances or products containing such substances: alcohols, including methyl, isopropyl, propyl or butyl; aliphatic acetates, including ethyl, methyl, propyl or methyl cellosolve acetate; acetone; benzene; carbon tetrachloride; cyclohexane; Freons, including Freon 11 and Freon 12; hexane; methyl ethyl ketone; methyl isobutyl ketone; naphtha; perchlorethylene; toluene; trichloroethane or xylene. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly smell or inhale the fumes of toxic vapors for the purpose of causing a condition of euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulled senses of the nervous system. No person shall knowingly possess, buy or use any such substance for the purposes described in this Section. This Subsection shall not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person knowingly to sell, offer for sale, deliver or give away to any other person any substance or product releasing toxic vapors, where the seller, offeror or deliverer knows or has reason to believe that such substance will be used for the purpose of inducing a condition of euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulled senses of the nervous system. 
(d)  In a prosecution for a violation of this Section, evidence that a container lists one (1) or more of the substances described in Subsection (a) above as one (1) of its ingredients shall be prima facie evidence that the substance in such container contains toxic vapors and emits the fumes thereof. (Ord. 18-1994 §6-301; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 9 - Weapons 

Sec. 10-9-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Ballistic knife means any knife that has a blade which is forcefully projected from the handle by means of a spring-loaded device or explosive charge. 
    Blackjack includes any billy, sand club, sandbag or other hand-operated striking weapon consisting, at the striking end, of an encased piece of lead or other heavy substance and, at the handle end, a strap or springy shaft which increases the force of impact. 
    Bomb means any explosive or incendiary device or Molotov cocktail as defined in Section 9-7-103, C.R.S., or any chemical device which causes or can cause an explosion, which is not specifically designed for lawful and legitimate use in the hands of its possessor. 
    Deadly weapon means any of the following which in the manner it is used or intended to be used is capable of producing death or serious bodily injury: 
a.  A firearm, whether loaded or unloaded; 
b.  A knife; 
c.  A bludgeon; or 
d.  Any other weapon, device, instrument, material, or substance, whether animate or inanimate. 
    Firearm silencer means any instrument, attachment, weapon or appliance for causing the firing of any gun, revolver, pistol or other firearm to be silent or intended to lessen or muffle the noise of the firing of any such weapon. 
    Gas gun means a device designed for projecting gas-filled projectiles which release their contents after having been projected from the device and includes projectiles designed for use in such device. 
    Gravity knife means any knife that has a blade released from the handle or sheath thereof by the force of gravity or the application of centrifugal force that, when released, is locked in place by means of a button, spring, lever or other device. 
    Handgun means a pistol, revolver or other firearm of any description, loaded or unloaded, from which any shot, bullet or other missile can be discharged, the length of the barrel of which, not including any revolving, detachable or magazine breech, does not exceed twelve (12) inches. 
    Knife means any dagger, dirk, knife or stiletto with a blade over three and one-half (31/2) inches in length, or any other dangerous instrument capable of inflicting cutting, stabbing or tearing wounds; but does not include a hunting or fishing knife carried for sports use. The issue that a knife is a hunting or fishing knife must be raised as an affirmative defense. 
    Machine gun means any firearm, whatever its size and usual designation, that shoots automatically more than one (1) shot, without manual reloading, by a single function of the trigger. 
    Nunchaku means an instrument consisting of two (2) sticks, clubs, bars or rods to be used as handles, connected by a rope, cord, wire or chain which is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense. 
    Short rifle means a rifle having a barrel less than sixteen (16) inches long or an overall length of less than twenty-six (26) inches. 
    Short shotgun means a shotgun having a barrel or barrels less than eighteen (18) inches long or an overall length of less than twenty-six (26) inches. 
    Stun gun means a device capable of temporarily immobilizing a person by the infliction of an electrical charge. 
    Switchblade knife means any knife the blade of which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in its handle. 
    Throwing star means a disk having sharp radiating points or any disk-shaped bladed object which is handheld and thrown and which is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-9-20. - Carrying concealed weapon. 
(a)  A person unlawfully carries a concealed weapon if such person knowingly and unlawfully: 
(1)  Carries a knife concealed on or about his or her person; or 
(2)  Carries a firearm concealed on or about his or her person; 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense that the defendant was: 
(1)  A person in his or her own dwelling or place of business or on property owned or under his or her control at the time of the act of carrying; 
(2)  A person in a private automobile or other private means of conveyance who carries a weapon for lawful protection of such person's or another's person or property while traveling; 
(3)  A person who, prior to the time of carrying a concealed weapon, has been issued a written permit pursuant to state law to carry the weapon by the chief of police of a town, city or city and county or the sheriff of a county; 
(4)  A peace officer, level I or level Ia, as defined in Section 18-1-901(3)(1)(I) or (II), C.R.S., performing the lawful discharge of his or her duties; 
(5)  A peace officer, level II, as defined in Section 18-1-901(3)(1)(III), while on duty; or 
(6)  A United States probation officer or a United States pretrial services officer while on duty and serving in the state of Colorado under the authority of rules and regulations promulgated by the judicial conference of the United States. (Ord. 18-1994 §10-101; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-9-30. - Carrying concealed weapon or possessing weapon on school grounds. 
(a)  A person unlawfully carries a concealed weapon if he or she knowingly and unlawfully and without legal authority carries, brings or has in his or her possession a deadly weapon as defined in Section 10-9-10 above in or on the real estate and all improvements erected thereon of any public or private elementary or secondary school or any public or private college, university or seminary, except for the purpose of presenting an authorized public demonstration or exhibition pursuant to instruction in conjunction with an organized school or class, for the purpose of carrying out the necessary duties and functions of an employee of an educational institution which require the use of a deadly weapon or for the purpose of participation in an authorized extracurricular activity or athletic team. 
(b)  It shall not be an offense under this Section if: 
(1)  The weapon is unloaded and remains inside a motor vehicle while upon the real estate of any public or private college, university or seminary; 
(2)  The person is in his or her own dwelling or place of business or on property owned or under his or her control at the time of the act of carrying; 
(3)  The person is in a private automobile or other private means of conveyance and is carrying a weapon for lawful protection of that person's or another's person or property while traveling; 
(4)  The person, prior to the time of carrying a concealed weapon, has been issued a written permit pursuant to state law to carry the weapon by the chief of police of a town, city or city and county or the sheriff of a county; 
(5)  The person is a peace officer, level I or level Ia, as defined in Section 18-1-901(3)(1)(I) or (II), C.R.S.; 
(6)  The person is a peace officer, level II, as defined in Section 18-1-901(3)(1)(III), C.R.S., while on duty; 
(7)  The person is a peace officer, level IIIa, as defined in Section 18-1-901(3)(1)(IV.5), C.R.S. while on duty and under supervision; or 
(8)  The person has possession of the weapon for use in an educational program approved by a school, which program includes, but is not limited to, any course designed for the repair or maintenance of weapons. (Ord. 18-1994 §10-102; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-9-40. - Prohibited use of weapons. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Knowingly and unlawfully aim a firearm at another person. 
(2)  Recklessly or with criminal negligence discharge a firearm or shoot a bow and arrow. 
(3)  Knowingly set a loaded gun, trap or device designed to cause an explosion upon being tripped or approached and leave it unattended by a competent person immediately present. 
(4)  Have in his or her possession a firearm while he or she is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or of a controlled substance as defined in Section 10-8-10 of this Code. Possession of a permit issued under Section 18-12-105.1, C.R.S. is no defense to a violation of this Section. 
(5)  Knowingly aims, swings or throws a throwing star or nunchaku at another person, or knowingly possesses a throwing star or nunchaku in a public place except for the purpose of presenting an authorized public demonstration or exhibition or pursuant to instruction in conjunction with an organized school or class. When transporting throwing stars or nunchaku for a public demonstration or exhibition or for a school or class, they shall be transported in a closed, inaccessible container. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the use of any such instruments in shooting galleries or in any private grounds or residences under circumstances when such instrument can be fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to endanger persons or property and also in such manner as to prevent the projectile from traversing any grounds or space outside the limits of such gallery, grounds or residence; and further provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the carrying of any type of gun whatsoever, when unloaded and properly cased, to or from any range or gallery. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the use of any such instruments by any peace officer as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of his or her duties. (Ord. 18-1994 §10-103; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-9-50. - Dangerous or deadly weapons; forfeiture. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, display, use, possess or carry any knife or knives having the appearance of a pocket knife the blade or blades of which can be opened by a flick of a button, pressure on the handle or other mechanical contrivance. Any such knife is hereby declared to be a dangerous or deadly weapon within the meaning of Subsection 10-9-20(b) above, and is subject to forfeiture to the Town as provided in Subsection (b) below. 
(b)  Every person convicted of any violation of this Section shall forfeit to the Town such dangerous or deadly weapon so concealed or displayed. 
(c)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to forbid United States Marshals, sheriffs, constables and their deputies and any regular, special or ex officio police officer or any other law enforcement officer from carrying or wearing, while on duty, such weapons as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of their duties. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-9-60. - Selling weapons to intoxicated persons. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to purchase, sell, loan or furnish any gun, pistol or other firearm in which any explosive substance can be used, to any person under the influence of alcohol or any narcotic drug, stimulant or depressant, to any person in a condition of agitation and excitability, or to any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  Such unlawful purchase, sale, loan or furnishing shall be grounds for revocation of any license issued by the Town to such person. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 10 - Noise 

Sec. 10-10-10. - Unreasonable noise. 
    No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any unreasonable noise; and no person shall knowingly permit such noise upon any premises owned or possessed by such person or under such person's control. For purposes of this Section, members of the Police Department are empowered to make a prima facie determination as to whether a noise is unreasonable. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-10-20. - Sirens, whistles, gongs and red lights. 
    It is unlawful for any person to carry or use upon a vehicle, other than Police or Fire Department vehicles or emergency vehicles for public use, any gong, siren, whistle or red light similar to that used on ambulances or vehicles of the Police and Fire Departments. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-10-30. - Disturbance; breach of peace. 
    It is unlawful for any person to make, countenance or assist in the making of undue or unnecessary noise, riot, disturbance or breach of peace on public or private property so as to disturb or cause to be disturbed the lawful peace and quiet of another person. (Ord. 18-1994 §9-108) 
ARTICLE 11 - Miscellaneous Offenses 

Sec. 10-11-10. - Gambling. 
    It is unlawful for any person to engage in gambling, namely, the risking of any money, credit, deposit or other thing of value for gain, contingent in whole or in part upon lot, chance, the operation of a gambling device or the happening or outcome of an event, including a sporting event, over which the person taking a risk has no control, but not including: 
(1)  Circumstances involving a person who engages in professional gambling, which entails aiding or inducing another to engage in gambling and having, other than by virtue of skill or luck, a lesser chance of losing or a greater chance of winning than one (1) or more of the other participants; 
(2)  Any game, wage or transaction which is incidental to a bona fide social relationship, is participated in by natural persons only and in which no person is participating, directly or indirectly, in professional gambling; 
(3)  Bona fide contests of skill, speed, strength or endurance in which the awards are made only to entrants or owners of the entries; 
(4)  Bona fide business transactions which are valid under the law of contracts; or 
(5)  Other acts or transactions nor or hereafter expressly authorized by law. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-110; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 10-11-20. - Burning. 
    No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or burn or permit to be burned any trash, paper, rubbish, wastepaper, wood, weeds, brush, plants or other combustible or flammable material anywhere within the Town limits or anywhere on Town property outside the Town limits, except when: 
(1)  The burning is in the course of an agricultural operation in the growing of crops as a gainful occupation and presents no fire hazard to other property in the vicinity and is expressly authorized by fire officials; 
(2)  The burning is for the noncommercial cooking of food for human beings; 
(3)  The burning is a smokeless flare or a safety flare used to indicate some danger to the public; or 
(4)  The burning is a training fire conducted by the Fire Department or a training fire conducted by another fire department and approved in writing by the Town Administrator/Clerk. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-402) 
Sec. 10-11-30. - Motorbikes, motorized skateboards. 
    The operation anywhere within the Town, whether on private or public property, of any so-called motorbike, mini bike, motorized skateboard, or other such gas powered motorized vehicle not designed and equipped for operation on a public street or highway, is hereby declared and deemed a public nuisance, and it is unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such public nuisance. The foregoing ordinance shall not be deemed to preclude operation of electrically powered vehicles including skateboards, scooters, segways or similar battery powered means of conveyance unless use of such means of conveyance are banned by other rules or ordinances adopted by the Town. (Ord. 18-1994 §11-601; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2009 , 4-28-09; Ord. No. 16-2016 , 6-28-16) 
CHAPTER 11 - Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property 
ARTICLE 1 - Streets and Sidewalks 

Sec. 11-1-10. - Repair and maintenance of sidewalks. 
    The owner, occupant, lessee or person in possession or control of any premises or property shall maintain the sidewalks adjoining such premises or property in good repair and in a safe, unobstructed condition, free of snow, weeds and debris. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 11-1-20. - Snow and ice removal from sidewalks. 
(a)  Every owner or occupant of any premises within the Town abutting a street and having a sidewalk adjacent to the street shall have the duty to keep the sidewalk clean of snow and ice. 
(b)  All snow and ice shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of accumulation. 
(c)  Abatement. 
(1)  Whenever snow or ice is permitted or maintained on a sidewalk adjacent to the street, the Town shall cause a written notice to be served upon the owner or occupant of the premises. Said notice shall state that if said snow or ice is not removed within twenty-four (24) hours from the time when the notice is served, which time and date shall be written on the notice and a record thereof maintained by the Town, the Town shall cause said snow or ice to be removed and the cost thereof shall be an amount established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs. Such cost shall be charged to the owner of the premises. The notice shall be considered served if delivered in person to an adult owner or occupant of the premises or if posted in a conspicuous place on the property. 
(2)  If any owner or occupant of any premises fails to remove the snow and ice from the sidewalk adjacent to the street within twenty-four (24) hours of the notice, the Town shall cause the removal of said snow and ice by Town employees or contract with another person to remove the snow and ice. The total cost of removing the snow and ice including, but not limited to, labor, equipment, notification and inspection shall be charged to the owner of the property. 
(3)  The Town Administrator/Clerk shall bill to the owner of record of the property the entire cost of removing the snow and ice including, but not limited to, labor, equipment, notification and inspection. A minimum fee shall be charged for each time the snow and ice are removed from the sidewalks. This minimum fee, however, shall not preclude the Town Administrator/Clerk billing for the actual cost if such cost is greater than the minimum fee. 
(4)  Failure to pay the bill in full within a period of thirty (30) days shall cause the bill to become a lien against the property. The Town Administrator/Clerk may certify the assessment to the County Treasurer to be placed upon the tax list for the current year, to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with a penalty of ten percent (10%) to defray the cost of collection. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the offending property is not subject to taxation, the Town Administrator/Clerk may elect alternate means to enforce this Section, including the commencement of a court action and the pursuit of such remedies as are provided by law. 
(d)  For purposes of this Code, premises shall mean any lot, parcel, outlot or other subdivision of real property, whether occupied or not and whether or not a structure exists on the lot, parcel, outlot or other subdivision. 
(e)  Any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. This penalty may be imposed in addition to the abatement proceedings provided in Subsection (c) above. (Ord. 1-1988 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 11-1-30. - Sidewalks mandatory for new construction. 
    Whenever a new principal building is constructed upon a lot which does not have a sidewalk along the abutting streets, it shall be the duty of the owner to provide, install and maintain a sidewalk or integrated curb-and-sidewalk in front of or upon the property and in such location as may be designated by the Town. Said sidewalk or integrated curb-and-sidewalk shall be installed and constructed in conformance with the Town's specifications. Sidewalks or integrated curb-and-sidewalks are to be aligned with existing walks in the same block or adjacent blocks. Where no sidewalks exist, sidewalks shall be placed not less than five (5) feet behind the back of the adjacent curb. The Town may withhold the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the principal building until said sidewalk is constructed in accordance with this Section. (Ord. 4-1994 §1) 
Sec. 11-1-40. - Notice to install sidewalk. 
    Whenever any owner of property defined in Section 11-1-30 above shall refuse to install a sidewalk or integrated curb-and-sidewalk in accordance with the provisions of this Article, the Town Administrator/Clerk, pursuant to authority given by the Board of Trustees, shall give notice to such person directing him or her to install same within ninety (90) days after receipt of the notice. In the event such notice is not obeyed, the Town Administrator/Clerk may order the installation and construction of such sidewalk or integrated curb-and-sidewalk, and the costs and expenses thereof shall be assessed against the responsible person as provided by law. (Ord. 4-1994 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 11-1-50. - Construction regulations. 
    Construction permits, supervision of work, contractor bonds and guarantee of work are required in accordance with Article 2 of this Chapter. (Ord. 4-1994 §1) 
Sec. 11-1-60. - Violation and penalties. 
    Any person violating this Chapter or any provision of applicable state law is guilty of a violation of this Code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. (Ord. 4-1994 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 2 - Curb and Gutter 

Sec. 11-2-10. - Construction at request of Town. 
(a)  Whenever the Board of Trustees or Town Administrator/Clerk shall deem it necessary that any portion of a curb, gutter or sidewalk be constructed or reconstructed, it may, upon its own motion, order that such curb, gutter or sidewalk or portion thereof be constructed or reconstructed, as the case may be. Such construction or reconstruction shall be at the expense of the Town. If the Board of Trustees finds such construction or reconstruction to be the responsibility of the adjacent property owner, such order shall be by resolution or ordinance duly passed in relation thereto, which shall describe the place where such sidewalk, curb or gutter is to be constructed or reconstructed; and further, that if same is not done by the property owner within fifteen (15) days from the date such resolution or ordinance takes effect under state law and this Code, the Town will construct the same and/or cause the work to be done and assess the cost thereof against the adjacent property owner and the owner thereof, and certify and collect the same as by law provided. 
(b)  In case such order is by ordinance, service shall be given by the publication or posting or by the mailing of a notice of such ordinance to the owners of such property within five (5) days; if such order is by resolution, the same shall be served upon the owners of the adjacent property in person within five (5) days of its passage or by mailing a notice of such resolution to the owners of such property at their last known address according to Town records within five (5) days. 
(c)  If any property owner shall fail to construct curb, gutter, and/or sidewalk when so ordered within fifteen (15) days from the date such ordinance or resolution takes effect under state law and the ordinances of the Town, the Town may construct the same or cause the work to be done. Upon the completion of any such curb, gutter and/or sidewalk and the acceptance of the same by the Board of Trustees, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall prepare a statement of the costs thereof, including the cost of inspection and the services of the engineer in properly locating the same, showing the amount of cost properly chargeable against the adjacent or abutting property and the owner thereof plus an additional ten percent (10%) of such amount to cover the cost of engineering, legal fees and other incidentals. 
(d)  Such statement, when completed, shall be subject to inspection by any person interested. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall thereupon, by advertisement, once within a period of fourteen (14) days in some daily or weekly newspaper of general circulation published in the Town, or by mailing a notice to the owner at his or her last known address according to Town records, notify the owner of the property to be assessed that such improvements have been or are about to be completed and accepted, specifying therein the lots or lands to be assessed and the amounts to be assessed on each thereof, and also designating therein a time and place upon which the Board of Trustees shall sit for the purpose of hearing complaints and objections thereto and making correction therein. Upon the day designated, the Board of Trustees shall sit for the purpose of hearing complaints and objections that may be as aforesaid, shall thereupon make such changes in such charges as may in its judgment be necessary, equitable or just, and shall thereupon finally determine the amount of such assessment and thereupon assess the cost of such improvements. 
(e)  In case such order includes any of such improvements in front of lots or lands of more than one (1) owner, the same shall be included in one (1) ordinance or resolution ordering the same, but the costs, when constructed by the Town, shall be assessed against each abutting property and the owners thereof separately according to cost of construction of the curb, gutter or sidewalk abutting on each lot or parcel of land, respectively. Such assessments shall be collected by the County Treasurer together with a penalty of ten percent (10%) thereon to defray costs of collection, as provided by state law. 
(f)  As an alternative to the collection of the assessment as a tax, the Town may provide for the payment of the assessment through a promissory note to be signed by the property owner, with payments to be made in three (3) equal monthly installments. Interest shall be charged upon the unpaid balance at the current maximum rate allowable. If any payment is not received upon the date due, the entire remaining amount shall become delinquent and shall be certified to the County Treasurer and collected the same as other taxes assessed against such property. (Ord. 19-1998 §11.02.01; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 11-2-20. - When owner may construct. 
    Curbs, gutters and sidewalks may be constructed by the owner of the property abutting upon the same and at his or her own expense within the Town when streets are laid out, opened and improved and in common use by foot travelers within the Town. Such curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be constructed of the character, location, grade, material and in the manner prescribed by the Wellington Standard Design Criteria and Standard Construction Requirements in effect at the time of construction. (Ord. 19-1998 §11.02.02; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 11-2-30. - Supervision. 
    The Public Works Director shall approve all material and supervise the construction of all curbs, gutters and sidewalks within the Town. (Ord. 19-1998 §11.02.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 11-2-40. - Construction permit required. 
    Before constructing curbs and gutters or sidewalks, the owner of the property adjacent thereto shall make an application to the Town Administrator/Clerk for a permit upon forms furnished by said Town Administrator/Clerk, and the curbs and gutters or sidewalks shall be constructed in conformity with the grades established by the Board of Trustees; however, where a contractor shall install curb, gutter and sidewalk for more than one (1) property owner, said contractor may obtain one (1) permit for all of the work he or she is to construct by listing the names, location and other information required for each separate property owner. (Ord. 19-1998 §11.02.04) 
Sec. 11-2-50. - Conformity to specifications required. 
    The specifications, construction and material for any curbs, sidewalks and gutters shall be in conformity with the Wellington Standard Design Criteria and Standard Construction Requirements in effect at the time of construction. (Ord. 19-1998 § 11.02.05) 
Sec. 11-2-60. - Expiration of permits. 
    Any permit issued under this Article shall expire sixty (60) days after the date mentioned as the date when construction will commence. No permit shall be issued unless grades have been established in the locality. In no case will the Town Engineer or an engineer designated by the Town assume to give the exact lot line or lot corners to the applicant. (Ord. 19-1998 §11.02.06) 
Sec. 11-2-70. - Guarantee of work defects. 
(a)  The contractor shall expressly guarantee such concrete curb and gutters and/or sidewalks and driveways for a period of one (1) year from and after their completion and acceptance by the Town through an inspector appointed by it, and shall agree to maintain it and make all necessary repairs of the same during the one-year period, without additional charge or cost to the property owner or the Town. It is understood and agreed that this guarantee shall include all repairs growing out of the imperfection or unsuitability of materials or composition, too great or too little moisture, defects in workmanship, settling of fills or excavations or any damage done to the curb by the expansion of the walk, either by breaking, cracking or pushing out of the curb. 
(b)  The determination of the necessity for repairs rests entirely with the Public Works Director, whose decision upon the matter shall be final and obligatory upon the contractors. The guarantee herein stipulated shall extend to the whole body of the curb, gutter and sidewalk, base as well as wearing surfaces; and the repair required under it may extend to the total reconstruction of the whole body of the curb, gutter and/or sidewalk, both base and wearing surfaces, if in the judgment of the Public Works Director such total reconstruction shall become necessary. Such contractor shall be held responsible for the acts and negligence of the contractor's employees and agents. (Ord. 19-1998, §11.02.07; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 11-2-80. - Correction of errors. 
    No delays, errors, defects or irregularities in any action or proceeding authorized by this Article shall prejudice or invalidate any final assessment, but the same may be remedied by subsequent amending acts or proceedings as the case may require, and when so remedied shall take effect as of the date of the original act or proceeding. If any court of competent jurisdiction sets aside any assessment on any account of any irregularity in the proceedings, then the Board of Trustees may correct such irregularity and make a new assessment, and the same shall be effective as of the date of the original assessment. (Ord. 19-1998, §11.02.08) 
ARTICLE 3 - Excavations 

Sec. 11-3-10. - Limitations. 
    No obstruction whatsoever other than that provided for by law or by this Article or some other Town ordinance shall be made upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the Town. (Ord. 32-1996 §12.03.01) 
Sec. 11-3-20. - Permit required; application. 
    Any person desiring to occupy any portion of a street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in connection with the erection, construction, remodeling or demolition of any building or improvement on property abutting or adjacent thereto shall make written application to the Town Administrator/Clerk for a permit on a form prepared and provided by the Town. (Ord. 32-1996 §12.03.02) 
Sec. 11-3-30. - Contents of application. 
(a)  The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address and telephone number; 
(2)  The street, alley, sidewalk or other public place affected and the extent affected; 
(3)  The address of the property on which the work is to be done; 
(4)  The reason for the obstruction; and 
(5)  The amount of time the permit is needed. 
(b)  The applicant shall agree in making the application to be bound by all of the provisions of this Article and the rules and regulations established by the Town Administrator/Clerk. (Ord. 32-1996 §12.03.03; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 11-3-40. - Fees. 
    A fee shall be charged for each application filed under this Article for the following: 
(a)  Sidewalks. The fee for the first fifty (50) feet shall be a base fee, plus an additional fee for each additional ten (10) feet. All fees shall be an amount established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs. 
(b)  Parking areas. The fee shall be assessed per space or portion thereof per month, with a minimum charge. The fee shall be an amount established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs. For the purposes of this Article, a space shall be defined as twenty-two (22) feet of frontage for parallel parking. (Ord. 32-1996 §12.03.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 11-3-50. - Term of permit; renewal and revocation. 
(a)  No permit required under this Article shall be issued for a period of more than ninety (90) days, provided that the Town Administrator/Clerk may renew any such permit for additional ninety-day periods upon written application and payment of the applicable fee as provided in Section 11-3-40. 
(b)  Any permit issued under this Article may be revoked by the Town Administrator/Clerk if the holder violates any of the provisions of this Article or the rules and regulations of the Town or if the work allowed by the permit unduly interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. (Ord. 32-1996 §12.03.05) 
Sec. 11-3-60. - Insurance. 
    Any person applying for a permit under this Article shall file with the Town adequate proof of insurance during the period of construction, and naming the Town as an additional insured on the policy and indemnifying and holding harmless the Town against and from all damages or claims for damages, loss, costs and charges or expenses that may be brought against it by any person on account of injury to persons or property resulting from or occasioned by reason of the occupation of the street, alley, sidewalk or public place. (Ord. 32-1996 §12.03.06) 
Sec. 11-3-70. - Adequate drainage and access to fire hydrants required. 
    Any person holding a permit under this Article shall take such measures as may be required to ensure that adequate drainage is maintained around the obstruction. All fire hydrants shall be kept clear of all building materials, rubbish and other obstructions, easy access to such hydrants shall be provided, and such fire hydrants shall be kept clear at all times. (Ord. 32-1996 §12.03.07) 
Sec. 11-3-80. - Removal of obstruction upon completion of work. 
    Upon completion of work, the permit holder shall remove all obstruction, materials, debris and rubbish within ten (10) days. (Ord. 32-1996 § 12.03.08) 
Sec. 11-3-90. - Permittee liable in case of nonconformance. 
    If any permit holder fails to do anything required hereunder, the Town Administrator/ Clerk may cause the work to be done, and the cost shall be charged to the holder of the permit, and the holder of the permit shall be liable for such costs. (Ord. 32-1996 §12.03.09) 
Sec. 11-3-100. - Penalties. 
    Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this Article shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 4 - Encroachments 

Sec. 11-4-10. - Limitations. 
    No encroachment whatsoever other than that provided for by law or by this Article or some other Town ordinance shall be made upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the Town. (Ord. 32-1996 §12.04.01) 
Sec. 11-4-20. - Permit required; application. 
    Any person desiring to erect a fence, barrier, post or other obstructions or encroachments upon any portion of a street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the Town shall make written application to the Town Administrator/ Clerk for a permit on a form prepared and provided by the Town. (Ord. 32-1996 § 12.04.02) 
Sec. 11-4-30. - Contents of application. 
(a)  The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address and telephone number; 
(2)  The street, alley, sidewalk or other public place affected and the extent affected; 
(3)  The type of encroachment, obstruction or other structure; and 
(4)  The purpose of the proposed encroachment, obstruction or other structure. 
(b)  The applicant shall agree in making the application to be bound by all of the provisions of this Article and the rules and regulations established by the Town Administrator/Clerk. (Ord. 32-1996 §12.04.03) 
Sec. 11-4-40. - Approval; permit fee; revocation. 
(a)  The application shall be made to the Town Administrator/Clerk. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the information contained in the application and prior to the issuance of a permit, shall determine that the proposed encroachment, obstruction or other structure does not constitute a nuisance, destroy or impair the use of the right-of-way by the public or constitute a traffic hazard. Additional special condition may be imposed to ensure there is no impairment. No permit shall be issued where those conditions are found to exist. 
(b)  At the time of issuance of a permit hereunder, the applicant shall pay a fee in an amount established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs. 
(c)  Any such permit so issued may be revoked by the Town Administrator/Clerk at any time the conditions in this Article are found to exist, or when it is determined the property upon which the encroachment, obstruction or structure exists is required for use by the public. (Ord. 32-1996 §12.04.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 11-4-50. - Insurance. 
    Any person applying for a permit under this Article shall file with the Town adequate proof of insurance during period of construction, naming the Town as an additional insured on the policy and indemnifying and holding harmless the Town against and from all damages or claims for damages, loss, costs and charges or expenses that may be brought against it by any person on account of injury to persons or property resulting from or occasioned by reason of the occupation of the street, alley, sidewalk or public place. (Ord. 32-1996 § 12.04.05) 
Sec. 11-4-60. - Notice to remove encroachment. 
    Whenever any encroachment, obstruction or structure is made contrary to the terms of the permit, without a permit or at such time as the permit is revoked as provided by this Article, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall give notice to the person who made or located such encroachment, obstruction or structure or caused or permitted it to be done or who owns or controls the premises with which such encroachment, obstruction or structure is connected to remove such encroachment, obstruction or structure. It shall be removed within ten (10) days after notice. (Ord. 32-1996 §12.04.06) 
Sec. 11-4-70. - Noncompliance with notice; removal of encroachment. 
(a)  If any notice given under Section 11-4-60 is not complied with, the Town Administrator/Clerk is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the removal of the encroachment, obstruction or structure. 
(b)  Upon completion of such removal, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall certify the cost of such removal and shall send by certified mail addressed to the owner of the premises with which the obstruction is connected a notice of such removal, the cost incurred for such work, and a statement that the cost of the work will be assessed against the owner's lot, tract or parcel of land if such cost is not paid to the Town within ten (10) days after mailing of such notice. (Ord. 32-1996 §12.04.07; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 5 - Cemetery 

Sec. 11-5-10. - Dedication. 
    The Town hereby dedicates a municipally owned cemetery, known as Wellington Highland Cemetery, hereinafter referred to as the Cemetery, located in Section 27, Township 9 North, Range 68 West of the 6th P.M., Larimer County, Colorado. The Board of Trustees shall have the power and duty to supervise and control the operation, sale and care of the lots therein. The Board of Trustees may enter into contracts for opening and closing graves and for the general maintenance and care of the cemetery. (Prior code 12.02.04) 
Sec. 11-5-20. - Lot fees; regulations. 
(a)  No lot shall be sold after January 14, 1979, unless the purchaser thereof also pays a fee for its perpetual care. The Board of Trustees shall, from time to time, by resolution establish the amount of the fees to be paid for lots, perpetual care, opening and closing a grave, disinterments and other charges designated by the Board of Trustees. Upon the payment to the Town Administrator/Clerk of the purchase price of any lot and the sum charged for perpetual care, the Mayor and Town Administrator/Clerk shall execute and deliver a deed of conveyance therefor, which shall be subject to the provisions of this Subsection and amendments thereto. Lots shall only be sold for cash. 
(b)  The Town Administrator/Clerk shall keep accurate records of all lots sold, and shall also keep an accurate, up-to-date map of the Cemetery, showing the location of lots and of each burial made therein. 
(c)  Burial of two (2) persons under the age of five (5) years may be made in a particular lot. The Board of Trustees may set a lower fee for a burial space, for a grave opening and for perpetual care of a deceased person under the age of five (5) years. (Prior code 12.02.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 11-5-30. - Perpetual Care Fund. 
    The Town Treasurer shall keep all money received as perpetual care fees in a separate fund to be known as the Perpetual Care Fund. The Board of Trustees may, but is not required to, transfer other funds of the Town into the Perpetual Care Fund. Amounts in the perpetual care fund shall be used for the care and maintenance of the Cemetery. The Town Treasurer shall invest the money in the Perpetual Care Fund in such a manner as may be approved by written resolution of the Board of Trustees and authorized by law. The income derived from investment of funds in the Perpetual Care Fund shall be paid into the Perpetual Care Fund. Disbursements from the Perpetual Care Fund shall be made by the Town Treasurer for the care and maintenance of the Cemetery in such amounts and for such purposes as are designated by the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may, but is not required to, order disbursements from the principal, as well as the income of the Perpetual Care Fund. (Prior code 12.02.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 11-5-40. - Permits; decorations. 
(a)  A written permit shall be obtained from the Town Administrator/Clerk before any of the following articles is placed in the Cemetery: any monument; any vault, marker or other structure, obstruction or improvement of a permanent nature such as a fence, railing, box, shells, stones, metal design, urn, bench or case; or any planting except as hereinafter allowed for plantings such as annual flowers. A written burial permit shall be obtained from the Town Administrator/Clerk before any burial is made. A written disinterment permit shall be obtained from the Town Administrator/Clerk before any disinterment is made. A written permit shall be obtained from the Town Administrator/Clerk before any transfer, assignment or conveyance of any right or any interest in the Cemetery is made. No change of ownership of any interest in the Cemetery is effective until after the Town has received notice thereof and has made the change on its records. The decision of the Town Administrator/Clerk in granting or denying a permit hereunder is subject to review by the Board of Trustees. The decision of the Board of Trustees is final. 
(b)  Ornamentals or decorations such as annual flowers, moveable vases or wreaths may be placed upon a lot without a permit. The Board of Trustees, in its sole discretion, may order the removal of any ornamental, decoration or other object placed in the Cemetery without notice. (Prior code 12.02.04) 
Sec. 11-5-50. - Time schedule. 
    The Cemetery shall be open from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. from April 1 through August 30 of each year and from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. from September 1 through March 30 of each year. (Prior code 12.02.04) 
Sec. 11-5-60. - General provisions. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Engage in any activity described in Subsection 11-5-40(a) for which a permit is required without obtaining a permit. 
(2)  Enter upon the grounds of the Cemetery when the gate is locked or at any other time except when it is open to the public, without first obtaining written permission from the Chief of Police. 
(3)  Inter any deceased person within the corporate limits of the Town except in the cemetery. (Prior code 12.02.04; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 11-5-70. - Provisions severable. 
    The provisions of this Article are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section, provision or part thereof shall be held unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of this Article shall continue in full force and effect, it being the intent of the Board of Trustees that this Article would have been adopted even if such unconstitutional or invalid matter had not been included therein. It is further declared that if any provision or part of this Article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Article and the application thereof to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Prior code 12.02.04) 
CHAPTER 13 - Municipal Utilities 
ARTICLE 1 - Water, Sewer and Storm Drainage Utility 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 13-1-10. - Definitions. 
    The words used in this Chapter shall have their common meaning unless that meaning is specifically modified by the definitions contained herein. 
    Delinquent account means any utility account assessed for Utility user charges which is not paid in full prior to the twentieth day of the month in which the bill is forwarded to the User. 
    Development shall be as defined in Chapter 16 of this Code. 
    Licensed plumber means a master plumber, journeyman plumber or residential plumber holding a current state license. 
    Meter size shall be determined by the inside diameter of the outlet side of the meter. 
    Person shall mean any individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, limited liability company, partnership, association, or other legal entity. 
    Tap shall mean the point where the service line connects to the Town's main line. 
    Town of Wellington Construction Standards means the Standard Design Criteria and Standard Construction Requirements as adopted by the Town. 
    User means either the tenant or owner of a premises which is connected to the Town's water, sewer or storm drainage facilities. 
    Utilities or Utility means water, sewer, storm drainage utilities of the Town. 
    Utility Billing Clerk means that Person designated by the Town Administrator/Clerk as the Town's Utility Billing Clerk. 
    Utility user charges or user fees or user charges means all charges imposed by the Town or the specific Town enterprise for water, sewer, storm drainage usage, including any administrative fees, interest, penalties and service charges imposed in accordance with this Chapter or imposed by State or other applicable law. (Prior code 7.01.01; Ord. 11-1987 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2016WE , 9-13-16) 
Sec. 13-1-20. - Ownership; responsibility. 
(a)  The Town shall own and maintain all parts of the water facilities used in the collection, treatment or distribution of water for municipal beneficial uses, except those portions identified as the property of the owner of property served. These facilities shall be known as the water Utility. 
(b)  The Town shall own and maintain all parts of the sewer facilities used in the collection, treatment or disposal of sewage, except those portions identified as the property of the owner of property served. These facilities shall be known as the sewer Utility. The sewer Tap and all facilities from the Tap extending to and located on the owner's property shall be owned by and be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(c)  Any Person who connects any pipe, tube, stopcock, wire, cord, motor or other instrument or contrivance with any main or service line supplying water to any property, or who turns on water for service to any property, without the knowledge and consent of the Town is guilty of a civil infraction of this Code. Each day that such violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense. 
(d)  Any Person who in any manner alters, obstructs or interferes with the action of a water meter or the remote read-out attached to a water meter, without the knowledge and consent of the Town is guilty of a civil infraction of this Code. Each day that such violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense. 
(e)  Any Person who causes damage in any form to the water or sewer facilities is guilty of a civil infraction of this Code. Each day that such violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense. 
(f)  In addition to any other remedies, the Town Attorney, acting on behalf of the Town, may institute injunction, abatement or any other appropriate action to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such violations, or to recover the cost of repairs to the facilities. 
(g)  The Town shall own and maintain the water service line including the water Tap from the water main to the owner's property line. The Town shall also own and maintain the stopcock at the property line, the meter pit, yoke, meter and remote readout associated with the water service. The property owner shall own and maintain the water service line that is on his or her property. 
(h)  The property owner shall own and maintain the sewer Tap and the sewer service line from the Tap to the owner's property including from the owner's premises to the connection to the sewer main. 
(h)  It shall be the duty of the User to promptly notify the Town of any leaks in the water service line or apparent malfunction of the water meter or remote readout. The Town shall investigate User-reported problems and repair or replace any malfunctioning water meter or remote readout. The Town shall use reasonable efforts to repair or replace any malfunctioning water meter or remote readout within three (3) working days of notification and repair or replace that portion of the water service line owned by the Town found to be leaking within five (5) working days. If the Town discovers that a meter or remote readout is not recording properly, the Town shall use reasonable efforts to repair or replace the water meter or remote readout within three (3) working days of its discovery. In those instances, where it is necessary to make arrangements with the User for access to the property to investigate complaints or accomplish necessary repairs, those arrangements shall constitute compliance with this Subsection. 
(i)  The property of any Utility User may be inspected at any time for the purpose of examining the condition of all pipes, meters, service lines or other parts of the Utility systems. If at any time the Town determines that the Tap, service line(s) or other facilities owned by the owner are defective in any manner or in need of repair or replacement, the owner shall cause such repairs or replacement to be made within ten (10) days of notification by the Town of said defect. The repairs or replacement shall be at the owner's sole expense, shall be made by a Licensed plumber and must be approved by the Public Works Director. Failure by the User to accomplish the repairs within the time allowed shall be a civil infraction of this Code. Each day that such violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense. (Prior code 7.01.01; Ord. 11-1987 §1) 
(Ord. No. 3-2009 , 4-28-09; Ord. No. 1-2016WE , 9-13-16) 
Sec. 13-1-30. - Utilization of Town services. 
(a)  All premises in the Town shall be connected to and receive municipal water from the Town's municipal water system and shall be connected to and discharge sewage into the Town's municipal sewer system. No individual residence, business or other property Development shall be permitted to create or expand a separate water or sewer system without approval of the Town. 
(b)  The owner of separate water or sewer systems existing prior to January 1, 1987, or systems created thereafter, may be required to connect to the Town's facilities at the property owner's expense upon thirty (30) days' written notice from the Town. The owner shall be liable and responsible for any improvements necessary to protect the general health and welfare, including emptying, cleaning and filling any non-Town owned disposal systems. 
(c)  Any developer of new Development of property within the Town shall make the necessary improvements to the Utility facilities of the Town in order to provide Utility service to the Development. These improvements shall include, but not be limited to, the installation of water and sewer trunk and main lines, valves, service lines, meters, meter pits and their appurtenances, booster and lift stations, storm water facilities and water storage facilities required as a result of the Development. All facilities and equipment installed by the owner of any Development shall be in conformance with the Town of Wellington Construction Standards and shall not cause a degradation of the existing service to the Town's residents. These capital improvements shall be subject to a separate agreement between the Town and the developer and shall be dedicated to the Town, free and clear of all encumbrances. 
(d)  The Town may require oversizing of capital improvements and may provide for participation in the cost of such oversizing in the case that it is recognized that the Development of subsequent properties will occur and the Development will require use of Town Utilities. (Prior code 7.01.01; Ord. 11, 1987 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2016WE , 9-13-16) 
Sec. 13-1-40. - Water and sewer rates. 
    All buildings or premises connected to the Town water and sewer facilities shall be held and deemed to be occupied, and Utility user charges collected thereon. The obligation to pay Utility user charges shall include charges to those buildings or premises for which service has been terminated by the Town or the property owner. All rates shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the Board of Trustees. (Prior code 7.01.02; Ord. 11-1987 §1; Ord. 5-1991 §1; Ord. 20-1997 §1; Ord. 16-2002 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2016WE , 9-13-16) 
Sec. 13-1-50. - Capital investment fees, water rights dedication requirements. 
(a)  Uniform water capital investment (tap or impact) fees. There are hereby imposed uniform water capital investment (tap or impact) fees as calculated in Appendix 17-A to this Code, payable upon application for a sewer Tap in the Town as established by ordinance or resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
(b)  Uniform sewer capital investment (tap or impact) fees. There are hereby imposed uniform sewer capital investment (tap or impact) fees as calculated in Appendix 17-A to this Code, payable upon application for a sewer tap in the Town as established by ordinance or resolution by the Board of Trustees. 
(c)  Water rights dedication. In order to offset the impact upon the Town's system, a dedication or transfer of water rights to the Town or a cash payment in lieu thereof shall be required for all Development or properties connected to or expanding use of the Town's Utilities as follows: 
(1)  Prior to approval of the annexation of any land to the Town or the subdivision or replatting of any land previously annexed; 
(2)  Prior to all new extensions of water services which will thereafter be used for domestic, commercial or industrial purposes. This Subsection shall not apply to the extension of a new municipal service to property for which the basic dedication requirement was met at annexation, subdivision or replatting. 
(3)  The Town may by separate agreement provide for the transfer of water rights, or cash payments in lieu thereof, at times other than provided in Paragraphs (1) and (2) above. 
(d)  Basic water rights dedication requirements. Water rights shall be dedicated in the following quantities: 
(1)  Developers of residential uses shall dedicate to the Town water rights yielding one (1) acre-foot of water per year for each dwelling unit to be served by the Town water Utility. 
(2)  Developers of commercial or industrial uses shall dedicate to the Town water rights in the quantity sufficient to satisfy the ultimate water demand of the commercial or industrial uses as determined by the Town. 
(e)  Procedure for dedicating water rights. The Town shall have the sole right of determination to accept or reject any water rights proposed for dedication pursuant to the provision of this Section, or to allow a cash payment in lieu of water rights dedication to satisfy the basic dedication requirement. At the time of submission, the applicant shall indicate the water rights proposed to be dedicated to the Town, or the amount of cash in lieu thereof that is proposed to be paid to the Town. 
(f)  Cash in lieu of water rights dedication. Cash payments in lieu of water rights dedication shall be equal to the fair market value of the water rights necessary to satisfy the basic water rights requirement. The Town shall determine from time to tome the cash in lieu payment amount to be paid after a public hearing before the Board of Trustees with the decision of the Board of Trustees being final and conclusive. (Prior code 7.01.03; Ord. 11-1987 §1; Ord. 21-1997 §1; Ord. 26-1997 §1; Ord. 16-1998 §6; Ord. 17-1999 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2016WE , 9-13-16) 
Sec. 13-1-60. - Water tap requirements and permits. 
(a)  Water and sewer tap permits required. It is unlawful for any Person to tap or make any connection with the Town's water or sewer facilities or to take or to use any water from said water facilities without having first obtained a permit from the Town. Any Person desiring to tap the water or sewer mains, or use water from the Town's water system shall make application in writing for a tap permit to the Town Administrator/Clerk. The application shall state the size of the tap to be made with the water or sewer system, the location of the proposed tap, the premises for which the service is sought, the purpose for which the water is to be used and the type and quality of the wastes to be discharged. All plant investment fees and other charges assessed by the Town shall be submitted with the application. 
(b)  Issuance of tap permits. If the application complies with the provisions of this Code, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall issue a permit subject to Town Engineer review. Applications for water taps larger than one (1) inch, sewer taps larger than one (1) inch, unusual projected water usage or unusual projected sewer discharge shall be referred to the Board of Trustees for a determination of the amount of the capital investment fees and the water acquisition charge. Permits shall be signed by the Town Administrator/Clerk and shall set forth the name of the Person for whose benefit the permit shall be granted, the date issued, the point on the water or sewer main at which the tapping is to be done, the size of the tap and the stopcock, the premises to be served and the use to be made of the water and any restrictions on the discharge to the sewer facilities. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall keep a duplicate or (c) Time limitation on tapping. 
(1)  Each water and sewer tap permit issued by the Town pursuant to this Code shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after the issuance of the permit unless the tap applied for has been installed during the one-hundred-eighty-day time period and unless the construction of the premises for which the tap has been issued has been commenced. 
(2)  The holder of any water or sewer tap permit may apply for an extension of the one-hundred-eighty-day time period. Extensions may be granted only by the Board of Trustees for good cause established by the permit holder. Any extension shall be limited in time to an additional one-hundred-eighty-day period and only one (1) extension shall be granted for any particular tap. 
(3)  If a water or sewer tap permit expires, all charges paid to the Town to serve the permit to the applicant shall be forfeited and are nonrefundable. 
(4)  The holder of a tap permit may relinquish the permit to the Town at any time prior to its expiration. The Town shall, upon demand, refund seventy-five percent (75%) of the permit fee paid to the owner. 
(d)  Transfer of tap permits. Tap permits are for a specific address or location and may not be transferred to any other site or another owner except as specifically authorized by the Board of Trustees. (Prior code 7.01.04; Ord. 11-1987 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2016WE , 9-13-16; Ord. No. 6-2017 , 4-25-17) 
Sec. 13-1-70. - Tapping of water or sewer lines; specifications. 
(a)  Tapping to be done by Licensed plumber. All connections or taps to water or sewer mains shall be made by a Licensed plumber and shall be at the sole expense of the applicant. The applicant shall furnish at his or her sole expense all materials and labor necessary for the tap or connection, except that the Town shall furnish the necessary water meter pit, water meter, meter yoke, remote readout and cable, the price of which is included in the tap fee set forth herein. 
(b)  Tapping requirements. All connections or taps shall be made in accordance with the Town of Wellington Construction Standards and shall be made under the supervision of the Public Works Director or other authorized Person. Materials used shall be compatible with the Town's mains and the service lines used. 
(c)  Restoration of street pavement and right-of-way. Any Person cutting street pavement or excavating within the public right-of-way for the purpose of tapping a water or sewer main or for maintenance of a service lateral shall obtain a street-cut permit from the Town and restore the street pavement or the public right-of-way to its previous condition. Excavations shall be mechanically tamped or re-compacted to the full depth of the excavation in accordance with the Town of Wellington Construction Standards. Compaction tests shall be provided to the Town by the Person making the street cut. Any removal, damage or disruption of asphalt or concrete pavement, curb and gutter, drainage structures or sidewalks shall be repaired in the manner prescribed by the Town Engineer. In the event that the Person making the street cut or excavation in the public right-of-way fails to effect the restoration in accordance with the street-cut permit, the Town may restore the affected pavement and right-of-way and assess the cost of said restoration against a street-cut permit applicant or the owner of the property benefitted by the street-cut. 
(d)  Charges for extra inspections. Where the installation of water or sewer services under paving or where other exceptional conditions occur, the Town shall make an additional charge, sufficient to cover the cost of additional inspections. 
(e)  Standard water tap size, service pipe, stopcock. All water taps shall be sized in accordance with the International Plumbing code as adopted by the Town, but shall in no case be less than three-fourths (3/4) inch. All Taps, service pipes and stopcocks shall be of materials required by and shall be installed in accordance with the Town of Wellington Construction Standards 
(f)  Standard sewer tap size, service pipe, cleanout. Except as provided by this Article, all sewer taps shall be sized in accordance with the International Plumbing Code as adopted by the Town, but in no case shall the Town permit less than a four (4) inch Tap, and Any Tap shall be of materials required by and shall be installed in accordance with the Town of Wellington Construction Standards. 
(g)  Water Meter size required for multiple-family Developments. All water Taps serving multifamily Developments shall be sized in accordance with the International Plumbing Code as adopted by the Town, but in no case, without Town Board approval, shall a Tap serving a multifamily structure be of a size less than size required to serve the following number of living as set forth below: 
Meter Size Number of Units 3/4" 1-3 1" 4-5 11/2" 6-12 2" 13-23  
(h)  Separate taps/meters required for individual ownership. The Town may require separate water and sewer taps and meters for premises with multiple occupancies. The requirement for separate taps and meters may be imposed by the Town upon the application for a Tap permit, or upon application for initiation of service or transfer of billing, or during the review of minor or major impact permit under the Land Use Code. (Prior code 7.01.05; Ord. 11-1987 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2016WE , 9-13-16) 
Sec. 13-1-80. - Water service initiation. 
(a)  Application for initiation of service or transfer of billing. Application to have water turned on or transferred from one (1) party to another shall be made in writing to the Town Administrator/Clerk. The Town may require written agreement by the applicant to abide by and accept all of the provisions of this Code pertaining to water or sewer service or other health, engineering or service limitations relative to service as conditions governing the use of the Town's Utility facilities by the applicant. 
(b)  Utility service deposit required, refund allowed. A refundable deposit of an amount established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs shall be required as a condition of providing any utility service to a customer under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Any new customer; 
(2)  Any customer who changes address to which utility service is furnished, except when such customer has been a nondelinquent customer during the most recent twelve-month period; 
(3)  Any customer who receives one (1) shut-off notice or two (2) delinquency notices within the previous year; or 
(4)  Any customer whose water service has been terminated because of delinquency. 
    Any deposit held by the Town, less any amount still due the Town for utility service, shall be refunded to the customer who paid the deposit after eighteen (18) months of continuous service wherein no delinquency or shut-off notice has been issued or when service to the customer is discontinued on a permanent basis, whichever occurs first. No interest will be paid by the Town upon refund of the deposit. (Prior code 7.01.06; Ord. 11-1987 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2016WE , 9-13-16) 
Sec. 13-1-90. - Payment of user charges. 
(a)  Owner responsible for payment. The owner or owners of any building or premises connected with the Town water or sewer facilities shall be held and deemed liable for the payment of all Utility user charges levied against such building or premises. A tenant in possession of the premises may apply for service and agree to pay the User charges; however, this will not relieve the owner of his or her liability for water, sewer and storm drainage Utility charges levied against the property. 
(b)  Utility bills due and payable. The Town shall issue Utility bills for Utility user charges in the Town's normal course of billing. All Utility user charges shall be due when service is provided. The User's failure to receive a billing shall not relieve the User of the obligation to timely Utility user charges before delinquency. Any Utility user charge becomes a Delinquent account if not paid in full on or before the twentieth day of the month after the User receives a billing for such Utility user charges. Water service to a delinquent water account may be discontinued until any Delinquent account is paid in full. 
Upon becoming delinquent a late fee (penalty) of one (1) percent of the deficiency shall be assessed against account balances each month if not paid after the 20th day of the month. Any Delinquent account may be charged reasonable attorney's fees and other costs of collection incurred by the Town. 
(c)  Payment with an insufficient funds or no account instrument. Payment of utility user charges with an insufficient funds or no account instrument shall cause the account to become delinquent and water service may be discontinued until the utility user charges are paid in full. A notice will be given three (3) days before shut off. The Town shall charge the utility User twenty dollars ($20.00), for any insufficient funds or no account instrument or payment not honored or returned to the Town. 
(d)  Delinquent utility user charges are a lien against property. 
(1)  All utility user charges when due are and remain a lien upon such building or lot receiving utility service, until such user charges shall be paid in full. The lien is prior and superior to all other liens, claims, titles and encumbrances, whether or not prior in time, except liens for general taxes. Such delinquent charges may be certified to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as delinquent general taxes and special assessments upon such property are collected or by any other means provided by law and shall be subject to any penalties and administrative fees as may be set by the County Treasurer. No such lien shall be removed by the Town once it is so certified. Any such lien attachable to any building, lot or other premises shall extend to the whole of such building, and likewise to the whole of each and every lot upon, which such building may be situated. Until all usage charges and penalties due by reason of the use of the Town's water and sewer and storm drainage facilities are paid and discharged, the Town may refuse to supply and may terminate service of water for use upon the premises against which said lien shall exist. 
(2)  At least thirty (30) days prior to certification of the delinquent utility bill to the County Treasurer for collection, the Town shall mail notice to the property owner advising him or her that the delinquent utility bill will be so certified if payment is not made by the date required in the notice. Notice shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested. Failure of the property owner to accept delivery of said notice within the thirty-day notice period shall not prevent the certification of the delinquent utility charges for collection. 
(e)  Premises considered occupied. All buildings or premises connected to the Town water and sewer facilities shall be held and deemed to be occupied water, sewer and storm drainage usage charges collected thereon. (Prior code 7.01.07; Ord. 11-1987 §1; Ord. 7-1988 §1; Ord. 11-1988 §1; Ord. 5-1991 §2; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2016WE , 9-13-16) 
Sec. 13-1-100. - Town reading of meters. 
    In the event that the Town provides a system whereby the water meters are read by Town staff or subcontractors, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Meters to be read monthly. Insofar as practicable, water meters at each premises served by the Town's water system shall be read on a monthly basis. The meters shall be read at approximately the same time each month with the readings supplied to the Utility Billing Clerk no later than the last day of each month; 
(2)  Inaccessible meters. In the event that a meter is inaccessible to the meter reader, the meter reader shall post a notice on the premises advising the User that he or she was unable to read the meter due to its inaccessibility. In the event that the meter is inaccessible for three (3) consecutive months, the Town shall have the right to relocate the meter to a point on the property or the public right-of-way that will be accessible to the meter reader and such cost incurred will be the responsibility of the User. 
(3)  Estimation of water usage. The Utility Billing Clerk shall provide for the estimation of water usage in the case where a meter is inaccessible to the meter reader. The Utility Billing Clerk shall provide for the estimation of water usage due to inclement weather or other factors beyond the control of the Town where the meter reader is unable to provide meter readings by the last day of the month. Said estimation may be based upon previous usage by the User, the average usage of similar User's during the same time period or upon any other reasonable method as determined by the Town Administrator/Clerk. (Prior code 7.01.07; Ord. 11-1987 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2016WE , 9-13-16) 
Sec. 13-1-110. - Customer self-reading meter system. 
    In the event that the Town provides for a customer "self-reading" system of water meter reading, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Water meter reading cards. The Town shall furnish on a monthly basis to every user a card to be used for the purpose of recording the actual number of gallons of water used during the immediately preceding calendar month. 
(2)  Duty to read water meters. It shall be the duty of every user to read the user's own water meter, to record the reading on the water meter reading card and to mail or deliver said card to the Town Administrator/Clerk so that the card is received by the Town Administrator/Clerk no later than the fifteenth day of each month. 
(3)  Administrative fee for cards not received on time. There shall be assessed an administrative fee, as established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs against all users of active taps on the Town's water system not having returned said user's water meter reading card with the proper meter reading written thereon by the fifteenth day of the month. The administrative fee is to cover the cost of estimating the usage and making adjustments to the account, is nonrefundable and is in addition to the water usage charge otherwise levied against the user. 
(4)  Estimation of water usage. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall provide for the estimation of water usage by a customer who fails to return the water meter reading card to the Town Administrator/Clerk by the fifteenth day of the month. Said estimation may be based upon previous usage by the customer, the average usage of similar customers during the same time period or upon any other reasonable method as determined by the Town Administrator/Clerk. 
(5)  Nonpayment of administrative fee. If any user fails to pay the administrative charge as assessed hereunder, the user shall be subject to termination of water service by the Town as if the user had failed to pay the monthly water user charge of the Town, and the Town reserves the right to pursue its various remedies pursuant to this Code. 
(6)  Multiple administrative charges. The administrative charge set forth herein shall be charged for each month the user fails to deliver the water meter reading card to the Town Administrator/Clerk. (Prior code 7.01.07; Ord. 11-1987 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 13-1-120. - Service restoration fees. 
    In any case where a utility account is delinquent and the supply has been turned off, or the water has been turned off at the request of the owner or agent due to a vacancy, the water shall not be turned on again until all delinquent user fees have been paid and until a service restoration (turn-on) fee as established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs has been paid to the Town Administrator/Clerk. (Prior code 7.01.07; Ord. 11-1987 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2016WE , 9-13-16) 
Sec. 13-1-130. - Discontinuance of utility services by Town. 
    Water Utility service to a User may be terminated upon the failure of the User to pay the amount due on the utility bill on or before the twentieth day of the month, for the payment of a utility bill with an insufficient fund or no account instrument, for failure to comply with the conditions of an installment payment plan, for unsafe or hazardous service lines, for tampering in any manner with the Town's utility facilities, for failing to abide by water use imposed by the Board of Trustees or for violation of any of the provisions of this Article. Advance notice of the pending termination shall be given only for the failure of a User to pay the amount due on the utility bill, or for the payment of a utility bill with an insufficient fund or no account check. 
(1)  Notice of pending termination of utility service. Any required notice of the termination of water service shall be served upon the User or owner of the property owing a delinquent utility account at least ten business days before the date the service is to be terminated. Such notice shall be taped to or hung on the door (door tag) to the address listed in the utility billing records which shall be sufficient to satisfy this requirement. 
(2)  The notice shall contain the following information: 
a.  The account number; 
b.  The amount of the unpaid bill and the amount that must be collected in order to avoid shut off; 
c.  The date on which the utility service will be terminated if the unpaid bill is not paid in sufficient amount; 
d.  The employee(s) of the Town to be contacted to ask about the notice, and the telephone number and normal office hours during which staff can be reached; 
e.  That an additional twenty-five dollars ($25.00) service charge will be added to the bill if a service is turned off. 
(3)  If a second or subsequent turn-off notice is delivered in a twelve-month period resulting in a service turn-off, a service charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be added to the bill. 
(4)  Termination of service. Water utility service to a User shall be terminated by turning off the water at the stopcock or at the meter, or by removal of the meter. 
(5)  Restoration of service. Service to a property that has been terminated for service shall not be restored until: 
a.  The delinquent utility user charges have been paid in full, including penalties and the service fee(s) for service restoration; or 
b.  A service fee is paid for restoring services and the owner of the property served enters into an installment payment plan with the Town. The Owner's agreement to an installment payment plan shall not satisfy the lien held by the Town against the property served. 
c.  The cause for termination has been corrected. (Prior code 7.01.07; Ord. 11-1987 §1; Ord. 5-1991 §§2, 3, 4, 5; Ord. 7-1992 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2016WE , 9-13-16) 
Sec. 13-1-140. - Installment plan for delinquent accounts. 
(a)  Installment payment plan for Delinquent accounts. The Utility Billing Clerk may agree to provide an installment payment plan for delinquent accounts. Plans may also be approved by the Town Administrator/Clerk or the by the Board of Trustees. An installment payment plan shall consist of two (2) or more equal payments over a period of sixty (60) days or more depending on the account and circumstances for the full amount of the delinquent account. To enter into an installment payment plan, the User shall pay the following fees, if applicable: 
(1)  The turn-on fee for restoring service. 
(b)  Any User entering into an installment payment plan shall be required to sign a binding contract detailing the conditions under which the Delinquent account will be paid in full. If a User fails to make an installment payment when due, or fails to pay the current billing payment when due, the Town may terminate service to the User immediately and without further notice. If an installment payment plan is defaulted upon, no further installment payment plans will be allowed for a period of twelve (12) months. (Prior code 7.01.07; Ord. 11-1987 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2016WE , 9-13-16) 
Sec. 13-1-150. - Corrections in accounts. 
    The Utility Billing Clerk or Town Administrator/Clerk is authorized to correct billing errors or make other adjustments to a User's account as may be appropriate to comply with this Chapter. (Prior code 7.01.07; Ord. 11-1987 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2016WE , 9-13-16) 
Sec. 13-1-160. - Sprinkling, water scarcity, water supply emergencies. 
(a)  Sprinkling, water scarcity. The Board of Trustees shall have the authority to establish such rules and regulations so as to limit the days and hours of outdoor watering or sprinkling or to limit the use of water in such manner as the Town Board shall deem necessary. Such regulations may be adopted by resolution and shall become effective immediately upon passage. Enforcement shall be by summons issued in accordance with Section 2-4-140 of this Code. And the property of any User violating this provision shall be subject to utility service termination. Each day that such violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  Water supply emergencies. If the water system experiences an emergency due to a water main break, treatment plant or storage system malfunctions, fire, flood or other natural disaster, the Director of Public Works or any authorized law enforcement officer or fire official may direct and require that residents of the Town restrict all usage of water during such time of emergency. Any Person who fails to obey such lawful order of the Public Works Director, law enforcement officer or fire official commits a civil infraction under this Code. (Prior code 7.01.07.5; Ord. 11-1987 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2016WE , 9-13-16) 
Sec. 13-1-170. - Pollution of water supply. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any Person to pollute or introduce any pollutant in any manner to any reservoir, stream, trench, pipe or drain within five (5) miles above the point where the Town receives any portion of its water supply, including any pollution or water contamination of any underground water source. 
(b)  Any Person placing manure, dead animals or other matter or allowing livestock to stand in any water source within the protected area shall be deemed to have violated this Section. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any Person to damage any facilities used by the Town in its water delivery system, including facilities located outside of the boundaries of the Town. The facilities protected shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, any pipeline, plant, building, head gate, valve, water box or other improvements, whether located within or outside of the Town limits. 
(d)  Any Person who violates any provisions of this Section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. In addition to such penalties, such Person shall be liable for all damages resulting from such violation. (Ord. 10-2005 §91-4; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 1-2016WE , 9-13-16) 
Division 2 - Wastewater Treatment and Pretreatment Systems 

Sec. 13-1-200. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This Article I, Division 2 sets forth uniform requirements for all users of the publicly owned treatment works for the Town and enables the Town to comply with applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 C.F.R. Part 403). The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass through it, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; 
(3)  To enable the Town to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit conditions, sludge use, and disposal requirements, and all other state and federal laws to which the POTW is subject; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the POTW; and 
(5)  To protect the POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment. 
(b)  This Article I, Division 2 authorizes the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit and other control mechanisms; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user monitoring and reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-210. - Administration. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the Administrator/Clerk shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Article I, Division 2. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Administrator/Clerk may be delegated by the Administrator/Clerk to other water personnel. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-220. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations, when used in this Article I, Division 2, shall have the designated meanings: 
CWA Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. gpd Gallons per day gpm Gallons per minute mg/l Milligrams per liter NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System O&M Operation and maintenance RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act  
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-230. - Definitions. 
    Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this Article I, Division 2, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
    Approval authority. The appropriate EPA regional administrator, or upon approval of Colorado's pretreatment program, the chief administrator of such pretreatment program. 
    Authorized representative of the user: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  The individual described in Section 13-1-210 may designate another authorized representative if the authorization: Is in writing to perform functions provided; specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and is submitted to the Town. 
    Best management practices or BMPs. The activities, practices, operating or maintenance procedures and treatment requirements necessary to meet the objectives of this Article I, Division 2 and to prevent or reduce prohibited discharges into the POTW. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 C.F.R Parts 405-471. 
    Composite sample. A sample formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples. The sample may be a time proportional composite sample or a flow proportional composite sample. In cases in which a composite sample is not obtainable, a composite sample shall consist of a minimum of four (4) grab samples collected at equally spaced intervals. 
    Daily maximum discharge limit. The maximum allowable discharge of a pollutant during a calendar day determined by the arithmetic average of all measurements of the pollutant taken that day. 
    Administrator/Clerk. The Administrator/Clerk of the Town or the Administrator/Clerk's duly authorized representative. 
    Domestic wastewater. (1) Wastewater from normal residential activities including, but not limited to, wastewater from kitchen, bath, and laundry facilities; (2) wastewater from the personal sanitary conveniences (toilets, showers, bathtubs, fountains, noncommercial sinks, and similar structures) of commercial, industrial, or institutional buildings, provided that the wastewater exhibits characteristics that are similar to those of wastewater from normal residential activities. 
    Enforcement response plan. The plan that sets forth the specific actions the Town will take to respond to violations of this Article I, Division 2. 
    Environmental protection agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Administrator/Clerk, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Fats, oil, and grease or FOG. A semi-solid, viscous liquid organic polar compound derived from animal or plant sources that contains multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 C.F.R. Part 136. 
    Food service establishment or FSE. A facility engaged in preparing or serving food. This term does not include single-family residences. 
    Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
    Grease interceptor. An outside, underground, multi-compartment tank designed to reduce the amount of fats, oil and grease in the wastewater discharged to the POTW. 
    Grease trap. An indoor device designed to reduce the amount of fats, oil and grease in wastewater discharged into the POTW. Grease traps usually serve no more than four (4) fixtures. 
    Grease removal device. A grease trap, grease interceptor or other device that is designed, constructed and intended to remove, hold or otherwise prevent the passage of fats, oil and grease to the sanitary sewer. 
    Hauled waste. Any domestic or nondomestic waste from holding tanks, including, without limitation, chemical toilets, vacuum pump tank trucks, and septic tanks. Hauled waste does not include domestic waste from an individual's recreational vehicle (e.g., camper or trailer). 
    Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Sections 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Clean Water Act. 
    Industrial user or user A direct or indirect discharge source of which contains non-domestic wastewater. 
    Instantaneous measurement. For monitoring requirements, a single reading, observation or measurement independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of the Town's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory or regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act; any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Local limit. Limit developed for a specific pollutant based on the quantity that the POTW can accept. 
    Monthly average. The maximum allowable discharge of a pollutant during a calendar month determined by the arithmetic mean of all samples collected during the calendar month. 
    New source: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act, which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
    Nondomestic wastewater. Water carrying wastes from any process or activity of business, trade, manufacturing, industry, or service. 
    Oil and sand removal device. Trap, interceptor or other Town-approved device designed to remove petroleum products, sand, sediment or similar substances. 
    Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Town's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities. 
    Pollutant. Includes, but is not limited to, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
    Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or alternation may be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, process changes, or by other means except as prohibited by Section 13-1-300. Appropriate pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such as equalization tanks or facilities for protection against surges or slug loadings that might interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW. However, where wastewater from a regulated process is mixed in an equalization facility with unregulated wastewater or with wastewater from another regulated process, the effluent from the equalization facility must meet an adjusted pretreatment limit calculated in accordance with 40 C.F.R. 403.6(e). 
    Pretreatment Requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment other than a pretreatment standard imposed on a user. 
    Pretreatment standard or standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 C.F.R. 403.5. 
    Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances as set forth in Section 13-1-250. 
    Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A treatment works, as defined in Section 212 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C § 1292) which is owned by the Town. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature and any sewers, pipes, and other conveyances which convey wastewater to the treatment plant. 
    Significant Industrial User or SIU: 
(1)  All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 C.F.R 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N; or 
(2)  Any other industrial user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the Town on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in definition of "significant industrial use or SIU", subsection (2)b. above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Town may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 C.F.R 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
    Slug discharge. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Section 13-1-250 or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or noncustomary batch discharge that has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits, or permit conditions. 
    Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried domestic and nondomestic wastes from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
    Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-240. - Legal authority. 
(a)  The Town operates pursuant to legal authority enforceable in federal, state, or local courts, which authorizes or enables the Town to apply and enforce the requirements of this Article I, Division 2 and 40 C.F.R Part 403. This authority allows the Administrator/Clerk to: 
(1)  Deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants to the POTW by users where: 
a.  Such contributions do not meet applicable federal, state, or local pretreatment standards and requirements; or 
b.  Could cause the treatment plant to violate its NPDES permit; or 
c.  Could cause problems in the POTW. 
(2)  Control through permit, order or similar means the wastewater contributions to the POTW by each user to ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(3)  Require compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements by industrial users. 
(4)  Identify and locate all possible industrial users which might be subject to the pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-250. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user may introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant(s) which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F (60° C) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R 261.21; 
(2)  Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with a pH less than 5.0; 
(3)  Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference; 
(4)  Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F (40° C); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the Administrator/Clerk in accordance with Section 13-1-340; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewer for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment plant process which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant effluent; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(13)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(14)  Wastewater causing two (2) readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than five percent (5%) or any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit of the meter; 
(15)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW. 
(c)  Users processing, storing, or handling pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this Section in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW may be required to develop a slug control plan in accordance with Section 13-1-330. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-260. - National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
    The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 C.F.R Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. 
(a)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the Administrator/Clerk may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 C.F.R 403.6(c). 
(b)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Administrator/Clerk may impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula at 40 C.F.R 403.6(e). 
(c)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R 403.15. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-270. - State pretreatment standards. 
    State pretreatment standards and requirements adopted pursuant to the Colorado Water Quality Control Act shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal standards. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-280. - Local limits. 
    The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following daily maximum allowable discharge limits: 
Arsenic 0.15 mg/l Mercury 0.0002 mg/l Cadmium 0.08 mg/l Molybdenum 0.49 mg/l Chromium 1.10 mg/l Nickel 1.95 mg/l Chromium (VI) 0.59 mg/l Selenium 0.37 mg/l Copper 1.94 mg/l Silver 0.19 mg/l Cyanide 0.65 mg/l Zinc 6.28 mg/l Lead 0.92 mg/l  
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-290. - Town's right of revision. 
    The Town reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, resolution, in a wastewater discharge permit, or other appropriate means, more stringent or additional standards or requirements to protect the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-300. - Dilution. 
    Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The Administrator/Clerk may impose mass limitations on an industrial user who is using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-310. - Pretreatment facilities. 
(a)  Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this Article I, Division 2 and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in Sections 13-1-250 through 13-1-280 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the Administrator/Clerk, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. The Administrator/Clerk may require that detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures be submitted for review, and shall be acceptable to the Town before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the Town under the provisions of this Article I, Division 2. 
(b)  The Administrator/Clerk may require a user to install sampling, monitoring, or other appropriate pretreatment equipment as necessary to assure compliance with the pretreatment standards and requirements. The equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-320. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the Administrator/Clerk may require that a user's wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, separate domestic wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this Article I, Division 2. 
(b)  Backflow prevention devices shall be installed and maintained by the user wherever there is a possibility of the user's process or activity contaminating the Town water supply. Such devices shall be tested, inspected, and repaired as needed by the user at its expense. 
(c)  Oil and sand removal devices and grease removal devices. 
(1)  Oil and sand removal devices shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Administrator/Clerk, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of oil, sand, or similar material; except that such devices shall not be required for residential users. All such devices shall be of type and capacity approved by the Town and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such devices shall be inspected, cleaned and maintained, as needed, by the user at its expense. 
(2)  Grease removal devices shall be provided in accordance with Section 13-1-350. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances shall install devices or construct to prevent the discharge of flammable substances into the POTW. 
(e)  Individual water meters, sub-meters or flow meters shall be installed where the Administrator/Clerk has determined it is necessary to ascertain flow data. Such devices shall be tested, inspected, and repaired as needed by the user at its expense. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-330. - Accidental discharge; slug control plans. 
(a)  Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of substances that have a reasonable potential to violate the POTW's regulations, local limits, or permit conditions. 
(b)  The Administrator/Clerk shall evaluate whether a significant industrial user needs a plan or other action to control slug discharge within one (1) year of being designated a significant industrial user. 
(c)  The Administrator/Clerk may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement a slug control plan or best management practices plan. If the Administrator/Clerk decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall address, at a minimum, the following elements: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharge, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under Section 13-1-250 with procedures for follow-up written notification within five (5) days as required by Section 13-1-440; and 
(4)  If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(d)  A notice shall be posted in a prominent place advising which employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection 13-1-330(a), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(e)  Significant industrial users are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at their facilities affecting potential for a slug discharge. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-340. - Hauled waste. 
(a)  Any hauled waste meeting the definition of a RCRA hazardous waste as defined in 40 C.F.R 261 will not be accepted. 
(b)  The Administrator/Clerk may accept hauled wastes on a case-by-case basis and may require such haulers to obtain a wastewater discharge permit. Hauled waste is subject to all the requirements of this Article I, Division 2. Hauled waste may only be discharged at locations designated by the Administrator/Clerk. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the Administrator/Clerk. The Administrator/Clerk may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The Administrator/Clerk may require the waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load or a waste-tracking form for every load prior to discharge. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-350. - Fats, oil and grease management. 
(a)  Applicability. This Section shall apply to all food service establishments connected to the POTW when, in the opinion of the Administrator/Clerk, it is necessary to prevent fats, oil and grease in quantities sufficient to cause sanitary sewer line restriction or necessitate increased POTW maintenance. 
(1)  New food service establishments. All new food service establishments shall be required to install a grease removal device as set forth in Section 13-10-350(2) prior to commencing discharge to the POTW. 
(2)  Existing food service establishments. 
a.  Unless otherwise exempted under subsection (a)(2)b. below, all food service establishments in existence prior to November 1, 2008, shall install a grease removal device within the timeline specified by the Administrator/Clerk after notification that such a device is required. A grease removal device shall be required if: 
1.  the food service establishment does not have a grease removal device and is discharging to the POTW wastewater containing fats, oil, and grease in quantities sufficient to cause sanitary sewer line restriction or necessitate increased POTW maintenance; 
2.  the existing grease removal device, in combination with best management practices, does not cause a reduction in the quantity of fats, oil, and grease sufficient to prevent sanitary sewer line restriction or POTW maintenance; or 
3.  the food service establishment changes in nature or is renovated in such a manner as to increase the likelihood of discharging to the POTW wastewater contributing fats, oil, and grease in quantities sufficient to cause sanitary sewer line restriction or necessitate increased POTW maintenance. 
b.  Existing food service establishments that are unable to comply with this Section due to site or plumbing constraints which make compliance impossible or financially impracticable shall apply in writing to the Administrator/Clerk for an exemption, which may be granted by the Administrator/Clerk in the Administrator/Clerk's sole discretion. The written request shall include the reason(s) why the food service establishment cannot comply with this Section and steps the food service establishment will take to prevent sanitary sewer line restriction and increased POTW maintenance. 
(b)  Grease removal device requirements. 
(1)  Grease interceptors. Unless exempted under subsection (b)(2) below, food service establishments shall install, operate and maintain grease interceptors. Grease interceptors shall be seven hundred fifty (750) gallon minimum capacity and provide a minimum of thirty (30) minutes retention time at total peak flow and must be maintained and installed in accordance with manufacturer's instructions and all applicable laws. The maximum size shall be two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons; a series of interceptors may be necessary for grease interceptor capacities greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons based on cleaning and maintenance frequency. Grease interceptors shall be located to provide easy access for cleaning and inspection. 
(2)  Grease traps. A food service establishment may install, operate and maintain a grease trap in satisfaction of the requirements set forth in subsection (a) above, if the Administrator/Clerk determines that the food service establishment is discharging to the POTW wastewater containing fats, oil, and grease in such small amounts that a grease interceptor is not warranted or that installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible. At minimum, grease traps shall be fifty (50) gpm flow rated or provide one hundred (100) pound grease retention and must be maintained and installed in accordance with manufacturer's instructions and all applicable laws. Grease traps shall be located to provide easy access for cleaning and inspection. A flow restriction device shall be placed upstream of the grease trap and must be accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(3)  Other grease removal devices may be allowed if it is shown that an alternative pretreatment technology is equally effective in controlling the discharge of fats, oil and grease. The Administrator/Clerk will evaluate the proposed use of other grease removal devices on a case-by-case basis and set appropriate maintenance and recording keeping requirements as needed. 
(4)  Unless directed otherwise, a professional engineer registered in the State of Colorado shall size and provide documentation to the Town to support the proposed grease removal device size. 
(5)  Certification. An engineer licensed by the State of Colorado shall file a written, signed certification with the Administrator/Clerk stating that the required grease removal device has been installed and all sources of fats, oil and grease are discharging to the device before discharging wastewater to the POTW. 
(c)  Best management practices. Food service establishments shall use best management practices designed to reduce the amount of wastewater containing fats, oil, and grease discharged into the POTW. These include: 
(1)  Implementing a comprehensive employee training program on the problems associated with fats, oil, and grease and their proper disposal; 
(2)  Disconnecting or minimizing the use of garbage disposals; 
(3)  Installing a ?" or 3/16 " mesh screen over all kitchen sinks, mop sinks, and floor sinks; 
(4)  Using "dry" clean-up methods, including scraping or soaking up fats, oil and grease from plates and cookware before washing; 
(5)  Using pre-wash sinks to clean plates and cookware; 
(6)  Recycling fats, oil, and grease and beneficial food waste when possible; 
(7)  Pouring remaining liquid fats, oil, and grease from pots, pans, and other cookware into containers to be disposed of in the trash once congealed; and 
(8)  Posting BMPs in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at all times. 
(d)  Maintenance. 
(1)  Grease removal devices shall be inspected, cleaned, and maintained in proper working order at all times by the user at its expense. 
(2)  Grease interceptor maintenance. 
(a)  Grease interceptors in active use shall be cleaned at least once every three (3) months or when the total accumulation of surface fats, oil, and grease (including floating solids) and settled solids reaches twenty-five percent (25%) of the grease interceptor's overall liquid depth, whichever occurs first. 
(b)  In the event that a grease interceptor is larger than the capacity of a vacuum truck, the interceptor shall be completely evacuated within a twenty-four (24) hour period. The user's documentation shall accurately reflect each pumping event. 
(3)  Grease trap maintenance. Grease traps shall be serviced at least one (1) time per month or when the amount of waste captured reaches twenty-five percent (25%) of the trap's capacity, whichever occurs first. Removable baffles shall be removed and cleaned during the maintenance process. 
(4)  Other grease removal devices. Facilities with grease removal devices other than grease interceptors or grease traps shall follow the Administrator/Clerk's maintenance and recordkeeping requirements as directed in Section 13-1-350(b)(3). 
(5)  The Administrator/Clerk may require that a grease removal device be cleaned more frequently than set forth in this subsection (d) if the cleaning frequency set forth herein is found to be inadequate. The Administrator/Clerk may change the required maintenance frequency to reflect changes in actual operating conditions. 
(6)  After each cleaning, the food service establishment shall inspect the device to verify that: 
a.  The contents of the device have been fully evacuated and that no liquids, semisolids, or solids were discharged back into the device after cleaning; and 
b.  The interior components of the device are in proper working order. 
(7)  Food service establishments shall require the liquid waste hauler, transporter, or any other person cleaning or servicing a grease removal device to completely evacuate all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, bottom solids, and accumulated waste on the walls of the grease removal device. Waste must be disposed of in accordance with federal, state, and local laws. 
(8)  Cleaning frequency variance. Any food service establishment desiring a cleaning schedule less frequent than that required in this subsection (d) shall submit a request to the Administrator/Clerk along with the maintenance records for the last four (4) grease interceptor cleanings, or last eight (8) grease trap cleanings, including measurements of the thickness of the floating fats, oil and grease and bottom solids layer, and total volume removed. A reduction in cleaning frequency may be granted by the Administrator/Clerk when it has been determined that the grease interceptor has adequate detention time for fats, oil, and grease removal. The cleaning frequency will depend on variables such as the capacity of the device, the amount of grease in the wastewater, the amount of solids in the wastewater, and the degree of adherence to BMPs. 
(e)  Prohibitions. The following are strictly prohibited: 
(1)  Connecting garbage grinders, garbage disposals, and dishwashers to grease traps. 
(2)  Discharging wastewater to a grease trap in excess of 140° Fahrenheit. 
(3)  Altering or tampering with a grease removal device. 
(4)  Discharging or permitting another to discharge any liquid, semi-solid, or solid back into a grease removal device at any time during maintenance or cleaning operations. 
(5)  Discharging or permitting another to discharge any grease removal device wastes into any drain, public or private sewer, or other grease removal device. 
(6)  Using hot water or chemicals, bacteria, enzymes, or other products to emulsify fats, oil, and /grease prior to discharging wastewater into the POTW; provided, however, that products may be added to floor drains and other kitchen fixtures to keep the plumbing between the kitchen and the grease removal device clear if such products are used according to their labels and do not interfere with the operation or performance of the grease removal device. Labels and other product descriptions must be kept on file with the food service establishment for at least three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-360. - Wastewater analysis. 
    When requested by the Administrator/Clerk, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within the time specified by the Administrator/Clerk. The Administrator/Clerk is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-370. - Signatures and certification. 
    When required, user applications, surveys, questionnaires, and reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-380. - Other jurisdictions. 
(a)  If another jurisdiction, or user located within another jurisdiction, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Town shall enter into an intergovernmental agreement with the contributing jurisdiction. 
(b)  Such intergovernmental agreement shall ensure that discharges received from entities outside of the Town's jurisdictional boundaries are regulated to the same extent as are discharges from within the Town's jurisdictional boundaries. 
(c)  Such intergovernmental agreement shall also include approval of such contributing jurisdiction as to the territory in which service is to be rendered by the Town. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-390. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 C.F.R 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Administrator/Clerk a report which contains the information listed at 40 C.F.R 403.12(b)(1)-(7). Sampling types shall be as specified at 40 C.F.R. 403.12(g)(3) and (4). 
(b)  At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the Administrator/Clerk a report which contains the information listed 40 C.F.R 403.12(b)(1)-(5). Sampling types shall be as specified at 40 C.F.R. 403.12(g)(3) and (4). A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-400. - Compliance schedule. 
    If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the user shall submit to the Administrator/Clerk the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this Section must meet the requirements contained at 40 C.F.R 403. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-410. - Reports on compliance. 
    Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Administrator/Clerk a report containing the information described in 40 C.F.R 403.12(b)(4)-(6) using the sampling types specified at 40 C.F.R 403.12(g)(3) and (4). All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13-1-370. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-420. - Compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the Administrator/Clerk but in no case less than once per six (6) months, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and/or maximum daily flow for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13-1-370. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this Section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Administrator/Clerk, using the procedures prescribed in Section 13-1-480, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-430. - Reports of changed conditions. 
    All industrial users shall promptly notify the Administrator/Clerk in advance of any planned substantial changes in the volume or character of pollutants of its discharge including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under Section 13-1-470. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-440. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, a noncustomary batch discharge or a slug discharge, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the Administrator/Clerk of the incident. This notification shall include, at a minimum, the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the Administrator/Clerk, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measure(s) to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this Article I, Division 2. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-450. - Reports and information. 
    All users connected to, or proposing to connect to, the POTW shall provide appropriate reports, or information to the Administrator/Clerk as the Administrator/Clerk may require in order to achieve the requirements of this Article I, Division 2. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-460. - Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting. 
    If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the Administrator/Clerk within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Administrator/Clerk within seven (7) days after becoming aware of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-470. - Discharge of hazardous waste. 
(a)  No user shall discharge hazardous waste without first obtaining a permit from the Town. 
(b)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R Part 261. Such notification must include the information specified in 40 C.F.R 403.12(p) and pretreatment standard operating procedures. 
(c)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(d)  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Administrator/Clerk, and State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(e)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(f)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this Article I, Division 2, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable Federal or State law. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-480. - Analytical requirements. 
    All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 C.F.R Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-490. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsection (b), below, a user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the Administrator/Clerk may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
(b)  Grab samples must be used for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, and volatile organic compounds Temperature and pH must be an instantaneous measurement. 
(c)  Samples shall be collected using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, approved EPA methodologies, and appropriate EPA guidance. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-500. - Reports received. 
    Reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not postmarked the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-510. - Record keeping. 
(a)  Users subject to the reporting requirements of this ordinance shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this ordinance and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. 
(b)  Records shall include, at a minimum, the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the sample(s); the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. 
(c)  These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the Town, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Administrator/Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-520. - Right of entry: Inspection and sampling. 
(a)  The Administrator/Clerk shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this Article I, Division 2 and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Administrator/Clerk ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, noncompliance investigation, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(b)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security personnel so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the Administrator/Clerk will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(c)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the Administrator/Clerk access to the user's premises shall be considered a violation of this Article I, Division 2. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-530. - Search warrants. 
    If the Administrator/Clerk has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this Article I, Division 2, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample to verify compliance with this Article I, Division 2 or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, the Administrator/Clerk may seek issuance of a search warrant from the court with appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-540. - Confidentially. 
(a)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, permit applications, discharge permits and monitoring programs, and from inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction subject to the provisions of the Colorado Open Records Law. 
(b)  Information and data which is effluent data will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-550. - Publication. 
    The Administrator/Clerk shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-560. - Criteria. 
    An industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(a)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of measurements taken for the same parameter during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined in Section 13-1-230; 
(b)  Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined in Section 13-1-230(ah), multiplied by the applicable criteria (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(c)  Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement that the Administrator/Clerk determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(d)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Administrator/Clerk's authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(e)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(f)  Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(g)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(h)  Any other violation or group of violations which the Administrator/Clerk determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-570. - Emergency suspensions. 
(a)  The Administrator/Clerk may immediately suspend a user's discharge after notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, environment, or the POTW. 
(b)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Administrator/Clerk may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Administrator/Clerk may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Administrator/Clerk that the period of endangerment has passed, unless termination proceedings are initiated against the user. 
(c)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the cause(s) of the harmful contribution and the measure(s) taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Administrator/Clerk. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-580. - Water supply severance. 
    Whenever a user continues to violate any provision of this Article I, Division 2, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-590. - Inspection fees. 
    An industrial user may be inspected periodically to determine compliance with applicable requirements of this Article I, Division 2. No fee will be charged where the purpose of the first inspection is to determine compliance. However, if a user is not in compliance, a re-inspection fee shall be charged on the user's utility bill for each inspection thereafter until compliance is achieved. Said fee shall be in an amount as established by resolution of the Town Board and shall be in addition to any other fees and charges permitted under this Article I, Division 2. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-600. - Upset. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements at 40 C.F.R 403.16(c) are met. 
(c)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(d)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-610. - Affirmative defense. 
(a)  A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it alleging a violation of the general prohibitions in Section 13-1-250(a), or the specific prohibitions in Sections 13-1-250(b)(3) through (b)(7), if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference; and 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the Town was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-620. - Bypass. 
    For the purposes of this section, bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(a)  An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause Pretreatment Standards or Requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of paragraphs b and c of this section. 
(b)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the Administrator/Clerk, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(1)  A user shall submit oral notice to the Administrator/Clerk of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Administrator/Clerk may waive the written report on a case-by case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(c)  Bypass is prohibited, and the Administrator/Clerk may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(1)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(2)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
(3)  The user submitted notices as required in subsection (b) above. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-630. - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
    The Town may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of operating the Town's pretreatment program which may include: 
(a)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
(b)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(c)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(d)  Fees for filing appeals; and 
(e)  Other fees as the Town may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees may be included on the user's utility bill, relate solely to the matters covered by this Article I, Division 2, and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the Town. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-640. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Article I, Division 2 is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be effected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-650. - Fraud and false statements. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly make a false statement, representation or certification in any record, report, or other document submitted or required to be maintained under this Article I, Division 2. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-660. - Cost recovery. 
    Any user that violated any of the provisions of this Article I, Division 2 or that discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction or causes damage to or impairs the POTW shall be liable to the Town for any expense, loss, or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The Town shall charge the user for the cost incurred by the Town for any monitoring surveillance, cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge and for costs incurred by the Town in investigating the violation or discharge and in enforcement this Article I, Division 2, including reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses of litigation. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
Sec. 13-1-670. - Leased property. 
    In situations involving leased or rented property, not resolved with the tenant, the owner or authorized representative of the property shall be notified of continued violations and is responsible for assuring compliance with the standards and requirements of this Article I, Division 2. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008 , 7-22-08) 
ARTICLE 2 - Cross-Connection Controls 

Sec. 13-2-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to: 
(1)  Protect the Town's systems from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within its customers' internal distribution systems or its customers' private water systems such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or backsiphon into the Town's water systems; 
(2)  Promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between its customers' in-plant potable water systems and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and 
(3)  Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of the potable water system. (Prior code 7.01.08; Ord. 11-1987 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 13-2-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
    Air-gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or the device and the flood level rim of said vessel. An approved air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the rim of the vessel, and in no case less than one (1) inch. When an air-gap is used at the service connection to prevent the contamination or pollution of the public potable water system, an emergency bypass shall be installed around the air-gap system and an approved reduced pressure principal device shall be installed in the bypass system 
    Approved means accepted by the Town as meeting the applicable specification stated or cited in this Chapter, or as suitable for the proposed use. 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the Town's approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another supplier's public potable water supply or any natural sources such as wells, springs, rivers, streams, irrigation canals, reservoirs, lakes, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the Town does not have sanitary control. 
    Back pressure means backflow cause by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or means that could create pressure within the system greater than the system pressure. 
    Backflow preventer means a device or means designed to prevent backflow or back-siphonage. 
    Back-siphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    Certified inspector and tester means a person who has passed a state approved and/or sponsored testing and inspection course and who is listed by the state as a certified inspector/tester. 
    Check valve means a self-closing device which is designed to permit the flow of fluids in one (1) direction and to close if there is a reversal of flow. 
    Colorado Department of Health Cross-Connection Control Manual means a manual that has been published by the state addressing cross-connection control practices which will be used as a guide for the Town in implementing the cross-connection control program. 
    Contamination means impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
    Critical level means the critical level C-L or C/L marking on a backflow prevention device or vacuum breaker which is a point conforming to approved standards and established by the testing laboratory (usually stamped on the device by the manufacturer), which determines the minimum elevation above the flood-level rim of the fixture or receptacle served at which the device may be installed. When a backflow prevention device does not bear a critical level marking the bottom of the vacuum breaker, combination valve, or the bottom of any such approved device shall constitute the critical level. 
    Cross-connection means any physical arrangement whereby a Town's water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage or other waste or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the Town's water supply as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices and other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of which, backflow control could occur are considered to be cross-connections. 
    Cross-connections-Controlled means the connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention device properly installed that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
    Double check valve assembly means an assembly of two (2) independently operating approved check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and Town-approved testing establishment for backflow prevention devices. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line maintenance and testing. 
    Flood-level rim means the edge of the receptacle from which water overflows. 
    Hazard, degree of is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
    Hazard, health means any condition, device or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create or, in the judgment of the Public Works Director, may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. An example of a health hazard is a structural defect, including cross-connections, in a water supply system. 
    Hazard, plumbing means a plumbing-type cross-connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by vacuum breaker, air-gap separation or backflow prevention device. Unprotected plumbing-type cross-connections are considered to be a health hazard. 
    Hazard, pollutional means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system which would constitute a nuisance, be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health. 
    Hazard, system means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would be a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
    Industrial fluids system means any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to, polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and user waters originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalis; circulated cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, irrigation canals, reservoirs and systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerin, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions; and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes. 
    Mayor means the Mayor of the Town or his or her duly authorized representative. 
    Nonpotable water means water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of questionable potability. 
    Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in the water that may degrade the water quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair its usefulness. 
    Potable water means water free from impurities in amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects. The bacteriological, chemical and radiological quality shall conform with the State's Drinking Water Regulations. 
    Reduced pressure principal device means an assembly of two (2) independently operating approved check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve between the two (2) check valves tightly closing shut-off valves on either side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check and relief valves. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and Town-approved testing agency for backflow prevention on assemblies. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two (2) check valves at a level less than the pressure on the Town's supply side of the device. At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the two (2) check valves shall be less than the pressure on the Town's supply side of the device. In case of leakage of either of the check valves, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two (2) pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line maintenance and testing and be installed in a location where no part of the device will be submerged. 
    Submerged inlet means a water pipe or extension thereto from a Town's water supply terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain water of questionable quality or waste or other contaminant and which is unprotected against backflow. 
    Vacuum means any pressure less than that exerted by the atmosphere. 
    Vacuum breaker, atmospheric nonpressure type means a vacuum breaker designed so as not to be subjected to static line pressure or installed where it would be under pressure for not more than twelve (12) hours in any twenty-four-hour period. 
    Vacuum breaker, pressure type means a vacuum breaker designed so as not to be subjected to static line pressure. 
    Water service connection means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system; i.e., where the Town loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There shall be no unprotected take-offs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the Town's water system. (Prior code 7.01.08; Ord. 11-1987 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 13-2-30. - Policy. 
(a)  No water service connection shall be installed or maintained by the Town unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulation and this Chapter. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the Town if a backflow prevention device required by this Chapter is not installed, tested and maintained; if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed; or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. Any person commits a misdemeanor when such person: 
(1)  Connects any pipe, tube, stopcock or contrivance with any main or service line supplying water to any property and does not install, test and maintain a backflow prevention device if one (1) is required by this Chapter; 
(2)  Removes or bypasses an existing backflow prevention device; or 
(3)  Allows an unprotected cross-connection to exist on the premises; 
Each day that such violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the Public Works Director to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the Public Works Director shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the conditions in conformance with state and Town statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(c)  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed, depending on degree of hazard. Such a device shall be installed at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist: 
(1)  In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may be of sanitary, bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the Public Works Director, the Town's water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. 
(2)  In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the Town's water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
(3)  In the case of premises having either internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled or intricate plumbing and piping arrangements, or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the Town's water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line. 
(d)  The type of protective device required under Paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) below shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists, as follows: 
(1)  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in Subsection (c)(1) above and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the Town's water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device. 
(2)  In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the Town's water system, the Town's water system shall be protected by an approved double-check valve assembly. 
(3)  In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the Town's water system, the Town's water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. 
(4)  In the case of any premises where there are uncontrolled cross-connections, either actual or potential, the Town's water system shall be protected by an approved airgap separation or an approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device at the service connection. 
(5)  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the Town's water system shall be protected against backflow or back-siphonage from the premises by the installation of a backflow prevention device in the service line. In this case, maximum protection will be required; that is, an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principal backflow prevention device shall be installed in each service to the premises. 
(e)  Any backflow prevention device required herein shall be of a model and size approved by the Public Works Director. Approved backflow prevention device means a device that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association entitled AWWA 0506-78 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principal and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices, and has met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California established by Specifications of Backflow Prevention Devices - #69-2, dated March, 1969, or the most current issue. Said AWWA and FCCC&HR standards and specifications have been adopted by the Town. Final approval shall be evidenced by a certificate of approval issued by an approved testing laboratory, certifying full compliance with said AWWA standards and FCCC&HR specifications. The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the Public Works Director to test and certify backflow preventers: 
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control & Hydraulic Research 
University of Southern California 
University Park 
Los Angeles, California 90007 
Testing laboratories other than the laboratory listed above will be added to an approved list as they are qualified by the Public Works Director. Backflow preventers which may be subjected to back pressure or back-siphonage, that have been fully tested and have been granted a certificate of approval by said qualified laboratory and that are listed on the laboratory's current list of approved devices may be used without further test of qualification. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the customer-user at any premises where backflow devices are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. In those instances where the Public Works Director deems the hazard to be great enough, he or she may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed by a certified inspector/tester. These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer-user whenever said devices are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhauls shall be kept and submitted to the Town within thirty (30) days after the device has been tested and/or inspected. (Prior code 7.01.08; Ord. 11-1987 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 13-2-40. - Existing cross-connections. 
    Within a reasonable time following the adoption of the regulation, existing cross-connections between the Town's water system and any secondary water system shall be eliminated or protected by means of an approved backflow preventer. The following entities will install devices within one (1) year: sewage treatment plants, hospitals, mortuaries and industrial establishments that manufacture materials that can exhibit health hazards. Any person who fails to eliminate or protect existing cross-connections by means of a backflow preventer within the time specified above commits a misdemeanor. Each day that such violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense. (Prior code 7.01.08; Ord. 11-1987 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 13-2-50. - Specific system requirements. 
(a)  Irrigation systems. The following guidelines relating to backflow prevention devices for irrigation systems shall apply: 
(1)  Atmospheric vacuum breakers shall be installed after the last control valve of each sprinkler circuit and at a minimum of six (6) inches above the highest irrigation head. The atmospheric vacuum breaker shall be installed only on irrigation circuits with heads that will not return any pressure in the circuit when the circuit control valve is closed. 
(2)  Pressure vacuum breakers shall be installed at the beginning of each irrigation circuit and at a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the highest irrigation head on the circuit. Individual irrigation circuits having quick-coupling valves or other similar type heads that will permit pressure to be retained in the circuit shall have a pressure vacuum breaker installed as a minimum requirement for each circuit. Irrigation systems using the subsurface drip method shall have a pressure vacuum breaker on each circuit. A pressure vacuum breaker may not be installed where a double-check valve assembly, reduced-pressure principal backflow prevention device or air-gap separation is required. 
(3)  A double-check valve assembly may be installed to serve multiple irrigation circuits in lieu of vacuum breakers on each individual irrigation circuit. 
(4)  A reduced-pressure principal backflow preventer or air-gap separation shall be required before any piping network in which fertilizers, pesticides and other chemicals or toxic contaminants are injected or siphoned into the irrigation system. 
(b)  Fire systems. Water systems for fighting fire, derived from a supply that cannot be approved as safe or potable for human use, shall whenever practicable be kept wholly separate from drinking water pipelines and equipment. In cases where the domestic water system is used for both drinking and firefighting purposes, approved backflow prevention devices shall be installed to protect such individual drinking water lines as are not used for firefighting purposes. It is the responsibility of the person causing the introduction of said unapproved or unsafe water into the pipelines to see (1) that a procedure be developed and carried out to notify and protect users of this piping system during the emergency; and (2) that special precautions be taken to disinfect thoroughly and flush out all pipelines which may have become contaminated before they are again used to furnish drinking water. In the event the means of protection of water customers is by disinfection of the auxiliary firefighting supply, the installation and its use shall be thoroughly reliable. When disinfection of the auxiliary supply itself is depended upon to render the water safe, the means of applying the disinfectant under this regulation shall be automatic with operation of the pumps employed with the dangerous water in question. Adequate supplies of chlorine or its compounds must be kept on hand at all times. Chlorine dosing equipment shall be tested daily and kept in good operating condition. The Town's water supply must be protected against backflow from dual domestic fire systems. (Prior code 7.01.08; Ord. 11-1987 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 3 - Sewer Regulations 

Sec. 13-3-10. - Drainage into sanitary sewers prohibited. 
    No leaders from roofs and no surface drains for rainwater shall be connected to any sanitary sewer. No surface or storm water, seepage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters shall be permitted to enter any sanitary sewer by any device or method whatsoever. (Prior code 7.02.06) 
Sec. 13-3-20. - Combined sewers. 
    No combined sewer or storm sewer or drain shall be connected to the sewage works. All storm waters, cooling waters and unpolluted industrial process waters shall be disposed of as directed by the Town. (Prior code 7.02.06) 
Sec. 13-3-30. - Types of wastes prohibited. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees F. 
(2)  Any water or waste which may contain more than one hundred (100) parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, woods, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewer works. 
(6)  Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constituting a hazard to humans or animals or creating any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a cleansing material that is not readily biologically degradable or which contains substances of a cationic nature that cannot be removed from water except by dehydration or electrolic process). (Prior code 7.02.06) 
Sec. 13-3-40. - Interceptors required. 
(a)  Unless written approval is given by the Town, grease traps or interceptors are required for all new construction of food-serving, food-preparing, food-catering, meal-cutting establishments; fish, fowl, or animal slaughter houses; soap factory, tallow-rendering, fat-rendering, hide-curing establishments and other establishments capable of discharging large amounts of grease into the sanitary sewer system. A grease trap or interceptor shall also be required for the above listed existing businesses upon a remodel or when deemed necessary by the administrative authority of the Town. In the case when an existing business is required to install a grease trap or interceptor, the owner shall be entitled to a rebate of twenty-five percent (25%) on the total cost of installing said trap or interceptor upon proof of expense. Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted to require a trap or interceptor for buildings used for residential purposes. 
(b)  Oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Town's administrative authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for buildings used for residential purposes. 
(c)  All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity as specified by the adopted Uniform Plumbing Code or as approved by the administrative authority, and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (Prior code 7.02.06; Ord. 10-1997 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 13-3-50. - Maintenance of interceptors. 
    All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. (Prior code 7.02.06) 
Sec. 13-3-60. - Preliminary treatment of wastes. 
(a)  The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes: (i) having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred (300) parts per million by weight; (ii) containing more than three hundred (300) parts per million of weight of suspended solids; or (iii) having an average daily flow greater than two percent (2%) of the average daily sewage flow of the Town shall be subject to the review and approval of the Town. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Town, the owner shall provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
(1)  Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred (300) parts per million by weight; 
(2)  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in Section 13-3-20; or 
(3)  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters and wastes. 
(b)  Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the Town, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. (Prior code 7.02.06) 
Sec. 13-3-70. - Maintenance of pretreatment facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense. (Prior code 7.02.06) 
Sec. 13-3-80. - Control manholes. 
    When required by the Town, the owner of any property served by the side sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the side sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Town. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Prior code 7.02.06) 
Sec. 13-3-90. - Special agreements. 
    No statement contained in this Subsection shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Town for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern and subject to such terms and conditions as might be required by the Town. (Prior code 7.02.06) 
Sec. 13-3-100. - Measurement and tests. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in Sections 13-3-30 and 13-3-80 shall be determined in accordance with standard methods and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in Section 13-3-80 or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the side sewer is connected. (Prior code 7.02.06; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 13-3-110. - Application. 
    This Article shall apply to all provisions of this Code regarding use of the sanitary sewer system. (Prior code 7.02.06) 
ARTICLE 4 - Water Enterprise 

Sec. 13-4-10. - Establishment of Enterprise. 
    Town of Wellington, Colorado, Water Enterprise (the "Enterprise") is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of the Act as an enterprise of the Town within the meaning of art. X, § 20 of the Colorado Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 6-2001, § 1, 3-13-01) 
Sec. 13-4-20. - Ownership of Enterprise. 
    The Enterprise shall be wholly owned by the Town and shall not be combined with any water activity enterprise owned by another district. 
(Ord. No. 6-2001, § 2, 3-13-01) 
Sec. 13-4-30. - Water activities. 
    The Enterprise may conduct one or more water activities as may be determined by the governing body of the Enterprise, including, but not limited to, the diversion, storage, carriage, delivery, distribution, collection, treatment, use, reuse, augmentation, exchange or discharge of water, the provision of wholesale or retail water services and the acquisition of water or water rights ("Water Activities"). 
(Ord. No. 6-2001, § 3, 3-13-01) 
Sec. 13-4-40. - Governing body. 
    The Board shall serve as the governing body of the Enterprise, and the officers of the Board shall serve as officers of the Enterprise. The Mayor of the Town shall serve as President of the Enterprise; the Town Clerk shall serve as Secretary of the Enterprise; the Treasurer of the Town shall serve as Treasurer of the Enterprise; and the Town Attorney shall serve as the Attorney for the Enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 6-2001, § 4, 3-13-01; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 13-4-50. - Powers of Enterprise. 
    The Enterprise shall have and may exercise the following powers in furtherance of its purposes: to hold meetings concurrently with regular or special meetings of the Board, to adopt ordinances and resolutions in the manner in which Town ordinances and resolutions may be adopted, to issue water revenue bonds in the manner prescribed by the Act without voter approval in advance, to pledge any revenues derived or to be derived from the water functions, services, benefits or facilities of the Town or the Enterprise or any other available funds of the Enterprise to the payment of such revenue bonds and to pay such revenue bonds therefrom, to enter into contracts relating to the water system of the Town (the "System") in the manner in which Town contracts may be entered into, to contract with the Colorado Water Conservation Board or any other governmental source of funding for loans and grants relating to Water Activity enterprise functions, to contract with the Colorado Water Resources and Power Development Authority for loans or other available financial assistance related to Water Activity enterprise functions, to make representations, warranties and covenants on behalf of the Town and to bind the Town to perform any obligation relating to the System other than any multiple-fiscal year direct or indirect debt or other financial obligation of the Town without adequate present cash reserves pledged irrevocably and held for payments in all future years, and to exercise the Town's legal authority relating to Water Activities. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Enterprise may not levy a tax that is subject to art. X, § 20(4) of the Colorado Constitution or exercise any other governmental powers of the Town. 
(Ord. No. 6-2001, § 5, 3-13-01) 
Sec. 13-4-60. - Powers retained in Town. 
    The Town shall continue to own the assets of the System, acquire and convey properties constituting part of the System, manage, operate and maintain the System, employ and discharge the officers, managers and employees of the System, keep books and records relating to the System, invest and manage funds, budget and appropriate revenues and expenditures of the System, award and execute contracts and make expenditures relating to the System, fix, adjust and collect water rates, fees, tolls and charges and tap fees, and prescribe rules and regulations relating to the System. The Town may also borrow money, issue bonds or enter into other financial obligations relating to the System as provided in the Colorado Constitution and statutes. 
(Ord. No. 6-2001, § 4, 3-13-01) 
Sec. 13-4-70. - Prior acts. 
    All action not inconsistent with the provisions of this Article heretofore taken by the Town or its officers and otherwise directed toward the establishment and authorization of the Enterprise to have and exercise certain powers in furtherance of its purposes is hereby ratified, approved and confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 6-2001, § 1, 3-13-01) 
ARTICLE 5 - Wastewater Enterprise 

Sec. 13-5-10. - Establishment of Enterprise. 
    The Town Wastewater Enterprise (the "Enterprise") is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of Part 1 of Article 45.1 of Title 37, C.R.S. (the "Act"), as an enterprise of the Town within the meaning of Article X, §20 of the Colorado Constitution. (Ord. 7-2001 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 13-5-20. - Ownership of Enterprise. 
    The Enterprise shall be wholly owned by the Town and shall not be combined with any wastewater activity enterprise owned by another district. (Ord. 7-2001 §2) 
Sec. 13-5-30. - Wastewater activities. 
    The Enterprise may conduct one (1) or more wastewater activities as may be determined by the governing body of the Enterprise, including but not limited to the provision of wholesale or retail wastewater and stormwater services ("Wastewater Activities"). (Ord. 7-2001 §3) 
Sec. 13-5-40. - Governing body. 
    The Board shall serve as the governing body of the Enterprise, and the officers of the Board shall serve as officers of the Enterprise. The Mayor of the Town shall serve as President of the Enterprise; the Town Clerk shall serve as Secretary of the Enterprise; the Treasurer of the Town shall serve as Treasurer of the Enterprise; and the Town Attorney shall serve as the Attorney for the Enterprise. (Ord. 7-2001 §4; Ord. 9-2001 §1; Ord. No. 9-2001, § 1, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 13-5-50. - Powers of Enterprise. 
(a)  The Enterprise shall have and may exercise the following powers in furtherance of its purposes: 
(1)  To hold meetings concurrently with regular or special meetings of the Board of Trustees; 
(2)  To adopt ordinances and resolutions in the manner in which Town ordinances and resolutions may be adopted; 
(3)  To issue wastewater and stormwater revenue bonds in the manner prescribed by the Act without voter approval in advance; 
(4)  To pledge any revenues derived or to be derived from the wastewater or stormwater functions, services, benefits or facilities of the Town or the Enterprise or any other available funds of the Enterprise to the payment of such revenue bonds and to pay such revenue bonds therefrom; 
(5)  To enter into contracts relating to the wastewater and stormwater system of the Town (the "System") in the manner in which Town contracts may be entered into; 
(6)  To contract with the Colorado Water Conservation Board or any other governmental source of funding for loans and grants relating to wastewater and stormwater activity Enterprise functions; 
(7)  To contract with the Colorado Water Resources and Power Development Authority for loans or other available financial assistance related to wastewater and stormwater activity Enterprise functions; 
(8)  To make representations, warranties and covenants on behalf of the Town and to bind the Town to perform any obligation relating to the System other than any multiple-fiscal year direct or indirect debt or other financial obligation of the Town without adequate present cash reserves pledged irrevocably and held for payments in all future years; and 
(9)  To exercise the Town's legal authority relating to wastewater and stormwater activities. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Enterprise may not levy a tax that is subject to Article X, §20(4) of the Colorado Constitution or exercise any other governmental powers of the Town. (Ord. 7-2001 §5; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 13-5-60. - Powers retained in Town. 
    The Town shall continue to own the assets of the System, acquire and convey properties constituting part of the System, manage, operate and maintain the System, employ and discharge the officers, managers and employees of the System, keep books and records relating to the System, invest and manage funds, budget and appropriate revenues and expenditures of the System, award and execute contracts and make expenditures relating to the System, fix, adjust and collect wastewater and stormwater rates, fees, tolls and charges and tap fees, and prescribe rules and regulations relating to the System. The Town may also borrow money, issue bonds or enter into other financial obligations relating to the System as provided in the Colorado Constitution and state statutes. (Ord. 7-2001 §6) 
ARTICLE 6 - Stormwater Enterprise 

Sec. 13-6-10. - Establishment of Enterprise. 
    Town of Wellington, Colorado, Stormwater Enterprise (the "Enterprise") is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of the Act as an enterprise of the Town within the meaning of Art. X, § 20 of the Colorado Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 6-2008 , § 1, 7-8-08) 
Sec. 13-6-20. - Ownership of Enterprise. 
    The Enterprise shall be wholly owned by the Town and shall not be combined with any stormwater activity enterprise owned by another district. 
(Ord. No. 6-2008 , § 2, 7-8-08) 
Sec. 13-6-30. - Stormwater activities. 
    The Enterprise may conduct one or more stormwater activities as may be determined by the governing body of the Enterprise, including, but not limited to, the diversion, storage, carriage, delivery, distribution, collection, treatment, use, reuse, augmentation, exchange or discharge of stormwater, the provision of wholesale or retail stormwater services and the acquisition of stormwater or stormwater rights ("stormwater activities"). 
(Ord. No. 6-2008 , § 3, 7-8-08) 
Sec. 13-6-40. - Governing body. 
    The Board shall serve as the governing body of the Enterprise, and the officers of the Board shall serve as officers of the Enterprise. The Mayor of the Town shall serve as Chairman of the governing body of the Enterprise; the Clerk of the Town shall serve as Clerk of the Enterprise; the Treasurer of the Town shall serve as Treasurer of the Enterprise; and the Town Attorney shall serve as the Attorney for the Enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 6-2008 , § 4, 7-8-08) 
Sec. 13-6-50. - Powers of Enterprise. 
    The Enterprise shall have and may exercise the following powers in furtherance of its purposes: To hold meetings concurrently with regular or special meetings of the Board; to adopt ordinances and resolutions in the manner in which Town ordinances and resolutions may be adopted; to issue stormwater revenue bonds in the manner prescribed by the Act without voter approval in advance; to pledge any revenues derived or to be derived from the stormwater functions, services, benefits or facilities of the Town or the Enterprise or any other available funds of the Enterprise to the payment of such revenue bonds and to pay such revenue bonds therefrom; to enter into contracts relating to the stormwater system of the Town (the "System") in the manner in which Town contracts may be entered into; to contract with the Colorado Water Conservation Board or any other governmental source of funding for loans and grants relating to Stormwater Activity enterprise functions; to contract with the Colorado Water Resources and Power Development Authority for loans or other available financial assistance related to Stormwater Activity enterprise functions; to make representations, warranties and covenants on behalf of the Town and to bind the Town to perform any obligation relating to the System other than any multiple-fiscal year direct or indirect debt or other financial obligation of the Town without adequate present cash reserves pledged irrevocably and held for payments in all future years; and to exercise the Town's legal authority relating to Stormwater Activities. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Enterprise may not levy a tax that is subject to Art. X, § 20(4) of the Colorado Constitution or exercise any other governmental powers of the Town. 
(Ord. No. 6-2008 , § 5, 7-8-08) 
Sec. 13-6-60. - Powers retained in Town. 
    The Town shall continue to own the assets of the System; acquire and convey properties constituting part of the System; manage, operate and maintain the System; employ and discharge the officers, managers and employees of the System; keep books and records relating to the System; invest and manage funds, budget and appropriate revenues and expenditures of the System; award and execute contracts and make expenditures relating to the System; fix, adjust and collect stormwater rates, fees, tolls and charges and tap fees; and prescribe rules and regulations relating to the System. The Town may also borrow money, issue bonds or enter into other financial obligations relating to the System as provided in the Colorado Constitution and statutes. 
(Ord. No. 6-2008 , § 6, 7-8-08) 
Sec. 13-6-70. - Prior acts. 
    All action not inconsistent with the provisions of this Article heretofore taken by the Town or its officers and otherwise directed toward the establishment and authorization of the Enterprise to have and exercise certain powers in furtherance of its purposes is hereby ratified, approved and confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 6-2008 , § 7, 7-8-08) 
ARTICLE 7 - Stormwater Drainage Fee 

Sec. 13-7-10. - Purpose and intent. 
    The Board of Trustees hereby finds, determines and declares the necessity of providing for and maintaining a stormwater drainage facilities for the drainage and control of flood and surface waters within the Town, including areas to be subdivided and developed, in order that storm and surface waters may be properly drained and controlled, pollution may be reduced, the environment enhanced, and the health, safety and welfare of the Town and its inhabitants may be safeguarded and protected. The Town currently assesses road and other development impact fees that provide for storm drainage functions and the Town will in the future modify other fees and implement a stormwater impact fee or a stormwater facility reimbursement fee to be charged to no development. 
(Ord. No. 9-2008 , § 1, 7-8-08) 
Sec. 13-7-20. - Owners of property to provide on-site drainage facilities as a condition of development. 
    In accordance with the assumptions of the Boxelder Creek Regional Stormwater Master Plan and the Town's Standard Design Criteria and Standard Construction Standards the owners of property to be developed within the Town shall be required, as a condition of development, to provide, at their sole expense, such on-site stormwater drainage facilities as are required by the plan and made necessary by the development. Such requirements shall include an obligation of owners of property to provide facilities necessary to convey stormwater runoff to major drainage ways. Since the development of elevated land can increase the amount of stormwater runoff from such land onto adjoining lands at lower elevations, the owner of elevated land has the legal duty to prevent such increased runoff from doing damage to other lands, which duty shall be deemed satisfied if adequate facilities are installed as required by this Section. Thus, in determining under this Section what facilities a landowner shall be responsible for constructing, the amount of increased stormwater runoff that will result from the development shall be taken into account. 
(Ord. No. 9-2008 , § 2, 7-8-08) 
Sec. 13-7-30. - Stormwater utility enterprise. 
(a)  The Board of Trustees hereby recognizes and confirms the operation of the stormwater drainage system (the "System") as an enterprise within the meaning of Section 20 of Article X of the State Constitution. 
(b)  The Board of Trustees hereby formally establishes the Town's Stormwater Utility Enterprise for the purpose of continuing the operation of the system as a water activity enterprise and as an "enterprise" within the meaning of Section 20 of Article X of the State Constitution. 
(c)  The Board of Trustees hereby designates itself as the governing body of the Stormwater Utility Enterprise. 
(d)  To the extent it deems necessary, the Board of Trustees, as the governing body of the Stormwater Drainage Utility Enterprise, shall exercise the Town's legal authority relating to the System, but shall not levy a tax. 
(e)  All action heretofore taken by the Board of Trustees or by the officers and employees of the Town directed toward the operation of the System as an "enterprise" under Section 20 of the Article X of the State Constitution is hereby ratified, approved and confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 9-2008 , § 3, 7-8-08) 
Sec. 13-7-40. - Adoption of Boxelder Creek Regional Stormwater Master Plan Boxelder Creek Regional Stormwater Master Plan. 
    The Boxelder Creek Regional Stormwater Master Plan was adopted by Resolution 13-2007. The Board finds and concludes that the adoption of the Boxelder Creek Regional Stormwater Master Plan was in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Wellington. The Board further finds that the Boxelder Creek Regional Stormwater Master Plan provides an adequate, justifiable and reasonable basis upon which to assess stormwater basin fees established by this Article, as well as the collection of those fees and the acquisition and construction of stormwater facilities. 
(Ord. No. 9-2008 , § 4, 7-8-08) 
Sec. 13-7-50. - Stormwater monthly basin user fee. 
    A monthly basin user fee is hereby imposed upon each and every developed lot or parcel of land within the Town, as well as the owners thereof. This fee is deemed reasonable and necessary to pay for the operation, maintenance, administration, and routine functions of the existing Town stormwater drainage facilities and for the operation, maintenance, and administration of such future stormwater drainage facilities as may be established within the Town, and to pay for the design, right-of-way acquisition and construction or reconstruction of such existing and future Town stormwater drainage facilities. All of the proceeds of this fee are deemed to be in payment for the use of the stormwater drainage system by the real property on and with respect to which the fee is imposed upon the owners. Further, the Board of Trustees finds that this fee benefits all users of the Town's stormwater drainage facilities, by allowing for the construction, improvement, operation, and maintenance of stormwater drainage facilities in the Town that promote the health, safety, and welfare of such users during storms and floods. 
(a)  In accordance with the Boxelder Creek Regional Stormwater Master Plan the board finds that the average residential property in Wellington creates two thousand (2,000) square feet of impervious surface area impacting storm drainage. Impervious area for commercial properties vary based upon multiple factors including use and lot size. For each commercial property and for residential properties with impervious area varying by more than twenty-five percent (25%) from the two thousand (2,000) square foot assumed impervious area, the Town Engineer shall determine the impervious area and fee that shall apply to such lot or parcel of land within the guidelines set forth herein. 
(b)  Each lot or parcel of land shall be assessed a monthly base amount per square foot of based on the impervious area determined as set forth herein for that lot or parcel, such fee to be assessed for operations, maintenance and basin improvements shall be established and reviewed by the Board of Trustees by resolution and shall be determined by multiplying such impervious square footage area times the per square foot fee amount. 
(c)  The monthly basin user fee shall not be collected in connection with any Town street, road or alley, or any railroad right-of-way used exclusively for trackage and related safety appurtenances. 
(d)  The monthly basin user fee assessed hereby shall be segregated, credited and deposited in a special fund and shall not be transferred therefrom except to pay for expenses directly attributable to the stormwater drainage activities as aforesaid. The monthly basin user fee assessed hereby shall not be used for general or other governmental or proprietary purposes of the Town, except to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting and management thereof. The monthly basin user fee shall be collected, maintained, and expended in strict accordance with the requirements of Section 29-20-801, Colorado Revised Statutes, and subsequent amendments thereto. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the Town from making temporary interfund loans or transfers as may be specifically allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 9-2008 , § 5, 7-8-08) 
Sec. 13-7-60. - Billing for monthly basin user fee and administrative fee for the establishment of monthly basin user fee accounts. 
    The monthly basin user fee shall be billed and collected with the monthly utility bill for those lots or parcels of land utilizing other Town utilities, and shall be billed and collected separately for those lots or parcel of land, and owners thereof, not utilizing other Town utilities. All such bills for monthly basin user fees shall be rendered monthly and shall become due and payable in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the Director of Finance for the collection of utility bills. A one-time administration fee shall be charged for the establishment of monthly basin user fee accounts. This fee shall be initially set at ten dollars ($10.00) for each account established; such fee may be modified by the Board of Trustees by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 9-2008 , § 7, 7-8-08) 
Sec. 13-7-70. - Unpaid charges constitute a lien. 
    Any unpaid fee pursuant to this Article shall be a lien upon the property to which such fee is associated, from the date the fee becomes due until such fee is paid. The owner of every building, premises, lot, parcel, or house shall be obligated to pay the fee for all service provided by the Town by action at law or suit to enforce the lien. In the case that a tenant in possession of any premises or building shall pay the fee, it shall relieve the landowner from such obligation and lien, but the Town shall not be required to look to any person whatsoever other than the owner for the payment of the fee. No changes of ownership or occupation shall affect the application of this Ordinance, and the failure of any owner to learn that he or she purchased property against which a lien for fees under this Article exists, shall in no way affect the responsibility for such payment. Any delinquent amount may be enforced by assessment upon the property and premises served as well as certification to the treasurer of Larimer County for collection under and pursuant to the Wellington Municipal Code and the statutes of the State of Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 9-2008 , § 8, 7-8-08) 
CHAPTER 15 - Annexation 
ARTICLE 1 - Annexation Procedures 

Sec. 15-1-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a procedure to bring land under the jurisdiction of the Town in compliance with the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 15-1-20. - Responsibilities of applicant. 
(a)  In addition to other duties imposed upon all applicants by this Code and the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, all applicants shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  The applicant is responsible for having a representative at all meetings where the request is reviewed. Failure to have a representative present will be cause to have the item withdrawn from the agenda of that meeting. 
(2)  The applicant shall consult with the Planning Department to discuss any special conditions pertaining to the annexation and to obtain an annexation petition. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 15-1-30. - Preliminary steps. 
(a)  Procedure. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the presentation of any annexation petition to the Board of Trustees, the applicant shall submit to the Town the annexation petition, the required annexation fee established by the Town board and a minimum of fifteen (15) copies of the master plan and annexation map. and a minimum of five (5) copies of all required supportive information. 
(1)  The Planning Department shall review all documents submitted for completeness and accuracy. If all documents are complete and accurate, the Planning Department shall submit the annexation petition to the Town Administrator/Clerk. 
(2)  The Town Administrator/Clerk shall present the annexation petition and a resolution initiating annexation proceedings to the Board of Trustees, which shall thereafter establish a date for a public hearing. Upon the establishment of a public hearing date, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall give appropriate notice in accordance with the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, and shall specifically direct copies of the annexation petition and the resolution initiating the annexation procedure by certified mail to the Clerk of the Board of County Commissioners and to the County Attorney of the county wherein the territory is located. Copies of the annexation petition and the resolution initiating the annexation procedure shall also be sent by certified mail to any school district or special district having territory within the annexed area. These copies shall be sent at least twenty-five (25) days prior to the public hearing. 
(3)  Upon acceptance of the annexation petition by the Board of Trustees, the Planning Department shall furnish to the following entities copies of the annexation map and the master plan. The Planning Department may submit copies of the annexation map and the master plan to additional interested entities as determined by the Planning Department in its sole discretion. Such entities shall be advised by the Planning Department of the scheduled hearing date and shall further be notified that any objections to the annexation and master plan must be submitted to the Town in writing no later than seven (7) days after receipt of the annexation map and master plan: 
a.  Telephone companies. 
b.  Franchise utility companies. 
c.  Town Engineer. 
d.  Fire Department. 
e.  Town Water and Sewer Department. 
f.  Colorado Department of Transportation. 
(4)  The Planning Commission shall review the annexation map, master plan and zoning request at a public hearing and shall submit a written recommendation to the Board of Trustees. 
(b)  Annexation map. All annexation maps shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one (1) inch represents one hundred (100) feet, and shall be on a reproducible medium with outer dimensions of twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. The annexation map shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date of preparation, the scale and a symbol designating true north. 
(2)  The name of the annexation. 
(3)  The names, addresses and phone numbers of the applicant and the firm or person responsible for preparing the annexation map. 
(4)  The legal description. 
(5)  Distinction of the boundary that is contiguous to the Town and the length of same. 
(6)  Lot and block numbers if the area is already platted. 
(7)  Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way. 
(8)  Existing and requested zoning and acreage of each requested zone. 
(9)  Ownership of all parcels within and adjacent to the annexation. 
(10)  Appropriate certification blocks as directed by the Planning Department. 
(c)  Master plan. All master plans shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one (1) inch represents one hundred (100) feet, and shall be on a reproducible medium with outer dimensions of twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. The master plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date of preparation, the scale and a symbol designating true north. 
(2)  The name of the annexation. 
(3)  The names, addresses and phone numbers of the applicant and the firm or person responsible for preparing the master plan. 
(4)  Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way. 
(5)  Block numbers and lot numbers with approximate dimensions. 
(6)  Proposed gross and net residential density. 
(7)  Existing watercourses with adequate easements for flood control. 
(8)  Designation of all public sites to be reserved and dedicated. 
(9)  Existing two-foot contours. 
(10)  Appropriate certification blocks as directed by the Planning Department. 
(d)  Supportive information. The following supportive information shall be submitted with the annexation map and master plan: 
(1)  Soils description and limitation. 
(2)  Preliminary utility plan. 
(3)  Mailing addresses of all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the annexation. 
(4)  Affidavit concerning the amount and historical use of all water rights owned. 
(5)  Vicinity map with a radius of one and one-half (11/2) miles, at a minimum scale of one (1) inch represents two thousand (2,000) feet. 
(6)  Statement on community need for proposed annexation and zoning. 
(7)  For all annexations in excess of ten (10) acres, the applicant shall obtain from the school district governing the area to be annexed a statement of the effect of the annexation upon the school district, including an estimate of the number of students generated by the proposed annexation and the capital construction required to educate such students. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 5-2008 , § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 15-1-40. - Annexation impact report. 
(a)  For all annexations in excess of ten (10) acres, the Town shall prepare an impact report regarding the proposed annexation not less than twenty-five (25) days before the date of the annexation hearing. One (1) copy of the impact report shall be filed with the Board of County Commissioners governing the area proposed to be annexed within five (5) days thereafter. The preparation and filing of the annexation impact report may be waived upon approval of the Board of County Commissioners governing the area proposed to be annexed. 
(b)  The annexation impact report shall include the following: 
(1)  A map or maps of the Town and adjacent territory showing the following information: 
a.  The present and proposed boundaries of the Town in the vicinity of the proposed annexation. 
b.  The present streets, major trunk water lines, sewer interceptors and outfalls, other utility lines and ditches and the proposed extension of such streets and utility lines in the vicinity of the proposed annexation. 
c.  The existing and proposed land use pattern in the areas to be annexed. 
(2)  A copy of any draft or final preannexation agreement, if available. 
(3)  A statement of the Town's plans for extending or providing for municipal services within the area to be annexed. 
(4)  A statement of the Town's plans for the financing of municipal services to be extended into the area to be annexed. 
(5)  A statement identifying all existing districts within the area to be annexed. 
(6)  A statement of the effect of the annexation upon the school district governing the area to be annexed, as is more fully set forth in Paragraph 15-1-30(d)(7) above. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 15-1-50. - Consideration of annexation ordinance. 
    Upon the submission of documentation in accordance with this Chapter and upon compliance with the notice and hearing requirements as set forth in the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, the Board of Trustees may consider the approval of an ordinance annexing the subject property to the Town. In the event the Board of Trustees considers and disapproves such ordinance, no similar request may be heard for a period of one (1) year from the date of denial. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 15-1-60. - Final submission. 
    In the event the Board of Trustees approves an annexation ordinance, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Department two (2) Mylars of the final annexation map and two (2) Mylars of the master plan within ten (10) days of the effective date of the annexation ordinance. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
CHAPTER 16 - Zoning 
ARTICLE 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 16-1-10. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these zoning regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-1-20. - Uniformity of regulations. 
    The regulations established by this Article within each zone shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land. Unless exceptions are specified in this Article, the following interpretations shall apply: 
(1)  No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, changed, constructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the zone in which it is located. Where a lot is divided by a zoning district boundary line by the current official zoning map or by subsequent amendments to the zoning map, the zoning requirements may be extended within the lot for a distance of not more than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  No building or other structure shall be erected or altered: 
a.  To exceed the height limitations; 
b.  To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
c.  To occupy a greater percentage of the area; or 
d.  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces. 
(3)  No part of a yard or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this Article, shall be included as part of a yard, open space or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building unless specific exception therefor is stated in this Article. 
(4)  No yard or lot existing or approved at the time of passage of the ordinance codified herein shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Chapter. 
(5)  Any use not permitted in a zone either specifically or by interpretation by the Town is hereby specifically prohibited from that zone. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-1-30. - Conflict with other provisions of law. 
    Whenever the requirements of this Land Use Code are at a variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the more restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-1-40. - Conflict with private covenants or deeds. 
    In case of a conflict between this Land Use Code and any private restrictions imposed by covenant or deed, the responsibility of the Town shall be limited to the enforcement of this Land Use Code. When provisions within this Land Use Code are more restrictive than those imposed by covenant or deed, or when any such private instruments are silent on matters contained within this Land Use Code, the provisions of this Code shall rule. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-1-50. - Zoning of annexed territory. 
(a)  Zoning of land during annexation may be done in accordance with the procedure and notice requirements of this Section and state law, including Section 31-12-115(1), C.R.S. The proposed zoning ordinance shall not be passed before the date when the annexation ordinance is passed. 
(b)  Any area annexed shall be brought under the provisions of this Section and the map thereunder within ninety (90) days from the effective date of the annexation ordinance, despite any legal review that may be made challenging the annexation. During such ninetyday period, or such portion thereof as is required to zone the territory, the Town shall refuse to issue any building permit for any portion or all of the newly annexed area. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-1-60. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to create a vital, cohesive, well-designed community in order to enhance the Town's small-town character and further the citizens' goals as identified in the Comprehensive Master Plan. These zoning regulations are designed to: 
(1)  Encourage the most appropriate use of land through the Town and ensure a logical growth of the various physical elements of the Town. 
(2)  Regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business, trade, industry or other purposes. 
(3)  Regulate and determine the size of building lots, yards and other open spaces. 
(4)  Promote good design and arrangement of buildings or clusters of buildings and uses in residential, business and industrial development. 
(5)  Encourage innovative, quality site planning, architecture and landscaping that reflect improvements in the technology of land development. 
(6)  Prevent the overcrowding of land, poor quality in development, waste and inefficiency in land use, danger and congestion in travel and transportation and any other use or development that might be detrimental to the stability and livability of the Town. 
(7)  Promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of Town residents. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 2 - Definitions 

Sec. 16-2-10. - Definitions. 
    The definitions contained in this Article apply to terms used in Chapters 16 and 17 of this Code. Definitions contained in this Article may also be used to interpret other sections of the Code, but the definitions are not necessarily intended to define terms outside of the context of the Land Use Code. 
    Accessory building means a subordinate building or structure, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the land, which is located on the same lot (or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership) with the main building or use. Accessory buildings are only permitted when they are incidental or accessory to an existing and permitted principal or conditional use. 
    Accessory dwelling means an apartment integrated within a single-family dwelling, or located in a detached accessory building, such as carriage houses or agricultural-type outbuildings, located on the same lot as single-family dwellings. Accessory dwellings shall be limited to eight hundred fifty (850) square feet in floor area. For purposes of calculating residential density, each accessory dwelling shall count as one-half (1/2) dwelling unit. There shall not be more than one (1) accessory dwelling located on a lot in addition to the single-family dwelling. 
    Accessory use means a subordinate use, clearly incidental and related to the main structure, building or use of land and located on the same lot (or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership) as that of the main structure, building or use. 
    Active repair is a term developed to differentiate between inoperable vehicles that are in the process of being made operable and those that are being stored without the benefit of ongoing repair or which are being stored for salvage purposes. 
    Adjacent means meeting or touching at some point or separated from a lot or parcel by one (1) of the following: a street, alley or other right-of-way, lake, stream or open space. 
    Adjacent property owner is an owner of record of any estate, right or interest in real property abutting and within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property. 
    Adult-oriented or sexually oriented use. Definitions related to adult or sexually oriented uses are contained in Section 16-11-20 of this Code. 
    Arterial street means a street which is anticipated to carry in excess of three thousand five hundred (3,500) vehicles per day in traffic volume, at desirable speeds ranging from thirty (30) to forty-five (45) miles per hour, and which is defined specifically as such on the Master Street Plan of the Town and is used for travel between areas within and outside the Town. 
    Bar means an establishment providing or dispensing fermented malt beverages and/or malt, special malt, vinous or spirituous liquors, and in which the sale of food products such as sandwiches or light snacks, is secondary (also known as a tavern). 
    Bed and breakfast means an establishment operated in a private residence or portion thereof, which provides temporary accommodations to overnight guests for a fee and which is occupied by the operator of such establishment. 
    Boarding and rooming house means a building or portion of which is used to accommodate, for compensation, four (4) or more boarders or roomers, not including members of the occupant's immediate family who might be occupying such building. The word compensation shall include compensation in money, services or other things of value. 
    Building means any permanent structure built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, which is governed by the following characteristics: 
a.  Is permanently affixed to the land. 
b.  Has one (1) or more floors and a roof. 
    Building frontage means the horizontal, linear dimension of that side of a building, which abuts a street, a parking area, a mall or other circulation area open to the public and has either a main window display or a public entrance to the building. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the established curb level to the highest point of the roof. Chimneys, spires, towers, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar projections, other than signs, shall not be included in calculating the height. 
    Cemetery means land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery. 
    Child care center means a facility, by whatever name known, which is maintained for the whole or part of a day for the care of seven (7) or more children under the age of sixteen (16) years who are not related to the owner, operator or manager, whether such facility is operated with or without compensation for such care and with or without stated educational purposes, except that a child care center shall not include any of the following three (3) types of family care homes as defined by the State: family child care home, infant/toddler home or experienced family child care provider home. The term includes, but is not limited to, facilities commonly known as day care centers, day nurseries, nursery schools, preschools, play groups, day camps, summer camps, large child care homes as defined by the State, centers for developmentally disabled children and those facilities which give twenty-four-hour-per-day care for dependent and neglected children. Child care centers are also those facilities for children under the age of six (6) years with stated educational purposes which are operated in conjunction with a public, private or parochial college or a private or parochial school, except that the term shall not apply to a kindergarten maintained in connection with a public, private or parochial elementary school system of at least six (6) grades. 
    Church or place of worship and assembly means a building containing a hall, auditorium or other suitable room or rooms used for the purpose of conducting religious or other services or meetings of the occupants of such structure. Church or place of worship and assembly shall include churches, synagogues or the like, but shall not include buildings used for commercial endeavors, including but not limited to commercial motion picture houses or stage productions. 
    Clinic means a building designed and used for the diagnosis and treatment of human patients that does not include overnight care facilities. 
    Clubs and lodges means organizations of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, literature, politics or other common goals, interests or activities, characterized by membership qualifications, dues or regular meetings, excluding clubs operated for profit and/or places of worship or assembly. 
    Code means the Municipal Code of the Town, including this Land Use Code. 
    Collector street means a street which is anticipated to carry from two thousand five hundred (2,500) to five thousand (5,000) vehicles per day in traffic volume at desirable speeds ranging from twenty-five (25) to thirty-five (35) miles per hour and which serves a collecting function by distributing traffic between local streets and arterial streets, thereby providing access to adjacent properties and linking neighborhoods with arterial streets. 
    Common open space shall have the same meaning as common open space in Section 24-67-103, C.R.S. 
    Comprehensive Master Plan or Comprehensive Plan means the Comprehensive Master Plan. 
    Convenience retail store means a retail store containing less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area which sells everyday goods and services which may include, without limitation, ready-to-eat food products, groceries, over-the-counter drugs and sundries. 
    Convenience shopping center means a shopping and service center located in a complex which is planned, developed and managed as a single unit and located within and intended to primarily serve the consumer demands of adjacent employment areas and residences. 
    Deck means an exterior platform adjacent to the principle structure which may be covered by roof or uncovered, and has no walls other than an open hand rail in compliance with current building codes. 
    Dedicated land means land transferred to the Town by platting, title, deed or other legal method approved by the Town Attorney. 
    Dedication means any grant by the owner of a right to use land for the public in general, involving a transfer of property rights and an acceptance of the dedicated property by the appropriate public agency. 
    Density means the overall average number of dwelling units located on the gross or net residential acreage (as applicable) contained within the development and calculated on a per-acre basis. Gross density is calculated by dividing the total number of units by the total acreage. Net density is calculated by dividing the [total number of units] by the [total acreage minus all publicly dedicated land]. 
    Design standards includes the Town Standard Design Criteria and Standard Construction Standards, the Lot and Block Standards beginning at Section 16-3-110; Street Standards beginning at Section 16-3-130; Parking Standards beginning at Section 16-3-150; Sidewalk and Path Standards beginning at Section 16-3-240; Park Standards beginning at Section 16-3-270; Landscape Design beginning at Section 16-3-330. 
    Developer means any person, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, association or corporation who participates as owner, promoter, developer or sales agent in the planning, platting, development, promotion, sale or lease of a development. 
    Development means the carrying out of any building activity or mining operation, the making of any material change in the use or appearance of any structure or land or the dividing of land into two (2) or more parcels. When appropriate in context, development shall also mean the act of developing or to the result of development. Development shall also include: 
a.  Any construction, placement, reconstruction, alteration of the size or material change in the external appearance of a structure on land; 
b.  Any change in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure or on a tract of land or a material increase in the intensity and impacts of the development; 
c.  Any change in the use of land or a structure; 
d.  Any alteration of a shore or bank of a river, stream, lake, pond, reservoir or wetland; 
e.  The commencement of drilling oil or gas wells, mining, stockpiling of fill materials, filling or excavation on a parcel of land; 
f.  The demolition of a structure; 
g.  The clearing of land as an adjunct of construction; 
h.  The deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste or fill on a parcel of land; 
i.  The installation of landscaping within the public right-of-way, when installed in connection with the development of adjacent property; and 
j.  The construction of a roadway through or adjoining an area that qualifies for protection as a wildlife or natural area. 
    Development shall not include: 
a.  Work by a highway or road agency or railroad company for the maintenance or improvement of a road or railroad track, if the work is carried out on land within the boundaries of the right-of-way; 
b.  Work by any public utility for the purpose of inspecting, repairing, renewing or constructing, on established rights-of-way, any mains, pipes, cables, utility tunnels, power lines, towers, poles or the like; provided, however, that this exemption shall not include work by a public entity in constructing or enlarging mass transit or fixed guide way mass transit depots or terminals or any similar traffic-generating activity; 
c.  The maintenance, renewal, improvement or alteration of any structure, if the work affects only the interior or the color of the structure or the decoration of the exterior of the structure; 
d.  The use of any land for an agricultural activity; 
e.  A change in the ownership or form of ownership of any parcel or structure; or 
f.  The creation or termination of rights of access, easements, covenants concerning development of land or other rights in land. 
    Drive-through facility means an establishment which, by design, physical facilities, services or packaging procedures, encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles. 
    Driveway means a constructed vehicular access serving one (1) or more properties and abutting a public or private road. 
    Dwelling means a building used exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multi-family dwellings. 
    Dwelling, multi-family means a dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units, not including hotels, motels, fraternity houses and sorority houses and similar group accommodations. 
    Dwelling, single-family means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by one (1) family, but not including mobile homes, otherwise provided herein. 
    Dwelling, single-family attached means a residential building containing dwelling units, each of which has primary ground floor access to the outside and which are attached to each other by party walls without openings. The term is intended primarily for such dwelling types as townhouses and duplexes. 
    Dwelling, single-family detached means a single-family dwelling which is not attached to any other dwelling or building by any means, excluding mobile homes and manufactured housing situated on a permanent foundation. 
    Dwelling, two-family or duplex means a building occupied by two (2) families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling unit means one (1) or more rooms and a single kitchen and at least one (1) bathroom, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate quarters for the exclusive use of a single family for living, cooking and sanitary purposes, located in a single-family, two-family or multi-family dwelling or mixed-use building. 
    Easement means a right to land generally established in a real estate deed or on a recorded plat to permit the use of land by the public, a corporation or particular persons for specified uses. 
    Eave means the overhanging lower edge of a roof. 
    Enclosed mini-storage means a building containing separate, individual, private storage spaces, which may be of various sizes and which are rented pursuant to individual leases for varying periods of time. 
    Entertainment facility and theater means a building or part of a building devoted to showing motion pictures or dramatic, musical or live performances, but does not include a sexually oriented business as defined in Article 11. 
    Excess-weight vehicle means any vehicle, excepting any vehicle owned by or in the control of any governmental authority, which weighs in excess of any adopted weight limit, the weight limit within the Town shall be ten thousand (10,000) pounds. Semi vehicles shall be defined and regulated by Chapter 8, Article 4 of this Code and if a vehicle or trailer falls within the definition of a semi-truck or semi-trailer as defined by Section 8-4-10 the semi-vehicle shall not be regulated as an excess-weight vehicle. 
    Family means an individual living alone, or either of the following groups living together in a single dwelling unit and share common living, sleeping, cooking and eating facilities: 
a.  Any number of persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or other duly authorized custodial relationship, unless such number is otherwise specifically limited in this Code; or 
b.  Any unrelated group of persons consisting of (i) not more than four (4) persons; or (ii) not more than two (2) unrelated adults and their related children, if any. 
c.  And includes family foster care of up to four (4) children which is licensed according to the statutes of the state but does not include individuals living in a group home. 
    Floodplain or flood hazard area. See Section 16-10-30 for definitions pertaining to floodplain regulations. 
    Floor area, also called gross floor area, means the total square footage of the building measured along the outside walls of the building and including each floor level, but not including open balconies, garages or other enclosed automobile parking areas and basement storage areas and not including one-half (1/2) of all storage and display areas for durable goods. 
    Food catering or small food product preparation means an establishment in which the principal use is the preparation of food and/or meals on the premises, and where such food and/or meals are delivered to another location for consumption or distribution, and where such use occupies not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet in gross floor area. 
    Foot-candle means a unit of measurement referring to illumination incident to a single point. One (1) foot-candle is equal to one (1) lumen uniformly distributed over an area of one (1) square foot. 
    Functional open space means open space which is large enough to serve a practical purpose, such as recreation, wildlife habitat or preservation of areas of agricultural, archeological or historical significance and shall exclude areas used for off-street parking, off-street loading, service driveways and setbacks from oil and gas wells or their appurtenances or other hazards to the public. 
    Funeral home means a building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial or cremation, for the display of the deceased and/or for ceremonies or services related thereto, including cremation and the storage of caskets, funeral urns, funeral vehicles and other funeral supplies. 
    Garage sale means a sale of personal belongings or household effects held on the seller's premises, usually in the garage or yard, and is a permitted accessory use in all residential districts, provided that: 
a.  No property may be offered for sale which has not been owned and used by the occupant of the premises or the co-participants in "neighborhood" garage sales. Neighborhood garage sales are allowed only if occupant of the premises receives no profit or commission from sale of other participant's property. 
b.  No garage sale shall be conducted for longer than three (3) days duration. 
c.  No more than three (3) garage sales are allowed annually at any premises. 
d.  Garage sales may be conducted during the daylight hours only. 
e.  Goods may not be stored outside during non-sale hours. 
    Gasoline station means any building, land area, premises or portion thereof, where gasoline or other petroleum products or fuels are sold and light maintenance activities, such as engine tune-ups, lubrication, minor repairs and carburetor cleaning, may be conducted. Gasoline station shall not include premises where heavy automobile maintenance activities, such as engine overhaul, automobile painting and body fender work, are conducted. 
    Grade means: 
a.  The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line, when the property line is more than five (5) feet from the building, between the building and a line five (5) feet from the building. 
b.  The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface. 
    Grade, finished means the final elevation of the ground surface after development. 
    Grade, natural means the elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before man-made alterations. 
    Grocery store, large or supermarket means a retail establishment which primarily sells food, but also may sell other convenience and household goods, and which occupies a space greater than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet. The term large grocery store is synonymous with supermarket. 
    Grocery store, small means a retail establishment primarily selling food, as well as other convenience and household goods, which occupies a space of not more than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet. 
    Group home means state-licensed facilities for developmentally disabled, handicapped, seniors or children as defined by and meeting the requirements of Section 31-23-303(2), C.R.S., or similar state statute. 
    Growth boundary means the growth boundaries established by the Comprehensive Master Plan. 
    Health club means an establishment that is open only to members and guests and that provides facilities for at least three (3) of the following: aerobic exercises, running and jogging, exercise equipment, game courts and swimming facilities, and that also includes amenities such as spas, saunas, showers and lockers. 
    Home occupation means an occupation or business activity which results in a product or service and is conducted in whole or in part in a dwelling unit and is subordinate to the residential use of the dwelling unit. 
    Horticulture means the growing of fruits, vegetables, herbs, flowers or ornamental plants. 
    Hospital means an institution providing health services primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and includes related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training and central services facilities and staff offices. 
    Hotel/motel/lodging establishment means a building intended and used for occupancy as a temporary abode for individuals who are lodged with or without meals, in which there are five (5) or more guest rooms. 
    Industrial means uses engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominately from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of or manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous conditions. Heavy industrial shall also mean those uses engaged in the operation, parking and maintenance of vehicles, cleaning of equipment or work processes involving solvents, solid waste or sanitary waste transfer stations, recycling establishments and transport terminals (truck terminals, public works yard, container storage). 
    Industrial, light means uses engaged in the manufacturing, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales or distribution of such products. Further, light industrial means uses such as the manufacture of electronic instruments, preparation of food products, pharmaceutical manufacturing, research and scientific laboratories or the like. 
    Infrastructure means those man-made structures which serve the common needs of the population, such as: potable water systems; wastewater disposal systems; solid waste disposal sites or retention areas; storm drainage systems; electric, gas or other utilities; bridges; roadways; bicycle paths or trails; pedestrian sidewalks, paths or trails; and transit stops. 
    Kennel means a facility licensed to house dogs, cats or other household pets and/or where grooming, breeding, boarding or training or selling of animals is conducted as business. 
    Land Use Code means Chapters 16 and 17 of this Code (Sections 16-1-10 et seq. and 17-1-10 et seq.). 
    Landscaping means any combination of living plants, such as trees, shrubs, plants, vegetative ground cover or turf grasses, and may include structural features such as walkways, fences, benches, works of art, reflective pools, fountains or the like. Landscaping shall also include irrigation systems, mulches, topsoil use, soil preparation, re-vegetation or the preservation, protection and replacement of existing trees. 
    Large retail establishment means a retail establishment, or any combination of retail establishments in a single building, occupying more than twenty-five thousand (25,000) gross square feet of floor area, except that no supermarket shall be deemed to be a large retail establishment. 
    Laundry and dry-cleaning retail outlet means a laundry or dry-cleaning business which consists primarily of serving retail customers, provided that any laundry and dry-cleaning processing that occurs on the premises is limited to items which are brought directly to the premises by the retail customer. 
    Limited indoor recreation facility means a place where recreation activities occur completely within an enclosed structure, including but not limited to bowling alleys, skating rinks, pool halls, video and pinball parlors. 
    Limited outdoor recreation facility means a place with outdoor activities, including but not limited to miniature golf, batting cages, water slides, skateboard parks, driving ranges and go-cart tracks. 
    Livestock includes horses, cattle, sheep and llamas, but does not include swine, chickens, goats, roosters, fowl, peacocks, guinea hens or other animals not allowed to be maintained within the Town by this Code (except that swine, chickens, goats, roosters, fowl, peacocks or guinea hens may be permitted with the Board of Trustees' approval in isolated circumstances, including for 4-H-type projects that do not unreasonably impact neighbors). 
    Local street means a street which is anticipated to carry under two thousand five hundred (2,500) vehicle trips per day in traffic volume at desirable speeds of up to twenty-five (25) miles per hour, and which provides access to abutting property and primarily serves local traffic. 
    Lodging establishment means a building intended and used for occupancy as a temporary abode for individuals who are lodged, with or without meals, in which there are five (5) or more guest rooms. 
    Long-term care facility means any of the following: 
a.  Convalescent center means a health institution that is planned, organized, operated and maintained to offer facilities and services to in-patients requiring restorative care and treatment and that is either an integral patient care unit of a general hospital or a facility physically separated from, but maintaining an affiliation with, all services in a general hospital. 
b.  Nursing care facility means a health institution planned, organized, operated and maintained to provide facilities and health services with related social care to in-patients who require regular medical care and twenty-four-hour-per-day nursing services for illness, injury or disability. Each patient shall be under the care of a physician licensed to practice medicine in the State. The nursing services shall be organized and maintained to provide twenty-four-hour-per-day nursing services under the direction of a registered professional nurse employed full time. 
c.  Intermediate health care facility means a health-related institution planned, organized, operated and maintained to provide facilities and services which are supportive, restorative or preventive in nature, with related social care, to individuals who because of a physical or mental condition, or both, require care in an institutional environment but who do not have an illness, injury or disability for which regular medical care and twenty-four-hour-per-day nursing services are required. 
    Lot means a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat or subdivision of at least a sufficient size to meet minimum requirements for use, street frontage coverage and area and to provide required yards and other open spaces in the zoning district in which the lot is located, and which has direct access onto a public or private street. 
    Lot depth means the average distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line. 
    Lot, double frontage means a lot which fronts on one (1) public street and backs on another. 
    Lot, flag means a lot so shaped and designed that the main building site area is set back from the street on which it fronts and includes an access strip connecting the main building site with the frontage street. 
    Lot line, front means the property line dividing a lot from a street. On a corner lot, only one (1) street line shall be considered as a front line, and the shorter street frontage shall be considered the front line. 
    Lot line, rear means the line opposite the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side means any lot lines other than the front lot line or rear lot line. 
    Lot, reverse corner means a corner lot having its side street line substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. 
    Lot size means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot; synonymous with area of lot. 
    Lot width means the distance parallel to the front lot line, measured at the front building setback line. Lot width on a curving front lot line means the distance parallel to the tangent of the front lot line at the building setback line. The lot width and the lot frontage may have different lengths on an irregularly shaped lot as they are measured at different points on the lot. 
    Manufactured home means a single-family dwelling which is partially or entirely manufactured in a factory; which is not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width and thirty-six (36) feet in length; which is installed on an engineered permanent foundation; which has brick, wood or cosmetically equivalent siding extending to the ground level; which has a pitched roof; which has the delivery system including wheels, tires, axles and tongue hitch removed; and which is certified pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq., as amended. 
    Manufacturing means a business which makes products by hand or by machinery. 
    Medical and dental offices and clinics means an establishment operated by one (1) or more duly licensed members of the human health care professions, including but not limited to physicians, dentists, chiropractors, psychiatrists and osteopaths, where patients are not lodged overnight but are admitted for examination and/or treatment. 
    Mini-storage warehouse means a building or a group of buildings containing separate, individual self-storage units divided from the floor to ceiling by a wall with an independent entrance from the exterior of the building, designed to be rented or leased on a short-term basis to the general public for private storage or personal goods, materials and equipment. 
    Mixed use means the development of a lot, tract or parcel of land, building or structure with two (2) or more different uses, including but not limited to residential, office, retail, public uses, personal service or entertainment uses, designed, planned and constructed as a unit. 
    Mixed-use building means a building designed, planned and constructed as a unit, used partially for residential use and partly for commercial uses, including but not limited to office, retail, public uses, personal service or entertainment uses. 
    Mixed-use dwelling unit means the dwelling unit in a mixed-use building. For purposes of calculating residential density, each dwelling unit shall count as one-half (1/2) dwelling unit. 
    Mobile home means a transportable, single-family dwelling unit built on a permanent chassis with attached undercarriage consisting of springs, axles, wheels and hubs, and which is suitable for year-round occupancy and contains the same water supply, waste disposal and electrical conveniences as immobile housing. A mobile home is designed to be transported on streets to the place where it is to be occupied as a dwelling unit and may or may not be attached to a permanent foundation. 
    Multiple-family dwelling means a dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units, including what is commonly known as an apartment building, but not including group, row or townhouses, or hotels, motels or condominiums, fraternity and sorority houses and similar group accommodations. 
    Nightclub means a bar or similar nonalcoholic establishment containing more than one hundred (100) square feet of dance floor area. 
    Nonconforming building means a building or structure, or portion thereof, that does not conform to the regulations of this Land Use Code, but that was lawfully constructed under the regulations in force at the time of construction. 
    Nonconforming use means a use that does not conform to the use regulations of this Land Use Code, but that was lawfully established under the regulations in force at the time the use was established and has been in regular use since that time. 
    Off-street parking area means all off-street areas and spaces designed, used, required or intended to be used for the parking, storage, maintenance, service, repair, display or operation of motor vehicles, including driveways or access ways in and to such areas and circulation aisles throughout such areas, but not including approved outdoor storage areas as defined herein or public streets and rights-of-way. 
    Oil and gas operation means any structure, facility or activity which is constructed on or disturbs land in association with oil or gas drilling, production or waste treatment and disposal, including but not necessarily limited to wells, tanks or tank batteries, pits, access roads for ingress and egress and pipelines. 
    Oil well or gas well means a well, the principal production of which at the mouth of the well is oil or gas. 
    Open-air farmers' market means an occasional or periodic market held in an open area or in a structure where groups of individual sellers offer for sale to the public such items as fresh produce, seasonal fruits, fresh flowers, arts and crafts items and food and beverages (but not to include second-hand goods) dispensed from booths located on-site. 
    Open space means any land or water area with its surface open to the sky, which serves specific uses of providing park and recreation opportunities, conserving natural areas and environmental resources, structuring urban development form and protecting areas of agricultural, archeological or historical significance. Open space shall not be considered synonymous with vacant or unused land but serves important urban functions. Usable open space shall exclude areas used for offstreet parking, off-street loading, service driveways and setbacks from oil and gas wells and their appurtenances or other hazards to the public. 
    Outdoor recreation facility means an area devoted to active sports or recreation, such as go-cart tracks, miniature golf, archery ranges, sport stadiums or the like, and may or may not feature stadium-type seating. 
    Outdoor storage means the keeping in an unroofed area of any equipment, goods, material, merchandise or operable vehicles including cars, trucks, boats and recreational vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours. The definition of outdoor storage includes vehicles, cars, trucks, boats or recreational vehicles undergoing active repair that are kept in the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours. Containers and semi-trailers may not be used for residential or storage uses except on construction sites. 
    Outlot means a measured piece of land contained within subdivided land that is not a building lot. An outlot may be conveyed to the public for open space or other public purposes, be retained by the developer for later subdivision or be conveyed to an owners association. 
    Park means an area open to the general public and reserved for recreational, educational or scenic purposes. 
    Parking garage means an off-street parking area within a building. 
    Parking lot means any off-street parking area as defined herein. 
    Patio cover means a cover of any material over an exterior surface that has no walls. 
    Personal and business service shops means shops primarily engaged in providing services generally involving the care of the person or such person's apparel, or rendering services to business establishments such as laundry or dry-cleaning retail outlets, portrait/photographic studios, beauty or barber shops, employment service, or mailing or copy shops. 
    Plant nursery and greenhouse means any land or structure used primarily to raise trees, shrubs, flowers or other plants for sale or for transplanting and may include the sale of nonliving landscape and decorating products. 
    Plat means a map of certain described land prepared in accordance with the requirements of this Code and Section 38-51-106, C.R.S., as an instrument for recording of real estate interests with the County Clerk and Recorder. 
    Principal use means the main use of land or of a structure as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. 
    Print shop means an establishment in which the principal business consists of duplicating and printing services using photocopy, blueprint or offset printing equipment and may include the collating of booklets and reports. 
    Private property rights means the rights of a property owner within the Town to use his or her property within the legal parameters set forth in this Code and subject to applicable state, federal and constitutional law. Nothing herein guarantees any private property rights to develop in a particular manner except pursuant to a valid vested right. 
    Private school means a school that is established, conducted and primarily supported by a nongovernmental agency. 
    Professional office means an office for professionals, such as physicians, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers, artists, musicians, designers, teachers, accountants and others who, through training, are qualified to perform services of a professional nature and where no storage or sale of merchandise exists, except as accessory to the professional services. 
    Proof of ownership means ownership as specified in a current title insurance commitment or policy, or certification of title, issued by a title insurance company licensed by the State. 
    Property means all real property subject to land use regulation by the Town. 
    Property line means the boundary of any lot, parcel or tract as the same is described in the conveyance of such property to the owner; and does not include the streets or alleys upon which said lot, parcel or tract abuts. 
    Public areas means streets, parks, open spaces and other property designated or described as for public use on a map or plat of the Town and fee title is vested in the Town, other public body or a special district as defined in Section 32-1-103, C.R.S. 
    Public facilities means those constructed facilities, including but not limited to transportation systems or facilities, water systems or facilities, wastewater systems or facilities, storm drainage systems or facilities, fire, police and emergency systems or facilities, electric, gas, telecommunication utilities or facilities and publicly owned buildings or facilities. 
    Public hearing means a meeting called by a public body for which public notice has been given and which is held in a place at which the general public may attend to hear issues and to express their opinions. 
    Public improvement means any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, landscaped open space, off-street parking area, lot improvement or other facility which benefits the public. 
    Public open space means an open space area conveyed or otherwise dedicated to the Town, State or County or other public body for recreational or conservation uses. Public open spaces are to be unencumbered by oil and gas wells, their appurtenances or other hazards to the public. 
    Public school means a free, tax-supported school. 
    Public use means uses which are owned by and operated for the public by the Town, county, state or federal governments or by school districts. 
    Public utility means a common carrier supplying electricity, wire telephone service, natural gas, water, wastewater or stormwater service or similar public services, but shall not include railroads or other forms of rail mass transit or depots or terminals supporting the same, or wireless telecommunication facilities. 
    Quasi-public means having the nature or characteristics of being public, but owned by a private or not-for-profit entity. 
    Raw water means water rights acceptable to the Town for domestic purposes, or water rights acceptable to the Town that may be used for irrigation of public facilities. 
    Recreational vehicle (RV). Definitions pertaining to recreational vehicles and recreational vehicle parks are contained in Section 16-9-10 of this Code. 
    Recycling facility means a building used for the collection and/or processing of recyclable material. Processing means the preparation of material for efficient shipment by such means as baling, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting or cleaning. Such a facility, if entirely enclosed within a building or buildings, shall be considered a warehouse. 
    Resource extraction, processes and sales means removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of sand, gravel, soil, rock, minerals, mineral substances or organic substances, other than vegetation, from water or land on or beneath the surface thereof, exposed or submerged. 
    Restaurant, drive-through means any establishment in which the principal business is the sale of foods and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state and in which the design or principal method of operation of all or any portion of the business is to allow food or beverages to be served directly to the customer in a motor vehicle without the need for the customer to exit the motor vehicle. 
    Restaurant, fast food means any establishment in which the principal business is the sale of food and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and in which the design or principal method of operation includes the following characteristics: 
a.  Food and beverages are usually served in paper, plastic or other disposable containers; and 
b.  The consumption of food and beverages is encouraged or permitted within the restaurant building, within a motor vehicle parked upon the premises or at other facilities on the premises outside the restaurant building or for carryout. 
    Restaurant, standard means any establishment in which the principal business is the sale of food and beverages to customers in a ready-to-consume state; where fermented malt beverages and/or malt, special malt or vinous and spirituous liquors may be produced on the premises as an accessory use; and where the design or principal method of operation includes one (1) or both of the following characteristics: 
a.  Customers are served their food and/or beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which the items are consumed; or 
b.  Customers are served their food and/or beverages by means of a cafeteria-type operation where the food or beverages are consumed within the restaurant building. 
    Retail establishment (also known as retail store ) means an establishment of twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet or less of gross leasable floor area in which sixty percent (60%) or more of the gross floor area is devoted to the sale or rental of goods, including stocking, to the general public for personal or household consumption or to services incidental to the sale or rental of such goods. 
    Retention basin means a pond, pool or basin used for permanent storage of water runoff. 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main or for another special use. The usage of the term right-of-way for land platting purposes means that every right-of-way established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use on the plat on which such right-of-way is established. 
    Setback means the required open space unoccupied and unobstructed between the nearest projection of a structure and the property line of the lot on which the structure is located, with the exception of eaves which may project a maximum of eighteen (18) inches into the setback. 
    Setback, front yard means the setback distance a building or structure must be placed from the front lot line. 
    Setback, rear yard means the setback distance a building or structure must be placed from the rear lot line. 
    Setback, side yard means the setback distance a building or structure must be placed from the side lot line. 
    Shopping center means a group of retail and service establishments located in a complex which is planned, developed, owned or managed as a unit, with off-street parking provided on the property. 
    Sight distance triangle means the area at the four (4) corners of an intersection that is to be kept free of shrubs, ground cover, berms, fences, structures or other materials or items greater than thirty (30) inches in height. Trees shall not be planted in the triangular area. The size of the sight distance triangles is determined as follows: at the intersection of any two (2) streets or where a street intersects with an alley, a triangle measuring thirty (30) feet along each curb or edge of roadway from their point of intersection, the third side being a diagonal line connecting the first two (2). 
    Sign, projecting means any sign supported by a building wall and projecting therefrom. 
    Sign, wall means any sign painted on, incorporated in or affixed to the building wall, or any sign consisting of cut-out letters or devices affixed to the building wall with no background defined on the building wall. 
    Sign, window is a sign that is painted on, applied or attached to a window or that can be read through the window from the public right-of-way. 
    Site plan means a scale drawing of a lot, showing the actual measurements, the size and location of any existing or proposed buildings, the location of the lot in relation to abutting streets and other details such as parking areas, access points, landscaped areas, building areas, setbacks from lot lines, building heights, floor areas, densities, utility locations and easements. 
    Site specific development plan means the final plat of a subdivision or final development plan of a PUD (Planned Unit Development) when approved by the Board of Trustees pursuant to this Code. 
    Small animal boarding (kennels/catteries) means a facility approved to board dogs, cats or other household pets as a business. 
    Street means a public way (whether publicly or privately owned) used or intended to be used for carrying vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic, and shall include the entire area within the public right-of-way and/or public access easement. 
    Streetscape means the distinguishing character of a particular street, within the public right-of-way, including paved materials and the adjacent space extending along both sides of a street, including landscaping, sidewalks, medians, lighting, street furniture and signage. 
    Structure means a combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the surface of land or water. 
    Subdivider or developer means any person, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, association or corporation who participates as owner, promoter, developer or sales agent in the planning, platting, development, promotion, sale or lease of a development. 
    Subdivision means the platting of a lot or the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plots or sites. 
    Supermarket means a retail establishment primarily selling food, as well as other convenience and household goods, which occupies a space of not less than twenty-five thousand one (25,001) square feet. 
    Tavern means an establishment providing or dispensing fermented malt beverages and/or malt, special malt, vinous or spirituous liquors and in which the sale of food products such as sandwiches or light snacks is secondary. 
    Title commitment means formal documentation from a title company listing the name of the owner of the property under consideration, the legal description of the property and any legal holdings on the property, such as easements, rights-of-way or liens. 
    Tourist facility means an establishment set up to primarily provide local tourist information to visitors. 
    Town means the Town of Wellington, a municipal corporation of the State, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
    Town Comprehensive Plan means the plan, which was adopted by the Planning Commission and Board of Trustees in accordance with Section 31-23-206, C.R.S., to guide the future growth, protection and development of the Town, affording adequate facilities for housing, transportation, comfort, convenience, public health, safety and general welfare of its population. 
    Townhouse means a single-family dwelling unit constructed in a series or group of attached units with property lines separating such units. 
    Vehicle major repair, servicing and maintenance means any building, or portion thereof, where heavy maintenance activities, such as engine overhauls, automobile/truck painting, body or fender work, welding or the like are conducted. Such use shall not include the sale of fuel, gasoline or petroleum products. 
    Vehicle minor repair, servicing and maintenance means the use of any building, land area, premises or portion thereof, where light maintenance activities, such as engine tune-ups, lubrication, carburetor cleaning, brake repair, car washing, detailing, polishing or the like are conducted. 
    Veterinary facilities, small animal clinic means any facility maintained by or for the use of a licensed veterinarian in the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of animal diseases wherein the animals are limited to dogs, cats or other comparable household pets and wherein the overnight care of said animals is prohibited except when necessary in the medical treatment of the animal. 
    Veterinary hospital means any facility which is maintained by or for the use of a licensed veterinarian in the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of animal diseases. 
    Warehouse means a building used primarily for the storage of goods or materials. 
    Warehouse, distribution and wholesale means a use engaged in storage, wholesale and distribution of manufactured products, supplies or equipment, including accessory offices or showrooms, including incidental retail sales, but excluding bulk storage of materials that are inflammable or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. 
    Warehousing means a business which stores or stocks merchandise or commodities. 
    Wireless telecommunication equipment means any equipment used to provide wireless telecommunication service, but which is not affixed to or contained within a wireless telecommunication service facility, but is instead affixed to or mounted on an existing building or structure that is used for some other purpose. 
    Wireless telecommunication facility means any freestanding facility, building, pole, tower or structure used to provide only wireless telecommunication services, and which consists of, without limitation, antennae, equipment and storage and other accessory structures used to provide wireless telecommunication services. 
    Wireless telecommunication services means services providing for the transmission of wireless communications utilizing frequencies authorized by the Federal Communications Commission for paging systems, enhanced specialized wireless telecommunication, personal communication services or cellular telephone. 
    Workshop and custom small industry means a facility wherein goods are produced or repaired by hand, using hand tools or small-scale equipment, including small engine repair, furniture making and restoring, upholstering, custom car or motorcycle restoring or other similar uses. 
    Yard means that portion of the open area on a lot extending open and unobstructed from the ground upward from a lot line for a depth or width specified by the regulations for the zone district in which the lot is located. 
    Yard, front means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the nearest line or point of the building. 
    Yard, front setback means the distance a building or structure must be placed from the back of the front property line. 
    Yard, rear means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the nearest line or point of the building. 
    Yard, rear setback means the distance a building or structure must be placed from the back of the rear property line. 
    Yard, side means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the side lot line and the nearest line or point of the building. 
    Yard, side setback means the distance a building or structure must be placed from the back of the side property line. 
    Zone district means a zone district of the Town as established in Article 5 of this Code, unless the term is used in a context that clearly indicates that the term is meant to include both the zone districts of the Town and the zone districts of an adjoining governmental jurisdiction. Also referred to as zoning district. 
    Zoning map means the official zoning map adopted by the Board of Trustees by ordinance, as amended. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 10-2008 , § 1, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 13-2008, § 1, 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 2-2009 , § 1, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 7-2010 , § 1, 7-27-10; Ord. No. 4-2011 , § 1, 3-22-11; Ord. No. 9-2011 , 8-9-11; Ord. No. 7-2018 , § 1, 4-24-18) 
ARTICLE 3 - Design Standards 

Sec. 16-3-10. - Applicability. 
    All development applications and building permit applications shall comply with the density, dimension, design and zoning standards contained in this Chapter. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-20. - Relation to zone district standards. 
    In the event of a conflict between a standard or requirement contained in this Article and Articles 5 and 6 of this Chapter, the requirements of Articles 5 and 6 shall prevail. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-30. - Vision and intent. 
    The intention of the Town in enacting this Article is to provide minimum standards to ensure development consistent with the Comprehensive Master Plan. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-40. - Application of community design principles. 
(a)  The community design standards as set forth in this Article are to be considered in every development proposal. The Town's goal is to expedite the planning review process by clearly outlining the Town's expectations for new development. 
(b)  The Planning Commission and Board of Trustees will evaluate each proposal based on these standards set forth in this Article and the context within which a project is located. The standards are intended to be specific enough to guide development, but not to preclude creative design solutions. Applicants must substantially conform to the design standards unless it can be demonstrated that an acceptable alternative meets one (1) or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  The alternative better achieves the stated intent; 
(2)  The intent will not be achieved by application of the standards in this circumstance; 
(3)  The effect of other standards will be improved by not applying a specific standard; and/or 
(4)  Strict application or unique site features make the standard impractical. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-50. - Design elements. 
    One (1) of the greatest challenges facing small towns is the successful integration of new development with the original Town pattern. Suburban development patterns which have included numerous cul-de-sacs and limited street connections have often separated communities and created enclaves of the original towns. In order to maintain the Town's unique, small-town character and clearly describe the Town's vision, the following design elements are set forth: 
(1)  Compact urban growth. As the community grows from the original Town limits, it is important to maintain a continuity of density, diversity and interconnectedness. Urban development should occur adjacent to the Town's core so that the community's prime agricultural land and natural areas are preserved and public infrastructure and utilities are used as efficiently as possible. 
(2)  Neighborhood design. New developments should help create neighborhoods, rather than residential subdivisions adjacent to one another. Neighborhoods should be organized around a strong center, which may include elements such as common open space, civic and commercial or mixed uses. Strong consideration should be given to pedestrian movement, the character of streets and sidewalks as inviting public space and the interconnectedness of the streets within the neighborhood and as they connect to the rest of the community. In addition, new neighborhoods should have a variety of housing sizes and types that help to create a distinct identity rather than a monotonous replication of styles. 
(3)  Lots and blocks, streets and sidewalks. The layout of lots and blocks should be designed to continue the Town's existing block pattern to form a grid or modified grid pattern that is adapted to the topography, natural features and environmental considerations. The streets should be interconnected in order to create a comprehensive transportation network that facilitates the movement of pedestrians, cars and bicycles. 
(4)  Parks and open space. New developments shall use natural open spaces and developed public space (such as parks and plazas) to organize and focus lots, blocks and circulation patterns, protect natural areas and quality agricultural land and to create an identity for each neighborhood. 
(5)  Site design, architecture and landscaping. One (1) of the fundamental intentions of this Chapter is to encourage innovative, quality site design, architecture and landscaping in order to create new places that can be integrated with the existing community and reflect the traditional patterns of the region. 
(6)  Environment. New developments should be designed to fit within the environment. To the greatest extent feasible, sites should be designed to preserve natural areas and the plants and wildlife inhabiting those areas. In addition, new developments are encouraged to conserve natural resources, especially water. 
(7)  Water conservation. As the Town and the State grow, increasing pressure will be placed on the limited supply of water resources. Town residents have emphasized the importance of preserving the quality and quantity of water. All new development is encouraged to use raw water for irrigation and to incorporate water-saving measures in building design and landscaping. Developments are required to use stormwater management techniques that address water quality as well as quantity. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-60. - Compact urban growth. 
    The Comprehensive Master Plan includes a compact urban growth policy that encourages and directs development to take place within areas contiguous to existing development in the community. This policy will accomplish several goals, including: 
(1)  Improving air quality by reducing vehicle miles traveled and by promoting alternatives to the private automobile; 
(2)  Preserving natural areas and features, particularly in the periphery of the Town; 
(3)  Making possible the efficient use of existing infrastructure and cost effective extensions of new services; 
(4)  Encouraging in-fill development and reinvestment in built-up areas of the Town; and 
(5)  Promoting physical separation from neighboring communities to help each maintain its individual identity and character. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-70. - Growth boundary. 
    The Town has established a Growth Management Boundary and a Planned Growth Boundary as part of the Comprehensive Master Plan. The purpose is to direct growth within the established growth boundaries. No development shall be approved unless it is located within the established planning boundaries and is consistent with the Comprehensive Master Plan. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-80. - Neighborhood design principles. 
    To encourage the creation of viable neighborhoods that interconnect with each other and integrate new projects into the existing community, thereby strengthening the original Town, the neighborhood layout should consider the street, lot and block pattern of the original Town, as well as solar orientation, topography, sensitive wildlife and vegetation, drainage patterns and environmental and regional climate issues. Further, the edges of neighborhoods should be formed by features shared with adjacent neighborhoods, such as major streets, changes in street pattern greenways or natural features such as streams and major drainage or riparian corridors. New streets, bikeways, sidewalks, paths and trails should connect to existing adjacent neighborhoods. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-90. - Neighborhood structure. 
    The following is a summary of essential elements to consider integrating into new neighborhoods: 
(1)  Street, sidewalk and trail connections within new neighborhoods that connect to adjacent existing neighborhoods and strengthen the connection to the existing town. 
(2)  Streets that encourage pedestrian activity by creating an inviting atmosphere through attention to the details of landscaping and tree locations, sidewalks, lighting and the building architecture, etc. 
(3)  A mixed-use neighborhood center located for easy access. 
(4)  A variety of housing types, sizes, densities and price ranges that are well integrated. 
(5)  A variety of land uses that are well integrated and a transition of intensity. Nonresidential uses, larger buildings and attached multi-family housing should be encouraged to be located near commercial centers with a transition to smaller buildings closer to low density neighborhoods. 
(6)  Pedestrian and bike connections throughout residential neighborhoods and linked to neighborhood commercial or civic centers and open space systems. 
(7)  Parks, open space, public plaza and greens that are well integrated into the neighborhood. 
(8)  Street trees (subject to water conservation considerations). 
(9)  Architectural, landscaping and site design elements of new developments as outlined in this Article. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-100. - Neighborhood; general provisions. 
    The following principles are contained in the original "Old Town" of the Town. The Comprehensive Plan identifies them as contributing to the Town's small-town character. Although the size of individual development proposals will vary, projects will be evaluated with consideration to these neighborhood design principles and the context within which a project is located. Failure to incorporate these design principles into a project may be cause for denial of the project by the Board of Trustees. 
(1)  Each neighborhood has a center and an edge. It is important that every neighborhood have activity centers that draw people together. Use natural and man-made features, such as a drainage ways, major roadways and ditches to define neighborhood edges. Buildings or other features located at gateways entering a neighborhood shall mark the transition into and out of the neighborhood in a distinct fashion using massing, additional height, contrasting materials and/or architectural embellishments to obtain this effect. 
(2)  Mix of types of dwelling units. A mix of dwelling unit types shall be distributed throughout the development. 
(3)  Focal points. Focal points, or points of visual termination, shall generally be occupied by more prominent, monumental buildings and structures that employ enhanced height, massing, distinctive architectural treatments or other distinguishing features, as well as landscape features. 
(4)  Public space as development framework. Public space is used to organize blocks and circulation patterns and to enhance surrounding development. Public open space must be functional and easily accessible and shall be designed to organize the placement of buildings to create an identity for each neighborhood. Buildings should face public open space to allow for casual surveillance. 
(5)  Design streets as public spaces. 
a.  Buildings shall define streets through the use of relatively uniform setbacks along each block. Subject to water use considerations, the streetscape shall also be reinforced by lines of shade trees planted in the right-of-way landscape strip and may be further reinforced by walls, hedges, landscaping or fences which define front yards. 
b.  On a lot with multiple buildings, those located on the interior of the site shall relate to one another both functionally and visually. A building complex may be organized around features such as courtyards, greens or quadrangles which encourage pedestrian activity and incidental social interaction. Smaller, individualized groupings of buildings are encouraged. Buildings shall be located to allow for adequate fire and emergency access. 
(6)  Order rather than repetition. The orderly arrangement of design elements can unify a space even when the elements are not the same. The location of sidewalks relative to streets, building setbacks and orientation and the placement of trees (subject to water use considerations) can all help create an overall impression of unity even though each home or building has a distinct character. 
(7)  Use human proportion. Buildings shall be considered in terms of their relationship to the height and massing of adjacent buildings, as well as in relation to the human scale. (In a small town, this means generally one-, two- and three-story buildings.) 
(8)  Define the transition between the public and private realm. Buildings shall be located to front towards and relate to public streets or parks, both functionally and visually, to the greatest extent possible. Wherever possible, buildings shall not be oriented to front towards a parking lot. 
(9)  Encourage walking and bicycling. Sites shall be designed to minimize conflicts between vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians. Pedestrian and bicycle access and connections shall be designed to enhance transportation on foot and by bicycle. 
(10)  Neighborhoods shall have a mix of activities available rather than a purely residential land use. Neighborhood residents shall have convenient access to parks, schools, open space, trails and services. The optimum size of a neighborhood is one-quarter (1/4) mile from center to edge. 
(11)  Fit within the environment rather than on top of it. New developments shall be designed to respond to the natural environment, fit into the setting and protect scenic view corridors. Key design considerations shall include a site layout that responds to natural features both on- and off-site, the size of structures and materials used in the development and the transition between the development and the surrounding landscape. 
(12)  Housing types and styles that reflect the architecture of the region. Familiar architectural styles shall play an important role in developing an architectural identity for neighborhood dwellings. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-110. - Lots and blocks. 
    The intent of the block and lot standards is to continue the Town's existing block pattern in a manner that is compatible with site-specific environmental conditions. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-120. - Lots and blocks; general provisions. 
    Streets shall be designed in accordance with this Chapter and the Town's Design Standards to create blocks that consider interconnectedness, topography, solar orientation, views and other design features. The length of blocks in "Old Town" is typically four hundred (400) feet. Thus, to the greatest extent possible, blocks shall be designed to have a length of between three hundred (300) feet and seven hundred (700) feet (nonresidential streets). The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to the following: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(2)  Need for convenient access, control and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation. 
(3)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(4)  Lot dimension and configuration. Lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and minimum building setback lines shall conform to Articles 5 and 6 of this Chapter and shall facilitate the placement of buildings with sufficient access, outdoor space, privacy and view. 
(5)  Depth and width of properties shall be adequate to provide for off-street parking, landscaping and loading areas required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
(6)  Lot frontage. All lots shall have frontage that is either adjacent to or directly accessible to a street. Flag lots are prohibited unless otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees. 
(7)  Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to accommodate side elevation enhancements, such as porches and bay windows, the required building setback and utility easements on both street frontages. For a corner lot, the front of the lot is defined as the side having the shortest street frontage. In the case of a reverse corner lot, both sides abutting a street shall maintain a front yard setback. 
(8)  Double frontage. Double frontage lots for residential uses shall not be permitted except where essential to provide separation of residential properties from arterial streets or commercial uses, or to overcome specific disadvantage of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten (10) feet in width, across which there shall be no vehicular right of access, may be required along the property line of lots abutting an arterial street or other high traffic or conflicting use. 

(9)  Residential lots adjacent to arterial streets. When residential lots are adjacent to, and the houses do not face, an arterial street (i.e., rear yards abut the street), they shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet deep and direct access to the street shall be prohibited. The setback to the house shall be a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet. When houses face the arterial street or are side loaded relative to the street, the front or side setback to the house, respectively, shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet. Additional buffering techniques must also be applied. 
(10)  Residential lot access to adjacent street. 
a.  Driveway access to a local or collector street from a single-family detached residential lot shall be limited to one (1) driveway curb-cut or driveway access of no greater than twenty (20) feet in width. A circular drive in which each access to the local or collector street is less than ten (10) feet in width, separated by at least thirty (30) feet, and which is constructed as an integral part of the overall architectural design of the single-family residence, may be considered as a single driveway access. 
b.  Driveway access to a local street from a single-family detached residential lot shall be greater than fifty (50) feet from the intersection of the local street and a collector street or one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the intersection of the local street and an arterial street as measured from the intersecting right-of-way lines. 
c.  Driveway access to a collector street from a single-family detached residential lot shall be greater than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the intersection of the collector street and a local street, another collector street or an arterial street as measured from the intersecting right-of-way lines. 
(11)  Multi-family residential, commercial, business and industrial lot access to adjacent street. 
a.  Driveway access to a local or collector street from a multi-family residential, commercial, business or industrial lot shall be greater than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from any street intersection as measured from the intersecting right-of-way lines; 
b.  Driveway access to an arterial street from a commercial, business or industrial lot shall be not less than two hundred fifty (250) feet from any intersection on the arterial street, or from another commercial, business or industrial lot's access as measured from the intersecting right-of-way lines or driveways; or 
c.  At the sole option of the Town, driveway access to a local street, collector street or arterial street from a multi-family residential, commercial, business or industrial lot shall be as determined by a traffic study approved by the Town. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-130. - Streets. 
    The intent of the design standards is to establish a safe, efficient, attractive transportation system that promotes all modes of transportation and is sensitive to the environment. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-140. - Streets; general provisions. 
    The local street system of any proposed development shall be designed to be safe, efficient, convenient and attractive and consider the use by all modes of transportation that will use the system. streets should be an inviting public space and an integral part of community design. Local streets shall provide for both intra- and inter-neighborhood connections to knit developments together, rather than forming barriers between them. All streets should interconnect to help create a comprehensive network of public areas to allow free movement of cars, bicycles and pedestrians. 
(1)  Street layout. All streets shall be aligned to join with planned or existing streets consistent with the approved Street Master Plan included in the Comprehensive Master Plan. The street layout shall form an interconnected system of streets primarily in a grid or modified pattern adapted to the topography, unique natural features, environmental constraints and peripheral open space areas. The street layout shall emphasize the location of neighborhood focus points, other internal open space areas, gateways and vistas. The use of cul-de-sacs and other roadways with a single point of access shall be minimized. The integration of traffic-calming features within and adjacent to residential areas shall be utilized when appropriate. 
(2)  Controlling street access. A strip of land between a dedicated street and adjacent property shall not be reserved for the purpose of controlling access to such street from such property. 
(3)  Visibility at intersections. No shrubs, ground cover, berms, fences, structures or other materials or items greater than thirty (30) inches in height shall be planted, created or maintained at street intersections within the site distance triangle. The site distance triangle is described by starting at the point where the flow-line of the two (2) intersecting streets meet. Two (2) of the legs follow down the flow-line of the respective streets thirty (30) feet to a point, with the final leg between these two (2) endpoints. Trees shall not be planted in the site distance triangle. 
(4)  Pedestrian crossings at street intersections and mid-block. Pedestrian crossings shall be accessible to handicapped individuals and mid-block crossings may be required at the direction of the Board of Trustees. 
(5)  Street and path alignment. Street, path and sidewalk alignment shall provide for the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists. The street pattern shall be the most advantageous to serve the adjoining areas. When possible, proposed streets shall be continuous and in alignment with existing and proposed streets. 
(6)  Access. Access to all subdivisions shall be from a public street. Driveways shall not be permitted to have direct access to arterial streets. 
(7)  Street right-of-way dedication. The full width of rights-of-way for all streets being platted must be dedicated to the Town. All streets within the Town shall afford public access for emergency services and utilities. In cases where streets form the perimeter of any development have a portion of the proposed right-of-way on an adjacent property, the following standards will apply: 
a.  The developer shall: 
1.  Purchase the other one-half (1/2) of the proposed right-of-way property for the Town at the appraised fair market value and then dedicate the right-of-way to the Town; 
2.  If the landowner of the proposed right-of-way property is unwilling to sell the proposed right-of-way property to the developer for its appraised fair market value, pay for the cost of an appraisal for the proposed right-of-way property and legal fees for the Town Attorney to condemn such property in the future; or 
3.  Provide for a traffic study establishing that construction of such right-of-way will not be necessary before the likely development of such adjacent property. 
b.  The developer shall finalize an agreement with the Town which guarantees the construction of the street to Town standards. 
(8)  Street standards. Rights-of-way shall be dedicated and streets shall be designed and constructed to accommodate present and future traffic volumes in accordance with all standards. 
(9)  Street names. Names of new streets comply with the IGA with Larimer County and the Municipalities of Larimer County concerning standardization of street names. New streets which are extensions of, or which are in alignment with, existing streets shall bear the names of such streets. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-150. - Parking. 
    The intent of the parking standards is to provide adequate parking and access for motor vehicles, ensure compliance with provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and minimize the visual impact of off-street parking areas. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 7-2018 , § 2, 4-24-18) 
Sec. 16-3-160. - Parking; general provisions. 
(a)  Adequate parking. In all zoning districts, off-street parking facilities for the storage of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees and patrons of the buildings or structures hereafter erected, altered or extended shall be provided and maintained as prescribed. 
(b)  Surface. All off-street parking areas as defined herein shall be surfaced with poured in place concrete or asphaltic concrete. All portions of a driveway that is within street right-of-way shall be paved and designed to the standards of the Town Engineer. 
(c)  Integrate parking lots with surroundings. Parking lots shall not dominate the frontage of pedestrian-oriented streets, interfere with designated pedestrian routes or negatively impact surrounding neighborhoods. The pedestrian character of streets and buildings shall be maximized through continuity of buildings and landscape frontage. 
(d)  Landscaping. Parking lots shall be landscaped, screened and buffered. 
(e)  Share access. Where feasible, parking lots shall share access drives with adjacent property with similar land uses. 
(f)  Off-street parking design. Any offstreet parking area, with the exception of driveways accessing a garage of a single-family residential unit, shall be designed so that vehicles may exit without backing onto a public street. Off-street parking areas shall be designed so that parked vehicles do not encroach upon or extend onto public rights-of-way or sidewalks, or strike against or damage any wall, vegetation, utility or other structure. 
(g)  Circulation area design. Circulation areas shall be designed to facilitate the safe movement of vehicles without posing a danger to pedestrians or impeding the function of the parking area. 
(h)  Lighting. All parking area lighting shall be full cutoff type fixtures. Any light used to illuminate parking areas or for any other purpose shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from nearby residential properties and away from the vision of passing motorists. Lighting intensities shall conform to the Town's lighting standards. 
(i)  Shared off-street parking. When there are opportunities to support parking demand through shared off-street parking for compatible uses (such as a movie theater and an office building), a parking study and shared parking agreements shall be used to demonstrate the adequacy of the parking supply as a substitute for standard parking requirements. 
(j)  Cleveland Avenue parking. For all new commercial uses located on Cleveland Avenue bounded by Sixth Street on the east, the alley between Cleveland and Harrison Avenues on the north or a projection of said easements east and west of those points, First Street on the west, and the alley between Cleveland and McKinley Avenues on the south or a projection of said easement east and west of those points, parking shall be required from the east property line to the west property line along the rear setback. The rear setback shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 7-2018 , § 3, 4-24-18 
Sec. 16-3-170. - Paved off-street parking requirements. 
    Paved off-street parking shall be provided according to the minimum requirements as specified below: 
Use Required Parking (must be outside rights-of-way) 1. Single-family detached 2 spaces per unit 2. Townhouse and duplex 1 space per bedroom, up to 2 per unit 3. Multi-family dwellings 1 space per bedroom, up to 2 per unit 4. Accessory dwellings 1 space per bedroom, up to 2 per unit 5. Hotels/motels 1 space per guest room plus 1 space per 500 square feet of common area* 6. Office/business uses 1 space for every 300 square feet of gross floor area* 7. Restaurant 1 space for every 100 square feet of gross floor area * 8. Retail 1 space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area* 9. Health club 1 space for every 100 square feet of gross floor area* 10. Schools 1 space per 3.5 seats in assembly rooms plus 1 per faculty member 11. Warehouse 1 space for every 100 square feet of gross floor area* 12. Institutional/Churches 1 space for every 6 seats 13. Industry 1 space each for the maximum number of employees present at any one time * Off-street parking for commercial uses shall be sufficient to provide parking for employees of all proposed uses, as well as long-term customer parking. Spaces reserved for employees shall be designated as such by means of striping and signage.  
(Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-180. - Location of spaces. 
(a)  Off-street parking facilities for residential uses shall be provided and located on the same lot as the building they are intended to serve. Except within a garage or in conjunction with an approved affordable housing project, tandem parking is not allowed to meet required off-street parking requirements. 
(b)  The location of required off-street parking facilities for other than residential uses shall be within seven hundred (700) feet of the building they are intended to serve when measured from the nearest point of the building or structure. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-190. - Handicap parking spaces. 
(a)  Handicap parking spaces shall be required for all office, business, industrial, institutional and multi-family uses. 
(b)  Handicap parking spaces shall be designated as being for the handicapped with painted symbols and standard identification signs. 
(c)  Handicap parking spaces shall be located as close as possible to the nearest accessible building entrance. 
(d)  Number of handicap parking spaces: 
Total parking spaces in lot Minimum required number of handicap parking spaces 1-25 1 26-50 2 51-75 3 76-100 4 101-150 5 151-200 6 201-300 7 301-400 8 401-500 9 501-1,000 2% of total 1,000 and over 20 plus 1 for every 100 over 1,000  
For every eight (8) handicap parking spaces, there must be at least one (1) van-accessible space. If there are less than eight (8) handicap parking spaces, one (1) space must be vanaccessible. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-200. - Handicap parking space dimensions. 
(a)  Handicap parking spaces must be eight (8) feet by eighteen (18) feet with a five-foot-wide access aisle. 
(b)  Van-accessible handicap parking spaces must be eight (8) feet by eighteen (18) feet with an eight-foot-wide access aisle. 
(c)  Handicap parking spaces that are parallel to a pedestrian walk which is handicap accessible may have the same dimensions as those for standard vehicles. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-210. - Parking stall dimensions. 
    Parking stalls for automobiles shall meet the following standards. All dimensions represent the minimum requirement for any required parking space. 
Parking Stall Dimensions Parking
angle
(A)Stall
width
(B)Stall
to
curb
(C)Aisle
width
(D)Curb
length
(E)Overhang
(F)45° 10 ft. 21 ft. 13 ft. 14'4" 1'5" 60° 10 ft. 21 ft. 13 ft. 11'6" 1'8" 90° 10 ft. 20 ft. 24 ft. 10 ft. 2 ft. 0° (parallel) 9 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft. 24 ft. 0 ft.  

(Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-220. - Bicycle parking spaces. 
    Commercial, industrial, civic, employment, multi-family and recreational uses shall provide bicycle facilities as follows: 
(1)  A minimum number of bicycle parking spaces shall be provided, equal in number to two percent (2%) of the total number of automobile parking spaces provided by the development, but not less than one (1) space. 
(2)  For convenience and security, bicycle parking facilities shall be located near building entrances. 
(3)  Within the Downtown Zone, however, a grouping of spaces may be utilized as directed by the Town. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-230. - Parking restrictions for excess-weight vehicles and recreational vehicles. 
(a)  Boats, boat trailers, tractors, trailers, motor homes, buses, detached/dismounted campers and excess-weight vehicles shall not be parked or kept on private property for longer than seventy-two (72) hours within any one month period, except as herein provided. 
(b)  Boats, boat trailers, tractors, trailers, motor homes, buses, detached/dismounted campers and excess-weight vehicles may be parked upon a public right-of-way or roadway adjacent to the owners property, for a maximum total of forty-eight (48) hours in any one month period. 
(c)  All boats, boat trailers, trailers, motor homes, buses, detached/dismounted campers and excess-weight vehicles kept or stored on private residential property for longer than seventy-two (72) hours during any one month period shall be kept or stored in a rear yard or interior side yard behind the front yard setback, or within an enclosed building except as herein provided. 
(d)  If the Town Administrator/Clerk, on request of a residential property owner, determines it to be unfeasible, as a result of the lot configuration, for an owner to store a boat, boat trailer, trailer, motor home, bus or detached/dismounted camper on a private residential property in a side or rear yard due to lack of access, the Town Administrator may authorize an owner to park one vehicle with a length of no more than twenty-one (21) feet in the front yard or in the case of a corner lot a side yard which off of which there is no entry to the residence. Gravel parking spaces are to be clearly delineated and kept clear of weeds and the combined driveway and parking space shall occupy no more than forty percent (40%) of any front yard area. Any vehicle shall be parked at least three (3) feet from sidewalk or six (6) feet from the curb when there is no sidewalk and no closer than two (2) feet from side property lines and occupied structures or closer than three (3) feet from an exit door of an occupied structure. Any vehicle stored pursuant to this subsection shall be operable, licensed and registered, as applicable. No vehicle parked pursuant to this subsection shall be used for storage or as a business or residential premises and no storage of parts, personal items, trash or refuse shall remain or around such vehicle, or in such vehicle unless vehicle is enclosed or covered. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the forgoing provisions of this section, parking of excess weight vehicles in public areas, including streets, shall be allowed in the following areas where reinforced streets or pads have been constructed: 
(1)  the west side of First Street from Cleveland Avenue to a point two hundred (200) feet north of Kennedy Avenue. 
(2)  on Cleveland Avenue in the following locations: 
a.  The south side of Cleveland Avenue between Sixth Street and Fifth Street. 
b.  The north side of Cleveland Avenue from Sixth Street to the access point of Lot 2B. 
c.  The south side of Cleveland from Fifth Street to one hundred sixty (160) feet west of Fifth street. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 13-2008 , § 1, 8-12-08; Ord. No. 2-2009 , § 1, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 9-2011 , 8-9-11; Ord. No. 6-2012 , § 1, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 16-3-240. - Sidewalks, pathways and trails. 
    The intent of the standards for sidewalks, pathways and trails is to assure a safe, convenient and attractive pedestrian/bicycle system that minimizes conflicts between vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-250. - Pathways; general provisions. 
(a)  Interconnected network. A sidewalk network that interconnects all dwelling units with other dwelling units, nonresidential uses and common open space shall be provided throughout each development. Sidewalks shall be separate and distinct from motor vehicle circulation to the greatest extent possible. The pedestrian circulation system shall include gathering or sitting areas and provide benches, landscaping and other street furniture where appropriate. 
(b)  Sidewalks required. In all zoning districts, except for the R-1, LI and I Districts, sidewalks are required along both sides of a street. Within the R-1 District, pedestrian movement may be accomplished with trails through common space if approved by the Board of Trustees. Requirements for sidewalks in the LI and I Districts shall be determined based on reasonably anticipated pedestrian needs and uses on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)  Sidewalk width. Sidewalk widths shall comply with the design standards for the category of streets. Sidewalks adjacent to storefronts in commercial areas shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width, or consistent with the average sidewalk width on a block if building in an area with existing sidewalks. 
(d)  Sidewalk location. Sidewalks shall be located within the right-of-way unless otherwise authorized by the Board of Trustees. 
(e)  Accessibility. Sidewalks and plazas shall be accessible to handicapped individuals as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and related requirements. 
(f)  Lighting. All sidewalks and other pedestrian walkways shall have appropriate lighting, using poles and fixtures consistent with the overall design theme for the development. 
(g)  Pathways. Pathways shall be provided to link internal open space areas with peripheral open space areas and shall connect to pathway routes throughout the Town. Pathway routes shall be designated between residential areas and commercial and employment centers and schools. Pathways on local streets may be delineated by painted "bicycle only" lanes. All other pathways shall be constructed in accordance with standards established in the Town Parks and Trails Master Plan. 
(h)  Trails. Trails shall be provided within and surrounding open space areas and connecting open space areas. Trails shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in width and shall be constructed of an impervious service concrete; however, for specific uses and circumstances, the Board of Trustees may approve construction of other impervious surfaces. Unless the Board of Trustees determines the area would not be used, trails shall be flanked on one (1) side by a soft surface path a minimum of four (4) feet in width. The soft surface path shall be constructed with a minimum depth of eight (8) inches of compressed gravel, crowned and compacted with edging to contain the surface material. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-260. - Easement and utility standards. 
(a)  Utility easement width. Utility easement widths and locations shall comply with the requirements of the design standards. Location and adequacy of utility easements shall be subject to the approval and acceptance of the Town or applicable utility companies. 
(b)  Multiple installations within easements. Easements shall be designed so as to provide efficient installation of utilities. Public utility installations shall be located as to permit multiple installations within the easements. The developer will establish final utility grades prior to utility installations. 
(c)  Underground utilities. Telephone lines, electric lines, cable television lines and other like utility services shall be placed underground. The subdivider shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of this Section and shall make the necessary arrangements, including any construction or installation charges, with each utility provider for the installation of such facilities. Transformers, switching boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, ducts and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such underground utilities shall be placed underground or on the surface but not on utility poles. Screening or fencing is required to the satisfaction of the Board of Trustees. Electric transmission and distribution feeder lines and necessary appurtenances thereto may not be placed above ground unless they are carrying greater than 115 kV. Such facilities shall be placed within easements or public streets, as therein provided, or upon private easements or rights-of-way provided for particular facilities. 
(d)  Street lighting. Street lighting and associated underground street lighting supply circuits shall be installed. The minimum requirement shall be two hundred fifty (250) watt sodium vapor lamps at a maximum spacing of four hundred (400) feet for local streets. Arterial streets and commercial areas shall have a higher level of lighting as determined by the Board of Trustees. 
(e)  Northern Colorado Water Association. The Town and the Northern Colorado Water Association (NCWA) entered into a 1994 settlement agreement related to litigation filed by NCWA (the NCWA Agreement). By the NCWA Agreement, the Town is restricted from providing domestic water service to areas of the Town without NCWA's consent. All water service by the Town staff within the areas to be jointly served or served by NCWA shall only be provided with the consent of NCWA and after existing and any new easements of NCWA have been approved by NCWA. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-270. - Parks and open space. 
    To ensure that a comprehensive, integrated network of parks and open space is developed and preserved as the community grows, the Town shall maintain a Park Plan affording varying types of public and private park settings for Town residents' uses. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-280. - Types of parks and open space. 
(a)  Plazas. A plaza is typically located in a commercial or industrial area to serve as a gathering place. A plaza is usually bordered by civic or private buildings. Plazas may range from very active places with adjacent complimentary uses, such as restaurants and cafes, to quiet areas with only seating, formal landscape plantings and amenities, such as fountains or public art. Developers are responsible for developing and providing the appropriate amenities for each plaza. 
(b)  Pocket parks. Pocket parks provide places within walking distance of residential units for supervised play for young children and unstructured activities for neighborhood residents. Developers must provide the land and develop a one-acre pocket park for every two hundred (200) residential units. At a minimum, a pocket park shall include sodded areas or other live grass ground cover approved by the Board of Trustees, trees and irrigation plus one (1) of the following: playground equipment, contemplative garden areas or other active or passive recreation opportunities for the neighborhood. 
(1)  Projects with less than two hundred (200) dwelling units must provide a pocket park or demonstrate that they are within one-quarter (1/4) mile of a neighborhood park. If credit is taken for proximity to a neighborhood park, the developer must provide a cash-in-lieu equivalent for a development's pro rata share of the cost of land and improvements for a pocket park (i.e., provide twenty-five percent [25%] of a pocket park for fifty [50] units). 
(2)  The land and amenities of a pocket park may be added to a centrally located neighborhood park. The pocket park amenities placed in a neighborhood park must be within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the sub-neighborhood's two hundred (200) residences served. For example, a neighborhood park serving a neighborhood of four hundred (400) residences shall have two (2) pocket park amenity pods, located to conveniently serve each of the sub-neighborhoods. 
(c)  Neighborhood parks. Neighborhood parks are places for recreation and social gatherings that are within walking distance of most residents. These parks can include multiple-use lawn areas, picnic areas, playground equipment, court game facilities and community gardens. At the direction of the Board of Trustees, residential development shall either provide land for a neighborhood park or pay park land dedication fees for the park that will serve the neighborhood. This can be credited toward the twenty-percent land dedication required at the time of subdivision. The Town will be responsible for the development and maintenance of the park. 
(d)  Community parks. Community parks serve the residents of several neighborhoods. Community parks are to be located on or near arterial streets at the edge of residential areas or in nonresidential areas to minimize the impact of organized recreational activities, such as lighted ball fields. These parks will generally be purchased and developed by the Town. 
(e)  Trails. The trail system shall link neighborhoods, parks, schools, open spaces, employment centers, community facilities and neighboring communities and thus provide important transportation connections as well as recreational opportunities and access. Developers must provide trails in all areas designated "Parks and Trails" on the Comprehensive Public Facilities Map or the Park Plan, as well as connections to the Town's trail system and destinations within the neighborhood. 
(f)  Storm drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities, including stormwater detention and stormwater retention ponds, may function as park areas or as open space for active recreation, trail corridors or habitat enhancement areas if they are designed appropriately. Credit toward the open space dedication requirements will be considered on a case-by-case basis by the Board of Trustees at the time of platting. 
(g)  Maintenance by others. The Board of Trustees may require that pocket parks, trails and open spaces be dedicated to the Town but maintained by the owners or a property owners' association. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-290. - Parks and open space; general provisions. 
(a)  Open space should serve as the neighborhood focus. Open space, such as the Town drainage ways and developed parks and plazas, shall be used to organize and focus lot, block and circulation patterns and to enhance surrounding development. Street, block, lot and building patterns shall respond to the views, landscape and recreational opportunities provided by the open space. 
(b)  Public access. Areas designated as public open space shall be both visibly and physically accessible to the community. Public access shall be provided to all public open space, natural and developed, directly from the public street and trail system. Open space areas shall be bounded along at least fifty percent (50%) of the perimeter by a street, except for pocket parks and plazas, unless otherwise authorized by the Board of Trustees. Pocket parks and plazas shall be integrated into the neighborhood design and be accessible to pedestrians and bicyclists. 
(c)  Buildings shall front public open space. Development adjacent to open spaces shall front onto the area as much as possible, so that the areas are not enclosed by back yards. Open space and trail areas shall have a minimum of three hundred (300) feet of street frontage unless otherwise authorized by the Board of Trustees. 
(d)  Open space uses. Uses designated within the open space shall be appropriate to the context and character of the site and the intensity of the proposed development. 
(e)  Ownership and maintenance of open space. Ownership and maintenance of public open space shall be determined by the Town on a case-by-case basis through the review process. 
(1)  Unless approved by the Board of Trustees, all parks, trails and open spaces shall be dedicated to or otherwise owned by the Town. 
(2)  Pocket parks, landscaped outlots and private recreational facilities may, with the Board of Trustee's approval, be owned and maintained by a homeowners' association or the landowner. 
(3)  Environmentally sensitive, archeological and historic resources may be dedicated to the Town and maintained by the Town if approved by the Board of Trustees. 
(4)  Stormwater detention and retention areas that function as open space shall be owned and maintained by a homeowners' association or the landowner, unless otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees. 
(5)  Areas designated as open space shall be maintained according to the designated function of the area. If the area is to remain in private ownership, a mechanism which will assure maintenance will be funded in perpetuity must be in place at the time of final plat. 
(f)  Open space protection. Areas designated as open space shall be dedicated or conveyed to the Town or, at a minimum, shall be protected by a deed restriction, conservation easement or other appropriate method to ensure that they cannot be subdivided or developed in the future and that such areas shall remain as open space in perpetuity. Uses of open space may include recreational or agricultural activities if approved by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-300. - Open space requirements. 
(a)  Open space includes: 
(1)  Areas within the community designated for the common use of the residents of an individual development or the community at large; 
(2)  Areas designated for preservation and protection of environmental resources, including floodplains, natural drainage ways and wetland areas; 
(3)  Areas designated for agricultural preservation; and 
(4)  Areas of archeological and historic significance. 
(b)  Non-open space. Open space shall not include the following: 
(1)  Required setback areas around oil and gas production facilities; 
(2)  Disconnected remnants of land created by division of sites into lots or parcels that do not qualify as functional open space, unless approved by the Board of Trustees; 
(3)  Private yards; 
(4)  Tree areas within a street right-of-way; or 
(5)  Required parking lot landscaping associated with all uses, except parking specifically designated for access to open space areas and within commercial or industrial projects. 
(c)  Amount of open space required. The amount of functional open space required in each development will be based on the density of the development, the recreational requirements of the anticipated users and the anticipated opportunities for public recreation within walking distance of the site (one-quarter [1/4] mile). All development within the Town shall meet the following open space requirements: 
(1)  Single-family residential developments. Open space for single-family residential development shall include, at a minimum: 
a.  Twenty percent (20%) of the gross land being subdivided as functional open space, which may include pocket parks, plazas, trails, recreational amenities, homeowner association owned landscaped areas (excluding parking lots), natural areas and amenities for residents or other civic purposes; 
b.  One (1) centrally located pocket park for every two hundred (200) residential units; 
c.  The land for one (1) neighborhood park within one-quarter (1/4) mile radius of the proposed homes or a fair-share, cash-in-lieu contribution for the cost of the neighborhood park that will serve the development; and 
d.  An internal trail, taking into account trails designated in the Comprehensive Plan and the Park Plan. 
(2)  Multi-family residential developments. Multi-family residential development shall include, at a minimum: 
a.  Twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross land being subdivided as functional open space, which may include pocket parks, plazas, trails, recreational amenities, homeowner association or landowner owned landscaped areas (excluding parking lots), natural areas and amenities for residents or other civic purposes; 
b.  One (1) centrally located pocket park for every two hundred (200) residential units; 
c.  The land for one (1) neighborhood park within one-quarter (1/4) mile radius of the proposed homes or a fair-share, cash-in-lieu contribution for the neighborhood park that will serve the development; and 
d.  An internal trail system, taking into account trails designated in the Comprehensive Plan and the Park Plan. 
(3)  Commercial and industrial developments. Commercial and industrial development shall include, at a minimum: 
a.  Twelve percent (12%) of the gross land being subdivided as functional open space, which may include plazas, trails, landscaped areas (including parking lots), recreational amenities and natural areas and other civic purposes; and 
b.  An internal trail system, taking into account trails designated in the Comprehensive Plan and the Park Plan. 
(d)  Open space and plans. All land development applications, with the exception of plot plan applications for individual single-family residences, shall be accompanied by the appropriate open space plan. The open space plan shall be included with the landscape plans or submitted as a separate map based on direction from the Town Administrator/Clerk. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-310. - Fee in lieu of dedication. 
    As determined by the Board of Trustees, a developer of property may, with the consent of the Board of Trustees, pay fee-in-lieu impact fees in those cases where dedication of land is not feasible or not the preferred alternative. Such payment shall be based on the fair market value of the developed property that otherwise would have been required to be dedicated as open space, to be determined after completion of the platting process. Such payment shall be held by the Board of Trustees for the acquisition of open space sites and land areas by the Town. At the option of the Board of Trustees, a developer may meet open space dedication requirements through a combination of payment of fee-in-lieu impact fees and land dedication. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-320. - Fair contribution for public school sites. 
    All development shall dedicate or convey land for public school purposes to the Poudre School District, or make payment in lieu of land dedication or conveyance in accordance with the intergovernmental agreement between the Town and the Poudre School District. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-330. - Landscape design. 
    The intent of the landscape design criteria is to preserve the Town's special character and integrate and enhance new development by promoting quality landscape design that: 
(1)  Reinforces the identity of the community and each neighborhood; 
(2)  Subject to water conservation practices, provides tree-lined streets in urban areas; 
(3)  Anchors new buildings in the landscape; 
(4)  Subject to water conservation practices, provides tree canopies within paved areas; and 
(5)  Is environmentally sensitive by preserving existing trees, using water conservation techniques, planting native species (when appropriate) and enhances valuable habitat. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-340. - Landscaping; general provisions. 
    All land development applications shall be accompanied by an appropriate landscape plan. Building permit applications for individual single-family residences will not require landscape plans. However, all landscaping within the community shall comply with the intent of these regulations. 
(1)  Street trees. Subject to water conservation practices, all collector and arterial streets shall be tree-lined streets. Trees shall meet the Town's tree standards. Street trees shall include a mix of species and be aligned in straight rows. Subject to water conservation practices, street trees shall be placed within the right-of-way within a tree lawn. Spacing of trees shall allow for their mature spread. Trees installed along streets that will be widened in the future shall take into account plans for future widening of streets so that established trees will not be disturbed during future construction. 
(2)  Site landscape design. Landscape improvements shall be an integral part of the overall site design for each property. Landscape improvements shall be designed to complement and enhance the character of neighborhoods and shall follow these guidelines: 
a.  Landscaped areas shall be configured to maximize their interconnectivity within the site, to natural areas and to landscaped areas in adjacent developments. Small, isolated islands of landscaping should be avoided except as required in parking lots and for screening along roadways. 
b.  Landscape improvements in all developments shall be consistent with the character of the proposed development and the surrounding area to reinforce neighborhood identity. 
c.  Landscape design shall enhance natural features, drainage ways and environmental resources. 
d.  All landscape improvements shall be designed for mature landscapes and shall provide appropriate visibility for cars and pedestrians. 
e.  The elements of gateway, path and destination shall be incorporated into the design of landscapes. Gateways are entries that provide transitions from one (1) space to another. Pathways are routes that lead to a destination. Destinations are focal points that can include anything from a garden bench at the end of a path to a civic building at the end of a street. 
f.  Landscaping shall be no more than thirty (30) inches high when located in a sight distance triangle. 
(3)  Environmental considerations. 
a.  Landscapes shall use the following xeriscape design principles to facilitate water conservation: 
1.  Well-planned planting schemes; 
2.  Appropriate turf selection to minimize the use of bluegrass; 
3.  Use of mulch to maintain soil moisture and reduce evaporation; 
4.  Zoning of plant materials according to their microclimatic needs and water requirements; 
5.  Improving the soil with organic matter, if needed; 
6.  Efficient irrigation systems; and 
7.  Proper maintenance and irrigation schedules. 
b.  All landscapes shall strive to maximize the use of native species. Where native material is not appropriate for the intended use or appearance, plant species that are regionally adapted and noninvasive should be emphasized. 
c.  Landscapes shall consist of a variety of species to enhance biodiversity. No one (1) species may make up more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total nongrass plant materials on one (1) site. 
d.  Buildings and parking areas shall be located to preserve and promote the health of existing trees, environmental resources and natural drainage ways. No healthy tree shall be removed without good cause. This requirement is not intended to prevent the removal of unhealthy trees in conjunction with site development. 
e.  Trees shall be located to provide summer shade and limit winter shade on walks and streets. 
f.  All areas disturbed by construction shall be reseeded to prevent erosion. Native, noninvasive grasses shall be used for revegetation where practical. Weed control is the responsibility of the landowner on all reseeded areas. 
(4)  New buildings and paved areas. Development shall be designed so as to anchor structures in the landscape through the use of trees, shrubs and ground cover. The size and intensity of plantings shall be appropriate to the size and context of the improvements. Development shall be designed so as to: 
a.  Integrate adjacent land uses of different intensities through a combination of berming, plantings and fencing. Use opaque screening only when necessary to mitigate the impact of noise, light, unattractive aesthetics and traffic. A fence shall not be the only screening material used. 
b.  Use landscaping to provide a transition from developed, managed landscape to more natural vegetation. 
c.  Provide a tree canopy by installing shade trees within and adjacent to paved areas. 
(5)  Plant materials. 
a.  Subject to water conservation practices approved by the Board of Trustees, minimum planting sizes on all required landscaping shall be two-inch caliper deciduous trees, one-and-one-half-inch caliper ornamental trees, six-foot-tall evergreen trees and five-gallon shrubs. 
b.  Required plant materials shall be grown in a recognized nursery in accordance with proper horticultural practice. Plants shall be healthy, well-branched, vigorous stock with a growth habit normal to the species and variety and free of diseases, insects and injuries. 
c.  All plants shall conform to standards for measurements, grading, branching, quality, ball and burlapping as stated in the American Standard for Nursery Stock, 1990 Edition, American Association of Nurserymen, Inc. (AAN-ASNS) and the Colorado Nursery Act of 1965 (CNA). 
(6)  Irrigation. All required landscaping shall be irrigated as required for plant establishment and maintenance. Irrigation shall be appropriate to the type and scope of the improvements. 
a.  Use of nontreated water for irrigation is encouraged if a permanent, suitable supply is available. 
b.  Required landscaping in urban developments shall be irrigated with a permanent irrigation system. 
c.  Temporary irrigation may be used to establish native grasses and vegetation. 
(7)  Guarantee of installation. Required landscape improvements shall be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy (CO) for all structures. If weather conditions prevent installation, the developer shall post a financial guarantee for the improvements. This guarantee shall be released upon completion of the installation of the landscaping. 
(8)  Maintenance. In order to provide for the ongoing health and appearance of landscape improvements, all landscaping shall be maintained and replaced by the landowner or occupant as necessary. All property owners or occupants shall be responsible for maintenance of landscaping within the portion of the public right-of-way between the back of the curb or street pavement and the adjacent property, unless the Town has specifically agreed in a development agreement to take over maintenance. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-350. - Landscaping design standards. 
(a)  Landscaping within the right-of-way and required common open space. Development shall be designed so as to: 
(1)  Street trees. Subject to water conservation practices approved by the Board of Trustees, all streets shall be landscaped with one (1) deciduous or ornamental tree for every forty (40) linear feet of block frontage or portion thereof. Street trees shall be planted within the tree lawn portion of the right-of-way with adequate spacing to allow for the mature spread of the trees. 
(2)  Collector streets. Collector streets shall be landscaped with live ground cover, including a combination of grass, trees, flowers, grass or shrubs. In commercial areas, particularly in the downtown district, collector streets may be paved in areas which function as pedestrian access to storefronts and which are integrated into the overall design of the other improvements on the site. 
(3)  Arterial streets. Arterial streets shall be landscaped with live ground cover as appropriate to the use and function of the area, including a combination of grass, trees, flowers, paving and one (1) shrub for every one hundred fifty (150) square feet of landscape area clustered into planting beds. New development shall also install an automatic irrigation system for all landscaping within arterial rights-of-way. In commercial areas, particularly in the downtown district, arterial streets may be paved in areas which function as pedestrian access to storefronts and which are integrated into the overall design of the other improvements on the site. 

(4)  Landscaping for required common open space. Landscaping in open space areas, such as pocket parks and trails, shall be appropriate to the use and function of the area subject to water conservation practices and include trees, shrubs, ground cover, irrigation and paving. 
(5)  Long-term landscape maintenance. Development shall provide a mechanism for long-term maintenance of common open space and arterial and collector street right-of-way landscaping, such as a homeowners' association and covenants. 
(b)  Single-family residential development landscaping standards. In addition to landscaping the right-of-way tree lawn, subject to water conservation practices, single-family development shall provide: 
(1)  Sod for the front yard setback of each single-family residential structure. There shall be a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) live materials between the front of the single-family residential structure and the curb, except in paved driveway areas, unless otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees. 
(2)  Five (5) shrubs for the front yard setback of each single-family residential structure. 
(3)  Each single-family residential owner shall: 
a.  Install the remainder of the owner's yard and, subject to water conservation practices, is encouraged to plant additional trees, shrubs and flowers using xeriscape principles and the general provisions set forth in this Section. 
b.  Maintain the owner's yard and landscaping within the adjacent road right-of-way. 
(c)  Multi-family and mixed-use residential landscaping standards. In addition to right-of-way landscaping, multi-family development shall provide: 
(1)  Site trees. Subject to water conservation practices, a minimum of one (1) tree per one thousand (1,000) square feet of landscaped area, distributed on the site. 
(2)  Shrubs. A minimum of one (1) shrub per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of landscaped area. Shrubs shall be grouped and distributed throughout the site. With the Board of Trustees' approval, trees may be substituted for up to one-half (1/2) of the required shrubs at the rate of one (1) tree for ten (10) shrubs. 
(3)  Ground cover. Irrigated turf maintained to appropriate standards for active recreation in areas that will function for active recreation. Where appropriate, use native grass for areas that will not function as active recreation areas. Native grass must be weed-free and maintained at a maximum height of eight (8) inches. There shall be a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) live materials between the front of the house and the curb unless approved by the Board of Trustees. 
(4)  Landscape setback to parking lots thirty (30) feet from arterials or twenty-five (25) feet from other streets. The purpose of the setback is to provide a buffer between street parking areas. This setback may be reduced to fifteen (15) feet if used in combination with a three-foot to four-foot masonry or stone decorative wall. Signage may be included in this setback. 
(d)  Large lot single-family residential zoning district development landscaping standards. Landscaping shall be designed to keep natural resource areas in their natural state as much as possible and should be in character with surrounding properties. 
(1)  Development of large single-family rural density (Zoning District R-1) shall provide: 
a.  Ground cover for the front yard setback of each home. The ground cover may be a combination of irrigated and native grasses and wildflowers as appropriate to the design of the individual home. There shall be a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) live materials between the front of the house and the edge of the roadway unless approved by the Board of Trustees. 
b.  Ten (10) shrubs for the front yard setback of each home. 
(2)  The homeowner shall install the remainder of the yard and, subject to water conservation practices, is encouraged to plant additional trees, shrubs and flowers using xeriscape principles and the general provisions set forth in these landscape standards. 
(3)  Maintain the yard and landscaping within the adjacent road right-of-way. 
(e)  Business/commercial and industrial development landscaping standards. 
(1)  Landscape improvements shall be designed to enhance the overall appearance of the development and integrate the project with adjacent land uses and into the surrounding neighborhood. All improvements shall consider the people who will use the site, travel through or by the site and adjacent land uses. With the exception of properties within the Downtown (D) Zone, a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the site (gross) shall be landscaped area, outside of street rights-of-way, building footprints or hard surfaced or landscaped areas used as parking lots and driveways. 
(2)  Development of commercial or industrial properties shall: 
a.  Site trees. Subject to water conservation practices, provide a minimum of one (1) tree per one thousand (1,000) square feet of landscaped area, distributed on the site. 
b.  Shrubs. Provide a minimum of one (1) shrub per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of landscaped area. Group shrubs and distribute throughout the site. With approval from the Board of Trustees, trees may be substituted for up to one-half (1/2) of the required shrubs at the rate of one (1) tree for ten (10) shrubs. 
c.  Sod. Establish irrigated grass turf maintained to appropriate standards for active recreation in areas that will function for active recreation. Where appropriate, use native grass for areas that will not function as active recreation areas. Native grass must be weed-free and maintained at a maximum height of eight (8) inches. There shall be a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) live materials between the building and the street unless approved by the Board of Trustees. 
d.  Landscape setback to parking lots. Establish a setback thirty (30) feet from arterials or twenty-five (25) feet from other streets. The purpose of the setback is to provide a buffer between street parking areas. This setback may be reduced to fifteen (15) feet if used in combination with a three-foot to four-foot masonry or stone decorative wall. Signage may be included in this setback. 
e.  Screen loading areas. Create screened loading areas (including areas for vehicles being loaded) and service and storage areas which, using acceptable materials, screen areas visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent property with an opaque screen that is an integral part of the building architecture or by landscaping. Chain link fencing with slats, tires or used building materials are not acceptable screening materials. 
f.  Compatibility. Integrate activities on the subject property with adjacent land uses by utilizing a combination of landscaping, building orientation and appropriate architectural elements. 
(3)  The building owner or occupant shall maintain the yard and landscaping within the adjacent road right-of-way. 
(f)  Parking lot landscaping standards. Parking lot landscaping is intended to break up large expanses of pavement, create shade, buffer views of parking lots from adjacent streets and development and enhance the overall appearance of each project. 
(1)  Applicability. All parking lots with ten (10) spaces or more shall be subject to the following requirements. 
(2)  The developer or assignees shall provide: 
a.  Site trees. Subject to water conservation practices, a minimum of one (1) tree per twenty (20) parking spaces. Trees shall be grouped together in islands which are a minimum of ten (10) feet wide. Landscaping shall be used to break up large expanses of pavement and to create a canopy for summer shade. 
b.  Shrubs. A minimum of one (1) shrub per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of landscaped area, with group plantings in landscape islands. 
c.  Ground cover. Limited areas of irrigated sod. Grass is discouraged in areas less than ten (10) feet wide and grass buffers (native grass where possible) around the lot perimeter to filter runoff and improve water quality is encouraged. 
d.  Parking setback. Landscape setbacks for parking areas thirty (30) feet from arterials or twenty-five (25) feet from other streets. The purpose of the setback is to provide a buffer between the street and parking areas and to screen the parking from the street. This setback may be reduced to fifteen (15) feet if used in combination with a three-foot to four-foot articulated masonry or stone decorative wall with trees and shrubs on both the street and parking lot sides of the wall to soften its appearance. Signage may be included in this setback. 
e.  Provide a mechanism for long-term maintenance of landscaping. All landscaping within and adjacent to parking lots shall be owned and maintained by the landowner or occupant. 
(g)  Landscape covenant. The Town may require that an owner requesting development approvals shall provide a mechanism for ensuring that landscape improvements will be maintained in order to ensure the continued upkeep of the property. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-360. - Storm drainage facilities. 
(a)  Intent. Stormwater facilities shall be installed to serve a development to promote innovative and effective land and water management techniques that protect and enhance water quality. 
(b)  Storm drainage; general provisions. 
(1)  Storm drainage improvements shall be constructed to serve development and landscaping associated with storm drainage facilities shall be integrated into the overall design of the project. 
(2)  Landscaping installed to address storm drainage shall enhance the overall appearance of the project, prevent erosion and improve water quality of stormwater runoff whenever possible. 
(3)  Storm drainage facilities may function as open space for active recreation, trail corridors or habitat enhancement areas if they are designed appropriately and approved by the Board of Trustees. 
(4)  The use of planting strips and shallow, landscaped depressions in parking lots and along roads is encouraged to help trap and remove pollutants from stormwater runoff. 
(c)  Applicability. All storm drainage facilities shall be appropriately landscaped. 
(d)  Minimum requirements. Minimum storm drainage improvements shall be constructed such that: 
(1)  All facilities shall be seeded to grass appropriate to the function of the area. Areas to be used for active recreation shall be seeded to a turf-type grass and irrigated with a permanent irrigation system. Areas to be maintained for habitat enhancement shall be seeded to native grasses and wildflowers. Development shall establish complete, weed-free grass areas. Trail corridors may be seeded to native grasses if appropriately integrated with adjacent improvements. 
(2)  The maximum side slope of drainage facilities shall be no more than 4:1 and the minimum slope at the bottom of a drainage facility shall be no more than one-half percent (0.5%). 
(3)  Landscape improvements shall be designed to enhance the function of the facility. Subject to water conservation policies, areas designed for recreation shall include clusters of trees to provide shade, located so they do not impair the function of the facility. 
(4)  Habitat and water quality enhancement, including wetland plantings in low wet areas, is encouraged. 
(e)  Ownership and maintenance. Easements for drainage facilities shall be dedicated to the Town but not accepted for maintenance and shall be maintained by the landowner or occupant unless otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-370. - Submittal standards for landscape plans. 
    All land development applications will be accompanied by a landscape plan. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-380. - Prohibited plant materials list. 
    The following trees are prohibited in the Town: 
(1)  Russian olive (an invasive species that threatens native trees in riparian ecosystems). 
(2)  Lombardy poplar (susceptible to canker-forming fungi for which there are no available controls). 
(3)  Siberian elm (can dominate native vegetation, especially in disturbed areas; is weak-wooded and subject to continuous dieback when large; can be devastated by the elm leaf beetle). 
(4)  Boxelder maple (primary host plant of the boxelder bug). 
(5)  Cotton-bearing cottonwood. The Board of Trustees will consider cotton-bearing cottonwood areas on a case-by-case basis for restoration projects along riparian corridors. (Often considered a public nuisance.) (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-390. - Buffering and screening techniques. 
    Properties shall be buffered and screened from adjoining areas with the goal of integrating adjacent land uses and providing seamless transitions from one (1) use to another through the use of building orientation and access, landscaping and appropriate architectural elements. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-400. - Buffering; general provisions. 
(a)  Buffering shall be provided between uses and by new users, with special consideration given to adjacent land uses of different intensities. Uses shall be required to ensure that the transition from one (1) use to another is attractive, functional and minimizes conflicts between the current and planned uses. 
(b)  Uses shall be required to demonstrate compatibility. This can be accomplished through the effective use of shared access and parking, appropriate building orientation and setbacks, landscaping, architectural treatment and limited use of fencing and screening walls. Special consideration shall be given to the impact of aesthetics, noise, lighting and traffic. 
(c)  Under no circumstances shall a fence be the only screening material used as a buffer between land uses. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-410. - Location and screening of required loading and service areas. 
(a)  Loading docks, solid waste facilities, recycling facilities and other service areas shall be placed to the rear or side of buildings in visually unobtrusive locations. 
(b)  Screening and landscaping shall prevent direct views of the loading areas and their driveways from adjacent properties or from the public rights-of-way. Screening and landscaping shall also prevent spill-over glare, noise or exhaust fumes. Screening and buffering shall be achieved through walls, architectural features and landscaping; and shall be visually impervious. Building recesses or depressed access ramps may be used. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-420. - Dumpsters. 
(a)  Every development that is required to provide one (1) or more Dumpsters for solid waste collection shall provide sites for such Dumpsters that are: 
(1)  Located to facilitate collection and minimize negative impacts, including to site occupants, neighboring properties and public rights-of-way; and 
(2)  Constructed to allow for collection without damage to the development site or the collection vehicle. 
(b)  All such Dumpsters shall be screened to prevent them from being visible to: 
(1)  Persons located within any dwelling unit on residential property other than that where the Dumpster is located; 
(2)  Occupants, customers or other invitees located within any building on nonresidential property other than that where the Dumpster is located; and 
(3)  Persons traveling on any public street, sidewalk or other public way. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-430. - Fences and walls. 
    The intent is to ensure that walls and fences are attractive and in character with the neighborhood. Recognizing that fences are used to create privacy, the Town encourages privacy fences be located close to residences or other primary buildings on a property and not along side and rear property lines. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-440. - Fences and walls; general provisions. 
(a)  Compatibility. Walls and fences shall be architecturally compatible with the style, materials and colors of the principal buildings on the same lot. If used along collector or arterial streets, such features shall be made visually interesting by integrating architectural elements, such as brick or stone columns, varying the alignment or setback of the fence, softening the appearance of fence lines with plantings or through similar techniques. A fence or wall may not consist of a solid, unbroken expanse for more than fifty (50) feet. 
(b)  Materials. 
(1)  Stone walls, or brick walls with a stone or cast stone cap, treated wood fences, decorative metal, cast iron fences, stucco walls and stone piers are encouraged. Solid walls and fences are permitted only in rear and side yards. Retaining walls are permitted where required for landscaping or architectural purposes. Hedges may be used in the same manner and for the same purposes as a fence or wall. 
(2)  Fences used in front yards (being the yard area that the primary or front entrance of the primary building on the property is oriented towards) shall be at least fifty percent (50%) open. Allowable fences within front yards are split rail, wrought iron, picket or other standard residential fences of fences of similar material or nature approved by the Building Inspector. 
(3)  Other materials may be incorporated in fences and walls as may be approved by the Board of Trustees. 
(c)  Prohibited materials. Fencing, including concertina or razor wire, are prohibited unless specifically allowed by the Board of Trustees. Barbed wire or electrically charged fences are only allowed in the Agricultural (A) or Rural Residential (RR) Districts. Electrically charged fences shall have signage at least every twenty-five (25) feet identifying such fencing as being electrically charged. Chain link fencing with or without slats shall not be used as a fencing material for screening purposes. 
(d)  Retaining walls. Retaining walls shall be designed to resist loads due to the lateral pressure of retained material in accordance with accepted engineering practice and shall not be unsightly or detrimental to abutting property. 
(e)  Height limitations. Fences or walls shall be: 
(1)  No more than forty-two (42) inches high between the front building line and the front property line. Such walls shall not be solid except for retaining walls. For corner lots, front yard fence regulations shall apply to both street sides of the lot. 
(2)  No more than forty-two (42) inches high if located on a side yard line in the front yard, except if approved by the Board of Trustees and required for unique security purposes. Such fences and walls shall not be solid, except for retaining walls. 
(3)  No more than thirty (30) inches high when located within the site distance triangle, and fences or walls within this site distance triangle shall not be solid. In the Industrial (I) Zone District, chain link fence is permitted so long as the height of the fence is not higher than six (6) feet, the fence is not used for screening and the fencing does not obstruct visibility at any intersection. 
(4)  No more than six (6) feet high for an opaque privacy fence located on a rear property line or on a side yard line in the rear yard. 
(5)  Fences around a recreation court (e.g., tennis, squash racket, squash tennis or badminton) or around a publicly owned recreation area may exceed six (6) feet in height if the fence is at least fifty percent (50%) open. 
(f)  Maintenance. Dilapidated, unsightly or dangerous fences shall be removed or repaired when removal is ordered by the Code Enforcement Officer. Hedges shall be maintained in a healthy condition, trimmed and pruned as appropriate for the plant type. Dead plant material in hedges shall be removed or replaced as appropriate when so ordered by the Code Enforcement Officer. Hedges shall not encroach upon sidewalks or street rights-of-way. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-450. - Site lighting. 
    All site lighting for industrial and commercial uses shall conform to the following standards and minimum and maximum lighting levels for outdoor facilities used at night: 
(1)  Lighting levels. 
Area Minimum foot-candles Maximum footcandles Parking areas/pedestrian walkways 1 10 Loading docks 5 20 Under-canopy fueling area 20 Offsite (20 ft. beyond property line on residential area or public right-of-way) 0.1 (as a direct result of on-site lighting)  
(2)  Site plan. A lighting plan indicating location and type of all outdoor light sources and indicating lighting levels achieved at all points on the site shall be submitted with the application for any land use change requiring review by the Planning Commission. For projects not requiring Planning Commission review, the lighting plan shall be submitted at the time of building permit application. 
(3)  Design standards. The lighting plan shall meet the following design standards: 
a.  Site lighting that may be confused with warning, emergency or traffic signals is prohibited. 
b.  Light sources shall be concealed and fully shielded and shall feature sharp cut-off capability minimizing up-light, spill-light, glare and diffusion. Undercanopy fueling areas shall feature flushmount, flat lens light fixtures. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-3-460. - Commercial and industrial architecture. 
(a)  Elevation and site plans. A Site Plan application as required by Chapter 17, Article 5, of this Code, including front, back and side dimensioned elevation drawings shall be submitted with any application for a land use change requiring review by the Planning Commission. For projects not requiring Planning Commission review, a site plan and elevations shall be submitted at the time of filing any building permit application. The site plan shall show the size and location of any existing or proposed buildings, the location of the lot in relation to abutting streets and other details such as parking areas, access points, landscaped areas, building areas, setbacks from lot lines, building heights, floor areas, densities, utility locations and easements. Elevations shall indicate materials to be installed on all building surfaces. 
(b)  Building form. The design of all buildings shall employ textured surfaces, projections, recesses, shadow lines, colors, window patterns, overhangs, reveals, changes in parapet heights and similar architectural features to avoid monolithic shapes and surfaces and to emphasize building entries. Designs shall not contain unbroken flat walls of greater than fifty (50) feet in length. Buildings having single walls exceeding fifty (50) feet in length shall incorporate one (1) or more of the following at a minimum of every fifty (50) feet: 
(1)  Changes in color, graphical patterning, texture or material; 
(2)  Projections, recesses and reveals; 
(3)  Windows and fenestration; 
(4)  Arcades and pergolas; 
(5)  Towers; 
(6)  Gable projections; 
(7)  Horizontal/vertical breaks; or 
(8)  Other similar techniques. 
(c)  Facade treatment. The architectural treatment of the front facade shall be continued, in its major features, around all visibly exposed sides of a building. 
(d)  Screening. All air-conditioning units, HVAC systems, exhaust pipes or stacks, elevator housing and satellite dishes and other telecommunications receiving devices shall be thoroughly screened from view from the public right-of-way and from adjacent properties by using walls, fencing, roof elements and landscaping. In addition, all trash facilities, loading and parking areas shall be properly screened. 
(e)  Architectural details. All materials, colors and architectural details used on the exterior of a building shall be compatible with the building's style and with other nearby buildings. 
(f)  New buildings and exterior modifications of existing buildings on Cleveland Avenue within the C-2 Downtown Commercial District shall comply with the Cleveland Avenue Architectural Guidelines contained in Appendix A to the ordinance codified herein, a copy of which is on file at the Town Clerk's office. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 2-2013 , § 1, 3-26-13) 
ARTICLE 4 - Nonconforming Uses and Nonconforming Buildings and Structures[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5-2016 , § 1, adopted April 12, 2016, amended article 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article 4, §§ 16-4-10-16-4-60, pertained to nonconforming uses and nonconforming buildings. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 16-4-10. - Continuation of use. 
    A nonconforming use may be continued and a nonconforming building or structure may continue to be occupied or used, except as otherwise provided in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 5-2016 , § 1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 16-4-20. - Change of use. 
    A nonconforming use may only be changed to a conforming use. 
(Ord. No. 5-2016 , § 1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 16-4-30. - Abandonment of use. 
(a)  If active operation of a nonconforming use activity is not carried on as part of the operation of a nonconforming use or nonconforming building during a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, the building, other structure or tract of land where such nonconforming use previously existed shall thereafter be occupied and used only for a conforming use. Intent to resume active operations shall not affect the foregoing. A nonconforming use home occupation business activity shall be considered to be abandoned if the occupants of the dwelling who were conducting such nonconforming use home occupation business discontinue either their occupancy of the dwelling or the nonconforming use home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 5-2016 , § 1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 16-4-40. - Alteration or repair of building or structure. 
(a)  A nonconforming building or structure may not be structurally altered or repaired in any way except as specifically permitted by this article. Any building or other structure containing a nonconforming use or any nonconforming building or structure or portion declared unsafe by the Building Permits and Inspections Administrator may be strengthened or restored to a safe condition. The following changes or alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or structure or to a conforming building or structure housing a nonconforming use: 
(1)  Maintenance repairs that are needed to maintain the good conditions of a building or structure, except that if a building or structure has been officially condemned by the Town, it may not be restored under this provision. 
(2)  Any structural alteration that would reduce the degree of nonconformance or change the use to a conforming use. 
(Ord. No. 5-2016 , § 1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 16-4-50. - Restoration or replacement. 
(a)  If a nonconforming use is destroyed or damaged in any manner, to the extent that the cost of restoration to its condition before the occurrence shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the cost of reconstructing the entire use, it shall be restored only if such use complies with the requirements of this Code. 
(b)  . If a nonconforming structure is destroyed or damaged in any manner, to the extent that the cost of restoration to its condition before the occurrence shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the cost of reconstructing the entire structure, it shall be restored only if such use complies with the requirements of this Code. 
(c)  Where a conforming structure devoted to a nonconforming use is damaged less than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of reconstructing the entire structure, or where a nonconforming structure is damaged less than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of reconstructing the entire structure, either may be repaired or restored, provided any such repair or restoration is started within twelve (12) months and is completed within eighteen (18) months from the date of partial destruction. 
(d)  When a nonconforming structure is removed from a premises, it shall be replaced only if such structure or its use is in full conformance with this Code. 
(e)  The cost of land or any factors other than the cost of the structure are excluded in the determination of cost of restoration or any structure or activity devoted to a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 5-2016 , § 1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 16-4-60. - Enlargement of building or structure and expansion of facilities, equipment or structures. 
(a)  A proposal for the enlargement or expansion of a building or structure containing a nonconforming use, a proposal for an expansion of existing facilities and equipment which are located on the lot and associated with the non-conforming use (such as expanding the number of fuel pumps at a gas station) and a proposal for adding facilities or structures to the lot which are associated with the nonconforming use (such as a new canopy over a fuel pump island), shall require the approval of the Board of Trustees after review by the Planning Commission. In considering such proposals, the Board of Trustees after review by the Planning Commission shall make a finding as to whether or not the enlargement, expansion or addition would adversely affect the surrounding properties. In making such determination, the Board of Trustees and the applicant shall be governed by the following limitations: 
(1)  The nonconforming use shall not be changed (except to a conforming use) as a result of enlargement, expansion or construction. 
(2)  The enlargement, expansion or construction shall not result in the conversion of the nonconforming use of a seasonal to a year-round operation. 
(3)  The nonconforming use shall not be expanded beyond the limits of the parcel of property upon which such use existed at the time it became nonconforming. 
(4)  Additional traffic generated by an enlargement, expansion or construction must be incorporated into the neighborhood and community transportation network without creating safety problems, or causing or increasing level of service standard deficiencies. 
(5)  The noise and vibration levels that may be generated by the nonconforming use shall not be increased beyond the levels that existed prior to the enlargement, expansion or construction that is under consideration. 
(6)  The outdoor storage areas shall not be expanded or located any closer to an adjoining residential development as a result of the enlargement, expansion or construction. 
(7)  The proposed enlargement, expansion or construction shall not add more than twenty-five percent (25%) of new floor area to existing buildings or structures on the site. 
(8)  The enlargement, expansion or construction shall not exceed the building height requirements of the zone district in which the property is located. 
(9)  The enlargement, expansion or construction shall not further encroach upon any nonconforming setback. 
(10)  The enlargement, expansion or construction shall not increase or amplify any inconsistency with the parking standards contained within the Land Use Code. 
(11)  The enlargement, expansion or construction shall not hinder the future development of surrounding properties in accordance with the Land Use Code. 
(12)  The enlargement, expansion or construction shall not present a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the Town or its residents. 
(b)  Where a building, facility, equipment or structure is enlarged, expanded or added pursuant to this Section, the parcel of ground upon which the building, facility, equipment or structure is located shall be brought into compliance with the applicable general development standards contained in Article 3 and the applicable district standards contained in Article 5 of this Chapter. Any new structure that is added to said parcel of ground shall also comply with the applicable general development standards and district standards referenced above. 
(Ord. No. 5-2016 , § 1, 4-12-16) 
ARTICLE 5 - Zoning Districts and Boundaries 

Sec. 16-5-10. - Zoning districts. 
    In order to carry out the provisions of this Code, the Town is divided into the following zoning districts: 
A Agricultural District R-1 Residential District, Single-Family Rural Density R-2 Residential District, Single-Family Medium Density R-3 Residential District, Single-Family Senior Housing R-4 Residential District, Multi-Family MH Manufactured Home Park District C-1 Community Commercial District C-2 Downtown Commercial District C-3 Highway Commercial District LI Light Industrial District TR Transitional District I Industrial District P Public District PUD Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District  
(Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-5-20. - Zoning District Map. 
    The boundaries and classifications of districts established are as depicted on the Zoning District Map as may from time to time be revised, updated or redrafted. The Zoning District Map adopted, and to be used for present reference, shall be that map bearing the most recent date of publication which has been signed by the Chair of the Planning Commission and the Mayor. 
(1)  Interpretation of boundary lines. If uncertainty is deemed to exist relative to the Zoning District Map, district boundaries shall be on section lines; lot lines; the center lines of highways, streets, alleys, railroad rights-of-way or such lines extended; municipal corporation lines; natural boundary lines, such as streams; or other lines to be determined by the use of scales shown on the map. Where a lot is divided by a zoning district boundary line at the time of enactment of the ordinance codified in this Section or by subsequent amendments to that ordinance or this Article, either zone requirements may be extended within the lot for a distance of not more than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Amendment upon zoning or modification. Upon enactment of any ordinance annexing and establishing zoning or modifying existing zoning for any property, and upon final passage thereof, the Town shall amend the prior existing official map to include the annexed area with the proper zoning classification or show the amended classification, as the case may be. Such updated, current official map shall contain, in table form, the date and number of the ordinance amending it, the date the map was amended to reflect each amendment and the initials of the person who checked and approved the change to the map. 
(3)  Cost for amending zoning. Any person who proposes zoning for property being annexed or proposes modifying existing zoning shall bear the entire cost of amending the official zoning map, including all notification costs. The Town shall provide applicants with a copy of the current fee schedule and fee agreement form. 
(4)  Public inspection; storage of original. The official Zoning District Map shall be available and on display at the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk during normal business hours. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-5-30. - General application of uses. 
(a)  Uses designated as permitted uses are allowed in a zone district as a matter of right. Uses classified as conditional uses are permitted with the Board of Trustees' approval after recommendation of the Planning Commission of a conditional use permit. Unless a use is designated as a permitted use or conditional use, subject to a variance or is classified as a legal nonconforming structure or use, it is not permitted. 
(b)  Land uses not otherwise identified in this Chapter may be proposed for development. In order to provide for such uses, the classification of any new or unlisted land use shall be made by the Board of Trustees to determine if the use can be reasonably interpreted to fit into a similar use category described in this Chapter. Unless such determination is made, the use is not permitted. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-5-40. - A - Agricultural District. 
(a)  Intent. This is an ultra low-density district intended for the pursuit of farm activities or for a transitional status. This zone is characterized by the growing of crops and related functions. 
(b)  Principal uses. Permitted principal uses in the A District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and accessory uses. 
(2)  Accessory dwellings when associated with a permitted use. 
(3)  Livestock, limited to the following provisions: 
a.  Specific animals that are present on the land at the time of annexation may continue to be monitored on the premises. If property is annexed into the Town or has been zoned such that the number of livestocked animals allowed on the property has been reduced from the number previously allowed before the annexation or the rezoning, a land owner may, within sixty (60) days after the effective date of the rezoning or the recordation of the annexation ordinance, provide the Town Administrator/Clerk with proof that the owner has consistently maintained a number of livestocked animals in excess of the limits allowed within the Town. So long as the Town Administrator/Clerk, whose decision shall be subject to appeal, as provided for at Section 2-11-50 of this Code, determines that no health or safety hazard shall be created as a result of the presence of such excess number of animals, the excessive number of animals shall be treated as a nonconforming use as allowed by Article 4 of this Chapter. 
b.  Horses, cattle, sheep and llamas, limited to two (2) per acre of land area with at least one-half (1/2) acre of pasture available to each animal. 
(4)  Any corral containing horses, cattle, sheep or llamas must be at least one hundred (100) feet from any residence or retail sales building that exists on the property. If a residence or retail sales building is constructed on the property, the corral must be relocated to a location at least one hundred (100) feet away from such structure. 
(5)  Cultivation, storage and sale of crops, vegetables, plants, flowers and nursery stock produced on the property. 
(6)  Farming, including but not limited to gardening, horticulture and growing and harvesting of fruit, vegetables, trees, shrubs, plants, turf and sod. 
(7)  Home occupations. 
(8)  Open-air farmers' markets. 
(9)  Parks and open space. 
(10)  Plant nurseries and greenhouses. 
(11)  Single-family dwellings. 
(12)  Structures for storage of agricultural products produced on the property. 
(13)  Veterinary facilities, small animal clinics. 
(14)  Veterinary facilities, large animal clinics. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Permitted conditional uses in the A District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Cemeteries. 
(2)  Child care centers. 
(3)  Gas, oil and other hydrocarbon well drilling and production (as permitted by state and local regulations). 
(4)  Limited outdoor recreation facilities. 
(5)  Public and private schools for elementary, intermediate and high school education. 
(6)  Public facilities; provided that business offices and repair and storage facilities are not included. 
(7)  Resource extraction, processes and sales establishments. 
(8)  Small animal boarding (kennels and catteries). 
(9)  Golf courses. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-5-50. - R-1 - Residential District, Single-Family Rural Density. 
(a)  Intent. This is a very low-density residential district intended for no more than two (2) single-family dwellings per acre and one (1) or more accessory buildings. This zone has been developed to provide for large-lot, single-family development in areas more characteristically rural and on the outskirts of the planning area. 
(b)  Principal uses. Permitted principal uses in the R-1 District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and accessory uses. 
(2)  Accessory dwelling when associated with a permitted use. 
(3)  Cultivation, storage and sale of crops, vegetables, plants, flowers and nursery stock produced on the property. 
(4)  Home occupations. 
(5)  Group homes. 
(6)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(7)  Parks and open space. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Permitted conditional uses in the R-1 District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Public facilities; provided that business offices and repair and storage facilities are not included. 
(2)  Cemeteries. 
(3)  Child care centers. 
(4)  Churches or places of worship and assembly. 
(5)  Community facilities. 
(6)  Golf courses. 
(7)  Limited outdoor recreation facilities. 
(8)  Public and private schools for elementary, intermediate and high school education. 
(9)  Horses, subject to densities based on specified number per acre of ground and pasture area. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-5-60. - R-2 - Residential District, Single-Family Medium Density. 
(a)  Intent. This is a medium-density housing district intended primarily for single-family uses on individual lots. This zone is characterized by tree-lined local streets, an interconnected pedestrian circulation system and proximity to schools and parks. 
(b)  Principal uses. Permitted principal uses in the R-2 District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and accessory uses. 
(2)  Accessory dwellings when associated with a permitted use. 
(3)  Group homes. 
(4)  Home occupations. 
(5)  Parks and open space. 
(6)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Permitted conditional uses in the R-2 District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Child care centers. 
(2)  Community facilities. 
(3)  Churches or places of worship and assembly. 
(4)  Limited outdoor recreation facilities. 
(5)  Public and private schools for elementary, intermediate and high school education. 
(6)  Public facilities; provided that business offices and repair and storage facilities are not included. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-5-70. - R-3 - Residential District, Single-Family Senior Housing. 
(a)  Intent. This District is intended primarily for single-family detached dwellings on small lots with minimal yard space (patio homes) for senior housing. Housing must be developed and maintained in compliance with the Housing for Older Persons Act of 1995 (HOPA) as amended. Covenants and/or deed restrictions will be required to be recorded on the property to guarantee perpetual use as senior housing in compliance with HOPA. 
(b)  Principal uses. Permitted principal uses in the R-3 District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Accessory dwellings when associated with a permitted use. 
(3)  Group homes. 
(4)  Accessory buildings and accessory uses. 
(5)  Parks and open space. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Permitted conditional uses in the R-3 District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Community facilities. 
(2)  Churches or places of worship and assembly. 
(3)  Limited outdoor recreation facilities. 
(4)  Public facilities; provided that business offices and repair and storage facilities are not included. 
(5)  Home occupations. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-5-80. - R-4 - Residential District, Multi-Family. 
(a)  Intent. This is a high-density residential zone intended primarily for multi-family uses on individual lots. In order to facilitate appropriate higher densities near viable business centers, multi-family buildings are generally encouraged near a C-1 or C-2 Commercial District or within a mixed-use PUD. Street and open space designs in these areas shall be used to create compatibility among frontages, which encourage pedestrian interaction and discourage high automobile speeds. Multi-family residential developments shall be designed around or adjacent to open space. 
(b)  Principal uses. Permitted principal uses in the R-4 District shall be as follows: 
(1)  All permitted principal uses in the R-2 zone, except home occupations and single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings (no more than twelve [12] units per building); provided that the density and dimensional standards for the R-4 District are met and the lot upon which any such dwelling is located is of sufficient size so that twenty percent (20%) thereof shall be devoted to functional open space. 
(3)  Senior housing; provided that the density and dimensional standards for the R-4 District are met and the lot upon which any such dwelling is located is of sufficient size so that twenty percent (20%) thereof shall be devoted to functional open space. Senior housing is exempted from the maximum number of twelve (12) units per building requirement for multi-family dwellings. 
(4)  Group homes. 
(5)  Parks and open space. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Permitted conditional uses in the R-4 District shall be as follows: 
(1)  All permitted conditional uses in the R-1, R-2 and/or R-3 Districts. 
(2)  Boarding and rooming houses. 
(3)  Child care centers. 
(4)  Home occupations. 
(5)  Long-term care facilities. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-5-90. - C-1 - Community Commercial District. 
(a)  Intent. The Community Commercial District is intended to preserve the character of the original downtown and to provide for a mixture of uses that will strengthen and expand the core community. 
(b)  Principal uses. Permitted principal uses in the C-1 District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Accessory/miscellaneous uses: 
a.  Accessory buildings. 
b.  Accessory uses 
(2)  Residential uses: 
a.  Residential lofts above ground-level retail or office space. 
b.  Group homes. 
(3)  Institutional/civic/public uses: 
a.  Churches or places of worship and assembly. 
b.  Parks and open space. 
c.  Public facilities, no business offices or repair and storage facilities. 
(4)  Commercial/retail uses: 
a.  Artisan and photography studios and galleries. 
b.  Bed and breakfasts. 
c.  Boarding and rooming houses. 
d.  Child care centers. 
e.  Convenience shopping and retail establishments without fuel sales. 
f.  Health and membership clubs. 
g.  Limited indoor recreation facilities. 
h.  Medical and dental offices and clinics. 
i.  Mixed-use dwelling units. 
j.  Open-air farmers' markets. 
k.  Personal and business service shops. 
l.  Professional offices, financial services and clinics. 
m.  Restaurants, standard and fast food without drive-through facilities. 
n.  Small grocery stores. 
o.  Tourist facilities. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Permitted conditional uses in the C-1 District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential uses. 
a.  Single-family residential and accessory dwellings when associated with a principal use. 
b.  Multi-family dwellings. 
(2)  Institutional/civic/public uses. 
a.  Community facilities. 
b.  Public and private schools, including colleges, universities, vocational and technical training. 
c.  Public facilities with business offices and repair and storage facilities. 
d.  Parks or open space. 
(3)  Commercial/retail uses: 
a.  Bars and taverns. 
b.  Entertainment facilities and theaters. 
c.  Gasoline stations. 
d.  Limited outdoor recreation facilities. 
e.  Hotel/motel/lodging establishments. 
f.  Long-term care facilities. 
g.  Motor vehicle service and repair facilities. 
h.  Parking lots and parking garages as a principal use. 
i.  Restaurants, standard and fast food with drive-through facilities. 
(4)  Industrial uses: 
a.  Light industrial (production, assembly packaging). 
b.  Workshops and custom small industry uses. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 5-2008 , § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 17-2008 , § 1, 11-11-08; Ord. No. 9-2013 , § 1, 7-3-13; Ord. No. 11-2013 , § 1, 7-23-13; Ord. No. 6-2016 , § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 16-5-100. - C-2 - Downtown Commercial District. 
(a)  Intent. The Downtown Commercial District is intended to preserve the character of the original downtown and to provide for a mixture of uses that will strengthen and expand the core community. 
(b)  Principal uses. Permitted principal uses in the C-2 District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential uses: 
a.  All existing legal Residential uses in place as of January 1, 2016 shall be considered conforming uses on the lots on which they exist. If any Residential use, legal as of January 1, 2017 is changed or abandoned from a Residential use the Residential use shall be deemed abandoned and such use shall no longer be conforming. 
b.  Residential lofts above ground-level retail or office space. 
(2)  Institutional/civic/public uses. 
a.  Churches or places of worship and assembly. 
b.  Parks and open space. 
c.  Public facilities, no repair and storage facilities. 
(3)  Commercial/retail uses. 
a.  Artisan and photography studios and galleries. 
b.  Bed and breakfasts. 
c.  Boarding and rooming houses. 
d.  Child care centers. 
e.  Convenience shopping and retail establishments without fuel sales. 
f.  Health and membership clubs. 
g.  Limited indoor recreation facilities. 
h.  Medical and dental offices and clinics. 
i.  Mixed-use dwelling units. In the case of single-story structures with commercial uses on the primary street front, alley-loaded or side-loaded residential uses are allowed. 
j.  Residential uses accessory to Principal commercial uses in separate out-buildings with alley access 
k.  Open air farmers' market. 
l.  Personal and business service shops. 
m.  Professional offices, financial services and clinics. 
n.  Restaurants, standard and fast food without drive-through facilities. 
o.  Small grocery stores. 
p.  Tourist facilities. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Permitted conditional uses in the C-2 District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential uses. Accessory dwelling with alley access when associated with a principal use. 
(2)  Institutional/civic/public uses. 
a.  Community facilities. 
b.  Public and private schools, including colleges, universities, vocational and technical training. 
c.  Public facilities with repair and storage facilities. 
(3)  Commercial/retail uses. 
a.  Bars and taverns. 
b.  Entertainment facilities and theaters. 
c.  Gasoline stations. 
d.  Limited outdoor recreation facilities. 
e.  Hotel/motel/lodging establishments. 
f.  Long-term care facilities. 
g.  Motor vehicle service and repair facilities. 
h.  Parking lots and parking garages as a principal use. 
(4)  Industrial uses: 
a.  Light industrial (production, assembly packaging.) 
b.  Workshops and custom small industry uses. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 17-2008 , § 1, 11-11-08; Ord. No. 23-2016 , § 1, 12-13-16) 
Sec. 16-5-110. - C-3 - Highway Commercial District. 
(a)  Intent. 
(1)  The Highway Commercial Use District is intended to be a setting for development of a wide range of community and regional retail uses, offices and personal and business services, and it is intended to accommodate a wide range of other uses, including multi-family housing and mixed-use dwelling units. The C-3 District should integrate various commercial and multi-family uses while transitioning from the highway to adjacent lower density neighborhoods. 
(2)  While some Highway Commercial District areas may continue to meet the need for auto-related and other auto-oriented uses, it is the Town's intent that the C-3 District emphasize safe and convenient personal mobility in many forms, with planning and design that accommodate pedestrians. Further, the C-3 District is intended to function with, rather than compete with, the Downtown District. 
(3)  The highway corridor is a visible commercial area of the community. Attention to the architectural standards outlined in Section 16-3-460 is required for approval. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted principal uses in the C-3 District are as follows: 
(1)  Accessory/miscellaneous uses: 
a.  Accessory buildings. 
b.  Accessory uses. 
(2)  Residential uses: 
a.  Group homes. 
(3)  Institutional/civic/public uses: 
a.  Churches or places of worship and assembly. 
b.  Parks and open space. 
c.  Public facilities, without business offices or repair and storage facilities. 
d.  Transit facilities without repair or storage. 
(4)  Commercial/retail uses. 
a.  Bed and breakfasts. 
b.  Boarding and rooming houses. 
c.  Car washes. 
d.  Child care centers. 
e.  Convenience retail stores with or without fuel sales. 
f.  Equipment rental establishments (without outdoor storage). 
g.  Food catering. 
h.  Funeral homes. 
i.  Gasoline stations. 
j.  Health and membership clubs. 
k.  Limited indoor recreation facilities. 
l.  Hotel/motel/lodging establishments. 
m.  Long-term care facilities. 
n.  Mixed-use dwelling units. 
o.  Motor vehicle service and repair (minor repairs). 
p.  Open-air farmers' markets. 
q.  Personal and business service shops. 
r.  Plant nurseries and greenhouses. 
s.  Print shops. 
t.  Professional offices, financial services and clinics. 
u.  Restaurants, with or without drive-through facilities. 
v.  Large retail establishments. 
w.  Small grocery stores. 
x.  Supermarkets. 
y.  Tourist facilities. 
z.  Veterinary facilities, small animal clinics. 
(5)  Industrial uses. 
a.  Workshop and custom small industry uses. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Permitted conditional uses in the C-2 District include the following: 
(1)  Residential uses. 
a.  Single-family residential and accessory dwellings when associated with a principal use. 
b.  Multi-family dwellings. 
(2)  Institutional/civic/public uses: 
a.  Community facilities. 
b.  Golf courses. 
c.  Public and private schools, including colleges, universities, vocational and technical training. 
d.  Public facilities with business offices and repair and storage facilities. 
(3)  Commercial/retail uses: 
a.  Artisan and photography studios and galleries. 
b.  Auto, RV, boat and truck sales. 
c.  Auto, RV, boat and truck storage. 
d.  Bars and taverns. 
e.  Clubs and lodges. 
f.  Entertainment facilities and theaters. 
g.  Equipment, truck and trailer rental establishments. 
h.  Hospitals. 
i.  Limited outdoor recreation facilities. 
j.  Motor vehicle service and repair (major repairs). 
k.  Nightclubs. 
l.  Parking lots and parking garages. 
m.  Retail and supply yard establishments with outdoor storage. 
n.  Veterinary hospitals. 
o.  Small animal boarding (kennels and catteries). 
(4)  Industrial uses. 
a.  Enclosed mini-storage facilities. 
b.  Gas, oil and other hydrocarbon well drilling and production (subject to state and local regulations). 
c.  Light industrial uses. 
d.  Research, experimental or testing laboratories. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 17-2008 , § 1, 11-11-08; Ord. No. 6-2016 , § 1, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 16-5-120. - MH - Manufactured Home Park District. 
(a)  Intent. This is a high-density residential district on a parcel of land under single ownership or control on which two (2) or more manufactured homes are occupied as residences. 
(b)  General requirements. Requirements applicable to MH Districts include the following: 
(1)  The minimum lot size for lots within the MH District shall be five (5) acres. 
(2)  Uses in this District must comply with the standards and provisions set forth in Article 8. 
(c)  Principal uses. Permitted principal uses in the MH District include the following: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and accessory uses. 
(2)  Home occupations. 
(3)  Manufactured homes. 
(4)  Public facilities; provided that business offices and repair and storage facilities are not included. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-5-130. - LI - Light Industrial District. 
(a)  Intent. This zoning district is intended to provide locations for a variety of workplaces, including light industrial uses, research and development offices and institutions. This District shall accommodate secondary uses that complement and support primary workplace uses, such as hotels, restaurants, convenience shopping, child care and housing, to encourage the development of planned office and business parks and to promote excellence in the design and construction of buildings, outdoor spaces, transportation facilities and streetscapes. 
(b)  Principal uses. Permitted principal uses in the LI District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and accessory uses. 
(2)  Bars and taverns. 
(3)  Car washes. 
(4)  Clubs and lodges. 
(5)  Community facilities. 
(6)  Convenience shopping and retail establishments. 
(7)  Equipment rental establishments without outdoor storage. 
(8)  Gasoline stations. 
(9)  Health and membership clubs. 
(10)  Light industrial uses; provided all manufacturing, fabrication and similar uses shall be carried on entirely within a completely enclosed structure. 
(11)  Mixed-use dwelling units. 
(12)  Parking lots and parking garages (as principal use). 
(13)  Parks and open space. 
(14)  Plant nurseries and greenhouses. 
(15)  Professional offices, financial services. 
(16)  Public and private schools, including colleges, vocational and technical training. 
(17)  Restaurants without drive-through facilities. 
(18)  Tourist facilities. 
(19)  Veterinary facilities, small animal clinics. 
(20)  Warehouse, distribution and wholesale uses. 
(21)  Wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(22)  Workshops and custom small industry uses. 
(23)  Small animal boarding/kennels. 
(c)  Limitations. Any use in this District shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Dust, fumes, odors, smoke, vapor and noise shall be confined to the site and be controlled in accordance with the state air pollution laws. 
(2)  Approved outdoor storage areas, equipment and refuse areas shall be concealed from view from abutting rights-of-way and from adjoining residential districts. 
(3)  All off-street parking areas as defined herein shall be surfaced with poured in place concrete or asphaltic concrete. Approved outdoor storage areas as defined herein may be surfaced with minimum three-quarter inch diameter crushed rock or approved alternative material to a depth of at least four (4) inches. If a crushed rock or alternative material surface is used, the subgrade of such areas shall be treated to the specifications of the Town Engineer. Areas surfaced with crushed rock or approved alternative material shall be treated with dust retardants, as needed, and kept free of weeds, trash and other debris. Appropriate fire-lane aisles and, if required, fire hydrants shall be provided. 
(4)  Light fixtures in parking areas shall be hooded and mounted not more than twenty-five (25) feet above the ground level and oriented in such a manner so as not to shine into residential areas. Lighting shall conform to the requirements in Section 16-3-450 of this Code. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Permitted conditional uses in the LI District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Accessory dwellings when associated with a permitted use. 
(2)  Artisan and photography studios and galleries. 
(3)  Auto, recreational vehicle, boat and truck sales. 
(4)  Bed and breakfasts. 
(5)  Boarding and rooming houses. 
(6)  Child care centers. 
(7)  Enclosed mini-storage facilities. 
(8)  Entertainment facilities and theaters. 
(9)  Funeral homes. 
(10)  Gas, oil and other hydrocarbon well drilling and production (as permitted by state and local regulations). 
(11)  Golf courses. 
(12)  Group homes. 
(13)  Hospitals. 
(14)  Limited indoor recreation facilities. 
(15)  Limited outdoor recreation facility. 
(16)  Hotel/motel/lodging establishments. 
(17)  Long-term care facilities. 
(18)  Manufacturing, assembly or packaging of products from previously prepared materials. 
(19)  Manufacturing of electric or electronic instruments and devices. 
(20)  Medical and dental offices and clinics. 
(21)  Motor vehicle service and repair (minor repairs). 
(22)  Open-air farmers' markets. 
(23)  Personal and business service shops. 
(24)  Public facilities; provided that business offices and repair and storage facilities are not included. 
(25)  Public facilities with business offices and repair and storage facilities. 
(26)  Research, experimental or testing laboratories. 
(27)  Restaurants with drive-throughs. 
(28)  Retail and supply yard establishments with outdoor storage. 
(29)  Small animal boarding (kennels and catteries). 
(30)  Small grocery stores. 
(31)  Veterinary hospitals. 
(32)  Light industrial uses with manufacturing, fabrication and similar uses carried on outside of a completely enclosed structure. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 5-2014 , §§ 1-3, 3-11-14; Ord. No. 7-2018 , § 4, 4-24-18) 
Sec. 16-5-140. - TR - Transitional District. 
(a)  Intent. This zoning district is intended to encompass existing areas containing a mixture of residential and commercial and/or light industrial uses or areas which are currently older neighborhoods of mostly nonconforming residential structures immediately adjacent to expanding commercial and/or light industrial areas and where it is anticipated the neighborhood will transform over time to consist of entirely, or almost entirely, commercial or light industrial uses. All new uses and expansion of existing uses shall require processing as a conditional use. 
(b)  Principal uses. Permitted principal uses in the TR District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and accessory uses. 
(2)  All existing legal uses as of the date of adoption of this Code shall be considered conforming uses on the lots on which they exist. 
(c)  Limitations. Any use in this District shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  All manufacturing and similar uses shall be carried on entirely within a completely enclosed structure. 
(2)  Dust, fumes, odors, smoke, vapors and noise shall be confined to the site and be controlled in accordance with the state air pollution laws. 
(3)  Approved outdoor storage areas, equipment and refuse areas shall be concealed from view from abutting rights-of-way and from adjoining residential districts. 
(4)  Travel and parking portions of the lot shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, compressed gravel or equivalent maintainable surfacing with erosion control. 
(5)  Light fixtures in parking areas shall be hooded and mounted not more than twenty-five (25) feet above the ground level and oriented in such a manner so as not to shine into residential areas. Lighting shall conform to the requirements in Section 16-3-450 of this Code. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Permitted conditional uses in the TR District shall be as follows: All permitted principal uses in the R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1, C-2 and LI zones. In considering a proposed new or expanded use in the TR District, the Planning Commission shall consider impacts on existing residential uses and compatibility with other commercial and light industrial uses, with due consideration of the future land use of the area. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 7-2018 , § 5, 4-24-18) 
Sec. 16-5-150. - I - Industrial District. 
(a)  Intent. This zoning district is intended to provide a location for a variety of employment opportunities, such as manufacturing, warehousing and distributing, indoor and outdoor storage and a wide range of commercial and industrial operations. This District also accommodates complementary and supporting uses, such as convenience shopping and child care centers. Locations for this zone require good access to major arterial streets and adequate water, sewer and power. 
(b)  Principal uses. Permitted principal uses in the I District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and accessory uses. 
(2)  Auto, RV, boat and truck storage. 
(3)  Car washes. 
(4)  Clubs and lodges. 
(5)  Community facilities. 
(6)  Enclosed mini-storage facilities. 
(7)  Equipment rental facilities. 
(8)  Gasoline stations. 
(9)  Health and membership clubs. 
(10)  Heavy industrial uses. 
(11)  Light industrial uses. 
(12)  Manufacturing and preparing food products. 
(13)  Manufacturing, assembly or packaging of products from previously prepared materials. 
(14)  Manufacturing of electric or electronic instruments and devices. 
(15)  Motor vehicle service and repair establishments (minor and major repairs). 
(16)  Parking lots and parking garages (as principal use). 
(17)  Parks and open space. 
(18)  Plant nurseries and greenhouses. 
(19)  Plumbing, electrical and carpenter shops. 
(20)  Public facilities, with or without business offices and repair and storage facilities. 
(21)  Research, experimental or testing laboratories. 
(22)  Restaurants, standard and fast food without drive-through facilities. 
(23)  Retail and supply yard establishments with outdoor storage. 
(24)  Veterinary facilities, small animal clinics. 
(25)  Warehouse, distribution and wholesale uses. 
(26)  Workshops and custom small industry uses. 
(c)  Limitations. Any use in this District shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Dust, fumes, odors, smoke, vapor and noise shall be confined to the site and be controlled in accordance with the state air pollution laws. 
(2)  Approved outdoor storage areas, equipment and refuse areas shall be concealed from view from abutting rights-of-way and from adjoining residential districts. 
(3)  All off-street parking areas as defined herein shall be surfaced with poured in place concrete or asphaltic concrete. Approved outdoor storage areas as defined herein may be surfaced with minimum three-quarter inch diameter crushed rock or approved alternative material to a depth of at least four (4) inches. If a crushed rock or alternative material surface is used, the subgrade of such areas shall be treated to the specifications of the Town Engineer. Areas surfaced with crushed rock or approved alternative material shall be treated with dust retardants, as needed, and kept free of weeds, trash and other debris. Appropriate fire-lane aisles and, if required, fire hydrants shall be provided. 
(4)  Light fixtures in parking areas shall be hooded and mounted not more than twenty-five (25) feet above the ground level and oriented in such a manner so as not to shine into residential areas. Lighting shall conform to the requirements in Section 16-3-450 of this Code. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Permitted conditional uses in the I District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Accessory dwellings when associated with a permitted use. 
(2)  Adult uses, including product sales and entertainment. 
(3)  Airports. 
(4)  Artisan and photography studios and galleries. 
(5)  Automobile, recreational vehicle, boat and truck sales. 
(6)  Bars and taverns. 
(7)  Child care centers. 
(8)  Convenience shopping and retail establishments. 
(9)  Dry-cleaning plants. 
(10)  Entertainment facilities and theaters. 
(11)  Equipment, truck and trailer rental establishments with outdoor storage. 
(12)  Gas, oil and other hydrocarbon well drilling and production (as permitted by state and local regulations). 
(13)  Golf courses. 
(14)  Limited outdoor recreational facilities. 
(15)  Night clubs. 
(16)  Open-air farmers' markets. 
(17)  Public and private schools, including colleges, vocational training and technical training. 
(18)  Public facilities; provided that business offices and repair and storage facilities are not included. 
(19)  Public facilities with business offices and repair and storage facilities. 
(20)  Recycling facilities. 
(21)  Research, experimental or testing laboratories. 
(22)  Resource extraction, processes and sales establishments. 
(23)  Restaurants with drive-throughs. 
(24)  Sales and leasing of farm implements, heavy equipment sales, mobile and manufactured homes and heavy excavation equipment. 
(25)  Sexually oriented businesses (as permitted in Article 11 of this Chapter). 
(26)  Small animal boarding (kennels and catteries). 
(27)  Veterinary facilities, large animal clinics. 
(28)  Veterinary hospitals. 
(29)  Wireless telecommunications facilities (as permitted in Article 16 of this Chapter). 
(30)  Poultry slaughtering. 
(e)  Prohibited Uses. All uses that are not expressly allowed as permitted or conditional uses in this Section, or determined to be permitted or conditional uses by the Planning Commission shall be prohibited. In addition, the following uses are specifically prohibited in the Industrial District: 
(1)  Feedlots. 
(2)  Petroleum refining. 
(3)  Blast furnaces, and rolling and finishing mills. 
(4)  Electric power generation for wholesale distribution. 
(5)  Cattle, hogs and sheep slaughtering. 
(6)  Animal rendering. 
(Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 2-2010 , §§ 1, 2, 4-13-10; Ord. No. 5-2014 , § 4, 3-11-14; Ord. No. 7-2018 , § 6, 4-24-18) 
Sec. 16-5-160. - P - Public District. 
(a)  Intent. This District is intended to identify and perpetuate the existence of public parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities and public and quasi-public buildings, whether publicly owned or leased. 
(b)  Principal uses. Principal permitted uses in the P District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and accessory uses. 
(2)  Cemeteries. 
(3)  Churches or other places of worship and assembly. 
(4)  Community facilities. 
(5)  Golf courses. 
(6)  Parks and open space. 
(7)  Tourist facilities. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Permitted conditional uses in the P District shall be as follows: 
(1)  Health and membership clubs. 
(2)  Hospitals. 
(3)  Limited indoor recreation facilities. 
(4)  Limited outdoor recreation facilities. 
(5)  Public and private schools for elementary, intermediate and high school education. 
(6)  Public and private schools, including colleges, vocational training and technical training. 
(7)  Public facilities with business offices and repair and storage facilities. 
(8)  Recycling facilities. 
(9)  Resource extraction, processes and sales establishments. 
(10)  Airports. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-5-170. - PUD - Planned Unit Development Overlay District. 
(a)  Intent. This Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District is enacted pursuant to the Planned Unit Development Act of 1972 as amended (Section 24-67-101 et seq., C.R.S.). A PUD is an area of land, controlled by one (1) or more landowners, to be developed under unified control or unified plan of development for a number of dwelling units, commercial, educational, recreational or industrial uses, or any combination of the foregoing, the plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk or type of use, density, lot coverage, open space or other restriction to the existing land use regulations. The PUD is intended to be used as an overlay zone district that supplements the underlying standard zone district. The intent and purpose of this District is to permit and encourage innovative design and high quality, master-planned developments on large parcels of land. This District is created to allow and encourage compatible uses to be developed in accordance with a unified development plan in harmony with the environment and surrounding neighborhood. The PUD Overlay District is intended to permit greater flexibility in the application of zoning and development standards and greater freedom in providing a mix of land uses in the development of a balanced community. PUDs are expected to preserve critical environmental resources, provide above-average open space and recreational amenities, including exceptional design and provide greater efficiency in the layout and provision of roads, utilities and other infrastructure. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the PUD Overlay District shall be those uses permitted in the underlying standard zone district for the property, except as otherwise set forth in this Section, shall be governed by the PUD Act of 1972, pursuant to Title 24 Article 7, C.R.S. An applicant for a PUD Overlay District may request modifications to the permitted uses of the underlying zone district to remove those uses that may be deemed incompatible or inappropriate for the overall PUD development. Conditional uses may be permitted if it can be demonstrated that such uses meet the conditional use review criteria for the underlying zone districts. 
(c)  PUD restrictions and general requirements. Properties utilizing the PUD Overlay District shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The area of land for the PUD may be controlled by one (1) or more landowners and must be developed under unified control or a unified plan of development. 
(2)  Areas designated as private streets and/or common open space, including land, an area of water or a combination of land and water within the site designated for a PUD, shall be designed and intended primarily for the use or enjoyment of residents, occupants and owners of the PUD; and provisions shall be made for the establishment of an organization for the ownership and maintenance of such private streets and/or common open space areas unless other adequate arrangements for the ownership and maintenance thereof are provided in a manner acceptable to the Town. 
(3)  All requirements set forth in this Code otherwise applicable to the area of land proposed for a PUD shall govern, except to the extent that the unified plan of development for residential, commercial, educational, recreational or industrial uses or any combination thereof may propose exceptions in lot size, bulk, type of use, density, lot coverage, open space or other standards within the existing land use regulations. 
(4)  No PUD may be approved by the Town without the written consent of the landowner whose property is included within the PUD. 
(d)  PUD approval procedure. 
(1)  All PUD Overlay District applications shall be submitted and processed simultaneously with the processing of subdivision applications for the property. The processes set forth in Chapter 17, Article 3 of this Code, for major subdivisions, shall be followed. In addition, an application for a PUD Overlay District amendment to the official zoning map shall be processed and subject to public hearings in the same manner as for other amendments to the official zoning map. 
(2)  Rezoning to a PUD Overlay District shall occur concurrently with a preliminary plat/preliminary PUD development plan. Public hearings for the zoning of a property as a PUD Overlay District and for preliminary PUD development plan approval may be combined or can occur separately. Development within a PUD Overlay District cannot occur unless and until a final plat for the portion of the property to be developed has been approved and recorded as provided in Chapter 17 of this Code. 
(3)  Upon approval of a final PUD development plan, the Board of Trustees shall adopt an ordinance establishing the PUD Overlay District for the property in accordance with that plan. 
(4)  In addition to all of the information required as part of the sketch plan, preliminary plat and final plat application packages, applications for a PUD development plan and PUD Overlay District shall include additional information as outlined below. 
(e)  Sketch PUD development plan application submittal requirements. A developer requesting sketch plan PUD approval shall submit: 
(1)  A PUD application fee. 
(2)  A written PUD description as part of the general development information, which includes: 
a.  A list of all subdivision regulation exceptions proposed for the PUD. 
b.  Identification of the underlying zoning districts for the property and a description of any proposed modifications and/or restrictions to the allowed uses and/or standards within the districts. If any conditional uses are requested, explain how the conditional use review criteria will be addressed. 
c.  Identification and explanation of the benefits which will be provided by the PUD to offset the impact of the modifications requested (i.e., if the minimum lot size is decreased, additional functional, centrally located common open space will be provided; or if the width of the local street right-of-way is decreased by eliminating on-street parking, then there will be designated parking areas within five hundred [500] feet of all residences, etc.). All proposed benefits must offset the proposed modifications. 
d.  An explanation of how the proposed PUD will be compatible with adjacent neighborhoods which now exist or are proposed in the future. Describe any proposed buffering techniques which serve to achieve such compatibility. 
e.  Any additional relevant information which the Town may deem necessary. 
(f)  Preliminary PUD development plan application submittal requirements. Following sketch plan approval, a developer requesting preliminary PUD plan approval shall submit: 
(1)  A PUD application fee. 
(2)  A written PUD description as part of the general development information which includes: 
a.  A list of all subdivision regulation exceptions being proposed for the PUD and an explanation of why such exceptions are justified. 
b.  Identification of the underlying zoning districts for the property and a description of any proposed modifications and/or restrictions to the allowed uses and/or standards within the districts. Provide a comparison between the proposed preliminary PUD plan to the elements and standards of the underlying zone districts as contained in this Chapter. If any conditional uses are requested, explain how the conditional use review criteria will be addressed. 
c.  A description of how the proposed PUD overlay rezoning satisfies one (1) or more of the criteria for amendments to the official zoning map. 
d.  Identification and an explanation of the benefits which will be provided by the PUD to offset the impact of the modifications requested. The proposed benefits must offset the proposed modifications. 
e.  An explanation of how the proposed PUD will be compatible with adjacent neighborhoods which now exist or are proposed in the future. Buffering techniques which serve to achieve such compatibility shall be described. 
f.  An explanation of how the preliminary PUD development plan is consistent with the sketch PUD development plan or, if there are differences, the rationale for the changes. 
g.  Draft copies of owners' association documents (covenants, conditions, restrictions and any architectural design guidelines) that provide an acceptable program for the continuing maintenance of open space, recreational areas, walkways and private streets within the PUD that detail the type of organizational structure responsible for such ongoing maintenance and that provide for architectural review based on the design guidelines. 
h.  Any additional relevant information which the Town may deem necessary. 
(3)  Preliminary PUD development plan map. The preliminary PUD development plan map shall be prepared using the preliminary plat map as the base. (Refer to Chapter 17 of this Code for drawing standards and format.) The base shall include a clear graphic or written representation of: 
a.  All principal, conditional and accessory uses within each land use category within the PUD (i.e., single-family, multi-family, commercial, etc.), either listed specifically or by reference to the zoning districts within the Town. In particular, any modifications to the principal, conditional and accessory uses of the underlying zone districts shall be noted. 
b.  Standards for principal and accessory uses within each land use category, to include: 
1.  Minimum lot area. 
2.  Maximum lot coverage. 
3.  Maximum floor area ratio (total floor area to total lot area). 
4.  Maximum building height. 
5.  Parking requirements for principal, accessory and conditional uses. 
6.  Any additional relevant information which the Town may deem necessary. 
c.  Proposed phasing for the development. 
(g)  Final PUD development plan application submittal requirements. Following preliminary approval, a developer requesting final PUD approval shall submit: 
(1)  A PUD application fee. 
(2)  A written PUD description as part of the general development information, based on the materials submitted for the preliminary PUD development plan and on comments received from the Town at the time of preliminary plan review. All of the items listed above for the preliminary PUD development plan in finalized form shall be included. An explanation shall also be included of how the final PUD development plan is consistent with the preliminary PUD development plan, or if there are differences, the rationale for the changes. 
(3)  A final PUD development plan map. The final PUD development plan map using the final plat map as the base shall be prepared. (Refer to Chapter 17 of this Code for drawing standards and format.) 
(4)  Any additional relevant information which the Town may deem necessary. 
(h)  PUD review criteria. 
(1)  Sketch PUD development plan review criteria. The following review criteria will be used by the Town staff, Planning Commission and Board of Trustees to evaluate all PUD applications at the time of sketch PUD plan/sketch plan review: 
a.  The proposed benefits offset the proposed exceptions to the zoning and subdivision standards, and the exceptions are in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
b.  The proposed PUD conforms to the PUD restrictions, and the proposed zoning is compatible with the surrounding land uses. 
c.  The PUD proposes creative and innovative design and high-quality development, thereby protecting and promoting public safety, convenience, health and general welfare. 
d.  The uses and densities in the proposed PUD are compatible and will be effectively integrated with adjacent neighborhoods which now exist or are proposed in the future. 
e.  The proposed PUD is in general conformance with the Comprehensive Plan. 
f.  One (1) or more of the criteria for amendment of the official zoning map has been satisfied. 
(2)  Preliminary PUD development plan review criteria. In addition to all of the review criteria for a sketch PUD development plan, the following review criteria will be used by the Town staff and Board of Trustees to evaluate all PUD applications at the time of the preliminary PUD plan/preliminary plat: 
a.  The preliminary PUD development plan is substantially consistent with the sketch development plan as approved by the Board of Trustees. 
b.  All sketch PUD development plan conditions of approval have been adequately addressed on the preliminary PUD development plan. 
(3)  Final PUD development plan review criteria. In addition to all of the review criteria for a preliminary PUD development plan, the following review criteria will be used by the Town staff and Board of Trustees to evaluate all PUD applications at the time of the final PUD plan/final plat: 
a.  The final PUD development plan is substantially consistent with the preliminary PUD development plan as approved by the Board of Trustees. 
b.  All preliminary PUD development plan conditions of approval have been adequately addressed on the final PUD development plan. 
(i)  Compliance with PUD Overlay District/final development plan. The Board of Trustees may initiate the process to repeal the ordinance establishing the PUD Overlay District if: 
(1)  The project for which the PUD overlay zone was established is not carried out pursuant to the approved final PUD development plan; provided, however, that the Board of Trustees may approve appropriate modifications to the final PUD development plan from time to time prior to completion of the proposed development; or 
(2)  Building activity for the PUD Overlay District has not commenced within a period of one (1) year after the effective date of the creating ordinance, unless otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 6 - Density and Dimensional Standards 

Sec. 16-6-10. - Agriculture and residential density and dimensional standards. 
    The following specifications shall be required in the zones identified: 
Zones A Agriculture R-1 Residential Single-family Rural Density R-2 Residential Single-family Medium Density R-3 Residential Single-family senior housing R-4 Residential Multi-family MH Mobile/Manufactured Home Park Standards Minimum site area 5 acres 1 acre 6,500 sq. ft. 1 acre 11,500 sq. ft. 10 acres 
(80 acres maximum) Minimum lot area per dwelling (sq. ft. unless otherwise noted) 5 acre 0.5 acre 6,500 1 4,000 11,500 (plus 2,000 per each unit over two) 4,000 Maximum net density (units per acre) 0.2 1 4 7 12 7 Minimum lot width (at setback line) (feet per dwelling) 120 120 60 50 25 
(Townhomes) 50 Minimum front yard setback (feet) Principal building 50 50 20 15 15 Front - 10 
Entry side - 15 Attached garage 25 25 Accessory building/detached garage 60 60 35 35 35 25 Minimum side yard setback 20 20 7 
15 on nonentry side of corner lot 7 7 (at end of each row) 10 Opposite entry Minimum distance between buildings 20 20 10 10 10 10 Minimum rear yard setback (feet) Principal building 20 20 20 10 15 10 Accessory building or structures 5 5 5 5 5 5 Deck 10 10 10 10 10 10 Patio cover 10 10 10 10 10 10 Minimum floor area (above grade) per dwelling unit 864 864 864 864 600 480 Maximum building height (feet) 35 35 35 One-story 
25 feet 35 16 
35 Park-owned common structures Maximum dwelling units per structure 1 1 1 1 12 1  
1 For Subdivisions of over 10 single-family lots, the average lot size shall be a minimum of 7,500 sq. ft. 
(Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 7-2010 , § 2, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 16-6-20. - Commercial, industrial and public density and dimensional standards. 
    The following codes are used in the table below: ( - = No specific requirement) 
Zones C-1 Community Commercial C-2 Downtown Commercial C-3 Highway Commercial LI Light Industrial I Industrial P Public Standards Minimum front yard setback (feet) 25 0 25 25 25 - Minimum rear yard setback (feet) 20 25 2 20 20 20 - Minimum side yard setback (feet) 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 20 - Maximum floor area ratio (ratio of total floor area to total lot area) 1:1 2:1 1:1 1:1 1:1 - Maximum net density (residential units per acre) 12 12 12 - - - Maximum building height (feet) 35 35 45 45 45 3 45  
1 Adjacent to residential uses, the minimum setback shall be 10 feet. The entire setback area shall be landscaped and include a minimum six-foot high privacy fence or hedge. 
2 For all new commercial uses located in the Downtown Commercial District, parking shall be required from the east property line to the west property line along the rear setback. The rear setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet. 
3 Maximum height may be increased by 1 foot for each additional 2 feet horizontal distance beyond minimum setback. or 
3 Subject to conditional review process and increased setback consideration. 
(Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 7 - Conditional Uses 

Sec. 16-7-10. - Purpose. 
(a)  In order to provide flexibility and to help diversify uses within a zoning district, specified uses are permitted in certain districts subject to the granting of a conditional use. Specific conditional uses for each zone district are listed in Article 6. 
(b)  Because of their unusual or special characteristics, conditional uses require review and evaluation so that they may be located properly with respect to their effects on surrounding properties. The review process prescribed in this Article is intended to assure compatibility and harmonious development between conditional uses, surrounding properties and the Town at large. Conditional uses may be permitted subject to such conditions and limitations as the Town may prescribe to ensure that the location and operation of the conditional uses will be in accordance with the conditional use criteria. The scope and elements of any conditional use may be limited or qualified by the conditions applicable to the specific property. Where conditions cannot be devised to achieve these objectives, applications for conditional use permits shall be denied. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-7-20. - Conditional use review process. 
(a)  Step 1: Optional preapplication conference. The applicant may attend a preapplication conference with the Town Administrator/Clerk. The purpose of the meeting is to discuss the conditional use submittal requirements and review process. 
(b)  Step 2: Conditional use application submittal. The applicant shall submit one (1) copy (twenty [20] copies of all plans and maps which are larger then 11" × 17") of the complete conditional use application package to the Town Administrator/Clerk and shall request that the application be reviewed by the Planning Commission and Board of Trustees. Conditional use requests shall include: 
(1)  A land use application form. 
(2)  A conditional use/technical criteria form. 
(3)  Title commitment. The title commitment must be current and dated no more than thirty (30) days from the date of conditional use application submittal. 
(4)  A written statement and any graphics necessary to describe the precise nature of the proposed use and its operating characteristics and to illustrate how all conditional use review criteria have been satisfied. 
(5)  A map showing the proposed development of the site, including topography, building locations, parking, traffic circulation, usable open space, landscaped area and utilities and drainage features. 
(6)  Preliminary building plans and elevations sufficient to indicate the dimensions, general appearance and scale of all buildings. 
(7)  Such additional material as the Town Administrator/Clerk may prescribe or the applicant may submit pertinent to the application. 
(8)  A surrounding and interested property ownership report. Provide a current list (not more than thirty [30] days old) of the names and addresses of the surrounding property owners (within three hundred [300] feet of the property), mineral interest owners of record, mineral and oil and gas lessees for the property and appropriate ditch companies. The applicant shall certify that the report is complete and accurate. 
(9)  A public hearing notification envelope. One (1) set of stamped, addressed, certified (return receipt requested) envelopes. The envelopes shall have the Town's address as the return address, and the envelopes shall be addressed to the surrounding property owners (within three hundred [300] feet of the property), mineral interest owners of record, oil and gas lessees for the property and the appropriate referral agencies. 
(c)  Step 3: Conditional use application certification of completion and report to Planning Commission. Within a reasonable period of time, The Town staff shall either certify that the application is complete and in compliance with all submittal requirements or reject it as incomplete and notify the applicant of any deficiencies. The applicant shall then correct any deficiencies in the application package, if necessary, and submit the required number of copies of the application (as specified in the conditional use technical criteria form). The original application and all documents requiring a signature shall be signed in blue ink. After a complete application is received, the Town staff shall prepare a report to the Planning Commission explaining how the application is or is not consistent with the conditional use application review criteria. 
(d)  Step 4: Planning Commission review of the conditional use application. The Planning Commission shall hold a meeting to review the application and determine if the application complies with the conditional use review criteria. The Planning Commission will then recommend to the Board of Trustees approval, approval with conditions or denial. 
(e)  Step 5: Set conditional use public hearing date and notify public of hearing. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall send notice of public hearing to the applicant, all property owners of record within three hundred (300) feet of the property in question, all mineral interest owners of record, oil and gas lessees for the property and the appropriate referral agencies no less than thirty (30) days before the hearing. The referral information shall include the time and place of the public hearing, the nature of the hearing, the location of the subject property and the applicant's name. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall also publish notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall prepare a public hearing notification sign to be posted on the property by the applicant. The hearing may be held no less than thirty (30) days from the date of property posting and newspaper publication. If the conditional use request is accompanying another application which is scheduled for public hearing before the Board of Trustees, one (1) public hearing may be held on both applications. 
(f)  Step 6: Board of Trustees public hearing and action on the conditional use. The Board of Trustees shall hold a public hearing on the conditional use application. Following the public hearing, the Board of Trustees may approve, conditionally approve or deny the conditional use application based on the conditional use review criteria. A conditional use permit may be revocable, may be granted for a limited time period or may be granted subject to conditions as the Board of Trustees may prescribe. Conditions may include, but shall not be limited to, requiring special setbacks, open spaces, fences or walls, landscaping or screening, street dedication and improvement, regulation of vehicular access and parking, signs, illumination, hours and methods of operation, control of potential nuisances, prescription of standards for maintenance of buildings and grounds and prescription of development schedules. 
(g)  Step 7: Record conditional use map. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall record one (1) original Mylar of the conditional use map in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder. The recording fee shall be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-7-30. - Conditional use review criteria. 
    The Town shall use the following criteria to evaluate the applicant's request: 
(1)  The conditional use will satisfy all applicable provisions of this Chapter and Chapter 17 of this Code unless a variance is being requested. 
(2)  The conditional use will conform with or further the goals, policies and strategies set forth in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(3)  The conditional use will be adequately served with public utilities, services and facilities (i.e., water, sewer, electric, schools, street system, fire protection, public transit, storm drainage, refuse collection, parks system, etc.) and not impose an undue burden above and beyond those of the permitted uses of the district. 
(4)  The conditional use will not substantially alter the basic character of the district in which it is in or jeopardize the development or redevelopment potential of the district. 
(5)  The conditional use will result in efficient on- and off-site traffic circulation which will not have a significant adverse impact on the adjacent uses or result in hazardous conditions for pedestrians or vehicles in or adjacent to the site. 
(6)  Potential negative impacts of the conditional use on the rest of the neighborhood or of the neighborhood on the conditional use have been mitigated through setbacks, architecture, screen walls, landscaping, site arrangement or other methods. The applicant shall satisfactorily address the following impacts: 
a.  Traffic; 
b.  Activity levels; 
c.  Light; 
d.  Noise; 
e.  Odor; 
f.  Building type, style and scale; 
g.  Hours of operation; 
h.  Dust; and 
i.  Erosion control. 
(7)  The applicant has submitted evidence that all applicable local, state and federal permits have been or will be obtained. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 8 - Manufactured Home Park (MH) District 

Sec. 16-8-10. - Intent. 
    This is a high-density residential district on a parcel of land under single ownership or control on which manufactured homes are occupied as residences. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-20. - MH District approval procedure. 
(a)  This District may only be used in conjunction with the PUD Overlay District. 
(b)  An amendment to the zoning district map to create an MH District shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 16-5-20 of this Chapter. Prior to, or simultaneously with the application for an amendment to the official zoning map for an MH District, the applicant shall submit an MH park development plan of the property for review and approval. 
(c)  Prior to or simultaneously with the application for an amendment to the official zoning map for an MH District, the applicant shall submit a subdivision plat of the property for review and approval as provided by Chapter 17 of this Code. Development within the manufactured home park shall be subject to review and approval through the preliminary and final plat process in compliance with all the standards in this Article and consistent with the applicable community design principles and development standards found in this Code. 
(d)  A manufactured home park development shall be subdivided for the purpose of dedication of adjacent public streets, internal public streets and ways, utility and other easements and other public facilities, and a final plat recorded as provided by Chapter 17 of this Code. 
(e)  Development in this District is permitted only in accordance with an MH District development plan and final plats prepared and approved in accordance with the provisions herein. The owners and their successors, heirs or assignees shall be bound by the approved MH District development plan and final plats, including any amendments thereto approved by the Board of Trustees, as provided herein. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-30. - General requirements applicable to MH Districts. 
(a)  In order to provide uniform administrative procedures and quality development standards, property zoned in the MH District shall conform to all provisions of this Code except as such provisions are specifically altered on the approved MH park development plan. 
(b)  Final approval of the MH manufactured home park amendment to the official zoning map and any development within an MH District shall not occur until a final plat for the portion to be developed is approved and recorded as provided in Chapter 17 of this Code. 
(c)  All public utility distribution lines shall be placed underground. 
(d)  Any property placed in the MH District shall be a minimum of five (5) acres. 
(e)  Building and occupancy permits for manufactured homes in a manufactured home park development shall comply with the following requirements. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to erect, move or place any manufactured home or other structure on or onto any property in a manufactured home park development without first obtaining a building permit. 
(2)  Application for a building permit shall be made in accordance with the requirements of the Building Code, to the extent applicable and shall be accompanied by a fee determined according to the current Building Code fee schedule. 
(3)  No building permit for the installation of a manufactured home shall be issued unless the manufactured home meets the requirements of the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq.) and applicable Town codes that are not in conflict therewith. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-40. - Manufactured home design standards/building requirements. 
(a)  The manufactured home must be partially or entirely manufactured in a factory. 
(b)  The manufactured home must be not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width and thirty-six (36) feet in length. 
(c)  The manufactured home must be set on an excavated, backfilled, engineered foundation enclosed at the perimeter so that the top of the perimeter wall sits no more than twelve (12) inches above finish grade. The foundation shall be similar in appearance and durability to a masonry foundation of a site-built dwelling. The foundation shall provide an anchoring system for the manufactured home that is totally concealed under the structure. 
(d)  The manufactured home must have brick, wood or cosmetically equivalent exterior siding on all exterior walls, which provides a consistent, continuous facade from the bottom of the soffit (top of the wall section) downward to the top of the exposed perimeter foundation. The exterior siding of the manufactured home must have the same appearance as materials commonly used on residential dwellings. Metal siding must be painted or anodized. 
(e)  The manufactured home must have a pitched roof with a pitch of at least a nominal three (3) in twelve (12). The roof must be covered with shingles, shakes or tile. Eaves of the roof must extend at least one (1) foot from the intersection of the roof and the exterior walls. 
(f)  The manufactured home must have windows that are wood, vinyl-coated or anodized aluminum. 
(g)  The manufactured home must have color-coordinated body and trim. Colors of both the factory components and the site-built components shall be the same. 
(h)  The main entrance to the manufactured home must face or be oriented toward an adjacent street. 
(i)  The transportation mechanisms, including the wheels, axles and hitch, must be removed. 
(j)  No manufactured home shall be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it is properly placed in a manufactured home space and connected to water, sewerage, electric and gas utilities, as appropriate. 
(k)  All manufactured homes shall be certified pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq., or shall be certified by the Colorado Division of Housing pursuant to Section 24-32-701 et seq., C.R.S. 
(l)  All manufactured homes shall have an enclosed crawlspace underneath the manufactured home and shall not provide a harborage for rodents or create a fire hazard. No enclosed crawlspace shall be used for storage unless the storage area is surfaced with concrete. Adequate access and ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the Guidelines For Manufactured Housing Installation. 
(m)  All manufactured homes shall meet or exceed equivalent engineering standards for other single-family residences. 
(n)  Additions to increase the floor area of manufactured home shall not be permitted except for patios, porches, garages, decks or carports. Garages may be detached or attached. 
(o)  Prior to occupancy, the Building Inspector shall inspect each manufactured home to determine compliance with this Code. No occupancy shall be permitted or certificate of occupancy issued until said inspection and all connections to public utilities have been made. The owner or home builder shall pay to the Town a building permit fee for each residential structure as may be required by this Code. Installation procedures and the building permit fee shall be in accordance with the then current Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation, including appendices, published by the International Conference of Building Officials for manufactured homes and as adopted by the Town. 
(p)  All additions shall comply with minimum yard requirements, and a building permit shall be required in advance for any such addition. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-50. - Density, dimensional and spacing standards. 
(a)  The minimum area manufactured home space shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet. 
(b)  The minimum lot length shall be eighty (80) feet. 
(c)  The minimum lot width shall be fifty (50) feet. 
(d)  The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(e)  The maximum gross density shall be ten (10) units per acre. 
(f)  The distance between any building or manufactured home from a property line of the manufactured home park shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(g)  The front setback of a manufactured home shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from the back of the curb; provided, however, that in order to encourage the enclosed storage of parked vehicles, the setback from the back of the curb to a garage shall be either five (5) feet or fifteen (15) feet or greater. 
(h)  Side spacing shall provide for a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet between manufactured homes. 
(i)  Rear spacing shall provide for a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet between units when units are side-to-end and a minimum distance of ten (10) feet between units when units are end-to-end. 
(j)  There shall be a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet between any service facility or manufactured home park permanent building and any manufactured home. 
(k)  Accessory buildings and structures shall be constructed in accordance with the adopted Building Code. Accessory buildings and structures shall include steps, attached or detached patios that are open on three (3) sides, attached or detached decks that are open on three (3) sides, attached or detached storage units, attached or detached garages and attached or detached carports. Accessory buildings or structures may be located adjacent to a manufactured home space line; provided, however, that a minimum of six (6) feet of separation is provided between a garage and any other structure on an adjoining space. Any other building or structure shall provide a minimum of ten (10) feet between it and any structure on an adjoining space. 
(1)  The limits of each manufactured home lot shall be clearly marked on the ground by permanent monuments set pursuant to Section 38-51-101, C.R.S. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-60. - Street design standards. 
(a)  Unless otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees, all streets in a manufactured home park shall be dedicated to the Town and, unless accepted for maintenance by the Town, shall be maintained by the park owner or an owners' association and shall be a minimum width of twenty-two (22) feet from back of curb to back of curb, including the width of gutter pans. 
(b)  Primary through streets shall be thirty-four (34) feet from back of curb to back of curb with a four-foot detached sidewalk on one (1) side being located six (6) feet from the back of curb. 
(c)  The developer shall provide for covenants or other mechanisms, which shall be approved by the Town, ensuring that streets are maintained and replaced as required. 
(d)  All streets within the manufactured home park shall be constructed to the Town standards. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-70. - Parking. 
(a)  Every manufactured home space shall have two (2) off-street parking spaces adjacent to the manufactured home. There shall be one (1) additional parking space for each manufactured home space within one hundred (100) feet for use by occupants and guests. 
(b)  Off-street vehicle parking for recreation facilities. Off-street vehicle parking shall be provided for recreation facilities located within a manufactured home park. One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) space per employee at the maximum shift, shall be provided for enclosed recreation facilities. Twenty (20) spaces are to be provided for every diamond or athletic field, or one (1) space for every four (4) spectator seats, whichever is greater. (One [1] seat is equal to two [2] feet of bench seating length.) Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided in conformance with the Americans With Disabilities Act, as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-80. - Pedestrian circulation. 
    The developer shall provide for a system of pedestrian circulation within the development. The system shall connect with existing sidewalks, if any are adjacent to the property. The system shall be designed to link residential units with recreation facilities, school bus stops and existing sidewalks in the neighborhoods. Attached and detached sidewalks within the manufactured home park shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in width. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-90. - Street and sidewalk lighting. 
    All streets and sidewalks shall be lighted in accordance with the standards contained in this Code. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-100. - Access and circulation. 
    A manufactured home park development shall have two (2) means of access to public streets at the perimeter of the site. Internal circulation may be provided by public or private streets, driveways and alleys. Each manufactured home space shall be provided access to the internal circulation system. No manufactured home space shall have direct access to a public street on the perimeter of the site. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-110. - Sidewalk between street and manufactured home. 
    Concrete sidewalks shall be provided between the manufactured home and the adjacent street sidewalk; except the paved parking area may satisfy this requirement, provided that a sidewalk is provided from the parking area to the manufactured home. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-120. - Traffic control. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 42-5-1102, C.R.S., the Town elects to impose and enforce stop sign regulations, speed limits and parking restrictions posted in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices upon all highways and streets which are privately maintained in manufactured home parks. The owner of the manufactured home park shall provide such signs as may be required by the Town Engineer and agree to erect and maintain such signs in conformity with the Model Traffic Code. 
(b)  The stop sign placement, speed limits and parking restrictions shall be determined by the Traffic Engineer, but shall be consistent with the provisions of Sections 42-5-1101-42-5-1104, 42-5-1204 and 42-5-1208, C.R.S. 
(c)  There shall be posted at each entrance to any such manufactured home park a sign giving notice of such enforcement in the following text: 
"NOTICE: Stop sign, speed limits and parking restrictions enforced by the Town." 
(d)  When all signs are in place, stop sign, speed limit and parking regulations shall be enforced, and violations thereof punished, in accordance with the provisions of the Model Traffic Code then in effect. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-130. - Utility design requirement. 
(a)  All public utilities shall be installed in accordance with the applicable Town standards. 
(b)  A manufactured home park may have multiple master meters for water service. 
(c)  Each manufactured home space shall have its own meter for water and electrical service. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-140. - Manufactured home space landscaping. 
    The developer shall provide front and rear manufactured home space landscaping for each manufactured home space, including but not limited to sod and irrigation system and trees and shrubs. The developer shall provide a graphic representation of "typical" manufactured home space landscaping for each of the manufactured home designs to be located in the manufactured home park for review and approval by the Planning Commission and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-150. - Manufactured home park perimeter and common space landscaping. 
    The developer shall landscape the perimeter and common open space of the manufactured home park in accordance landscaping plans approved by the Planning Commission and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-160. - Outdoor living area. 
(a)  No less than eight percent (8%) of the gross site area shall be reserved for and devoted to improved recreation areas and facilities provided in locations convenient to all manufactured home spaces. 
(b)  An outdoor living area shall be provided on each space equal to at least ten percent (10%) of its area, provided that in no case shall such area be less than three hundred (300) square feet or required to be more than five hundred (500) square feet. The minimum horizontal dimension of such area shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(c)  Such outdoor living area shall be properly drained, located for convenience and optimum use and walled, fenced or landscaped to provide reasonable privacy. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-170. - Tenant storage. 
(a)  A separate uniform tenant storage structure shall be provided for each space, located on each space. 
(b)  There shall be a minimum of two hundred twenty-four (224) cubic feet of storage area provided for each manufactured home space. 
(c)  Design and location of tenant storage shall enhance the appearance of the park, and the exterior siding of the structure shall have the same appearance as materials commonly used on residential dwellings. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-180. - Street names; addressing; mail delivery. 
    All streets shall be named on the MH park development plan and submitted by the owner for approval. Each space shall be numerically designated for address and mail purposes and signs furnished and installed by the manufactured home park owner. Cluster postal boxes will be provided at central locations convenient to the residents. No individual street-side mailboxes are permitted unless otherwise approved by the Town. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-190. - Solid waste disposal. 
(a)  The owner of the manufactured home park shall be responsible for the promulgation and enforcement of rules and regulations governing solid waste storage and handling that meet or exceed state or federal regulations. 
(b)  The owner shall provide containers for the storage of solid wastes awaiting collection for each manufactured home space. Containers are to be sized to completely contain all solid waste that is generated on the premises. Containers are to be fly-tight, watertight and rodentproof and are to be kept off the street, curb, sidewalk and all other public ways and concealed from public view, except on collection day. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-200. - Single ownership of a manufactured home park development. 
(a)  A manufactured home park development may not be converted to another use other than such uses provided for in the MH park development plan without the approval of the Town and meeting the appropriate lot size, lot width, setback and other requirements of the new use. 
(b)  The land within a manufactured home park development shall remain in a unified ownership, and the individual ownership of lots or portions of lots shall not be transferred. 
(c)  No dwelling unit other than a manufactured home shall be located within a manufactured home park development. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-210. - Conformance of manufactured home park to state law. 
    A manufactured home park and its operation shall conform to the provisions of the Mobile Home Park Act, Section 38-12-201 et seq., C.R.S. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-220. - Business license. 
    The owner or operator of a manufactured home park shall obtain a business license as provided in this Code. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-230. - Application submission requirements. 
(a)  The applicant shall submit the required information to the Town Administrator/Clerk on paper and by electronic media as required. Accompanying the submission shall be a filing fee as established by the current fee schedule and a signed fee agreement form. The submission shall be reviewed by the Town staff for completeness and compliance with the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, this Code and this Article. The applicant shall be notified of any deficiencies or inadequacies. An incomplete submission shall not be processed or considered by the Planning Commission or Board of Trustees. 
(b)  All maps and graphic plans shall be prepared, signed and stamped by a licensed engineer or registered surveyor. All narrative reports shall be prepared by a qualified professional in the field, signed by the author and shall contain a summary of the author's professional qualifications. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-240. - MH District zoning application submission requirements. 
(a)  The following are the submission requirements for the zoning application. 
(1)  A land use application form. 
(2)  An application fee as established by resolution by the Board of Trustees. 
(3)  Current proof of ownership in the form of title insurance issued within thirty (30) days of submission of the application. 
(4)  A word processing file of the legal description of the property on an acceptable computer disk, formatted disk or by other acceptable electronic transfer as required by the Town Administrator/Clerk (Microsoft Word 6.0 TM or higher, or WordPerfect 6.1 TM or higher). 
(5)  A notarized letter or authorization from the landowner permitting a representative to process the application, as necessary. 
(6)  MH park development plan. The MH park development plan shall be submitted on 24" × 36" paper with a minimum two-inch margin on the left side and a minimum of one-half-inch margins at the top, bottom and right side. The plan shall be drawn at a scale of 1" = 100' or 1" = 200', or another scale approved by the Town Administrator/Clerk. An AutoCAD TM drawing file (Release 12 or higher) of the MH park development plan on formatted computer disk or by other acceptable electronic transfer shall also be provided. 
(b)  The name of the MH park development plan shall be centered on the upper portion of each sheet. Each sheet shall have a title block in the lower right-hand corner or along the right-hand margin and the sheet numbered in the lower right-hand corner. For processing purposes, the text information may be prepared on 81/2" × 11" paper. For recording purposes, the text information shall be displayed on the 24" × 36" sheets unless otherwise approved by the Town Administrator/Clerk. 
(c)  MH Park Development Plan Sheet 1. 
(1)  The name of the proposed MH park shall be centered at the top of the sheet along the long dimension of the sheet. There shall be a title block in the lower right-hand corner or along the right-hand margin. 
(2)  Centered on the sheet a vicinity map that depicts the relationship to the surrounding area within a two-mile radius shall be superimposed on a current Town land use plan map. 
(3)  The following "statement of commitments" shall be placed in columns, beginning in the upper left-hand column and may wrap around the vicinity map. The statement of commitments shall, in all cases, describe the development commitments, including a method for assigning responsibility to heirs, successors or assignees and timing of the fulfillment of these commitments for the following: 
a.  Dedication. A description of dedications for public use, either in specific acreage dedication (referenced by number, letter or symbol) or specific amounts of cash-in-lieu of land or facilities. 
b.  On- or off-site improvements. Provisions shall be made for the construction of community or off-site improvements through irrevocable letters of credit or the imposition of pro rata fees. 
c.  Payment of taxes on land to be dedicated for public use. A commitment to pay all taxes due at closing for land to be dedicated to public use. 
d.  Other commitments imposed by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-250. - MH manufactured home park review and approval criteria. 
    In addition to the criteria set forth for zoning amendments, the following criteria shall be considered by the Planning Commission and Board of Trustees in the review of MH manufactured home park zoning applications: 
(1)  Whether the application is in compliance with the requirements of this Section; 
(2)  Whether the proposed zoning is compatible with the surrounding land uses; 
(3)  Whether the subject land is suitable for the intended use and is compatible with the natural environment; and 
(4)  Whether the MH District is compatible with the Comprehensive Master Plan and related plans and documents. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-8-260. - MH District post-approval actions. 
(a)  Upon approval by the Board of Trustees of the MH park development plan, the applicant shall comply with required plat and sketch plan submission requirements, as required, of the approved MH park development plan for recording, accompanied by the recording fees and all other costs billed by the Town relative to the MH park development plan. Inaccurate, incomplete or poorly drawn plans shall be rejected. 
(b)  The MH park development plan shall be a tapeless, spliceless and creaseless original drawing on double matte Mylar film with a uniform thickness of not less than three one-thousandths (.003) of an inch, using only permanent black ink that will adhere to drafting films or an acceptable "fix-line" photographic reproduction (emulsion down) or computer-generated reproduction of the original drawing. In addition, the applicant shall submit one (1) 11" x 17" Mylar reduction of the plan and an AutoCAD TM drawing file (Release 12 or higher) of the plan on a formatted computer disk or by other acceptable electronic transfer. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the MH park development plan, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall review the documents for compliance with the Board of Trustee's approval, obtain the Town Officials' signatures and submit the approved MH park development plan and the ordinance amending the official zoning map to the County Clerk and Recorder for recordation and shall cause the appropriate amendment to the official zoning map. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 9 - Recreational Vehicle Parks 

Sec. 16-9-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section: 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicular-type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted or drawn by another vehicle. The following shall be considered a recreational vehicle (RV): 
a.  Camping trailer. A canvas (or other type of material), folding vehicle of rigid construction, mounted on wheels and designed for travel and recreation. 
b.  Motorized home, motor home and/or recreational bus or van. A recreational vehicle consisting of a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation and vacation uses and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
c.  Pickup coach. A vehicle designed to be mounted on or loaded into a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreation. 
d.  Tent. Protective fabric erected to provide protection from the elements. 
e.  Travel trailer. A towable vehicle designed as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreation. 
f.  Travel trailer, self-contained. A trailer which can operate independently of connections to sewer, water and electric systems. It contains a water-flushed toilet, lavatory, shower or bath and kitchen sink, all of which are connected to water storage and sewage holding tanks located within the trailer. 
    Recreational vehicle park means a parcel of land specifically developed for locating only recreational vehicles on lots on a short-term basis. 
    Recreational vehicle site means a plot of ground within a recreational vehicle park intended for the accommodation of either a recreational vehicle, tent or other individual camping unit on a temporary basis. 
    Sanitary facilities means toilets, urinals, lavatories, showers, utility sinks, drinking fountains and the service buildings containing these units. 
    Sanitary waste station means a facility used for removing and disposing of waste from self-contained camping vehicle sewage holding tanks. 
    Service building means a structure housing a toilet, lavatory, bath, laundry, service sink and other such sanitary facilities as may be required. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-20. - Review process. 
(a)  All new recreational vehicle parks or development on any recreational vehicle park, new or preexisting, must submit all plans and specifications in detail for such development to the Planning Commission and obtain approval after formal public hearing from the Board of Trustees. No construction or development shall be commenced until approved by the Board of Trustees and a building permit issued. 
(b)  Permits for development of recreational vehicle parks shall be granted according to the conditional review process of this Code. 
(c)  The Building Inspector and Town Engineer shall inspect each new recreational vehicle park or space/site addition or construction on existing parks to determine compliance with the provisions of this Article and all other applicable ordinances, rules, regulations or codes. No occupancy shall be permitted or certificate of occupancy issued until said officials have made such determination in writing. Occupancy of the premises prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy based on the above determination shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in this Code. The above-named officials shall have authority to enter upon the premises for the purpose of such inspection at any reasonable time without notice or approval of the owner or manager. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-30. - Location of recreational vehicle parks. 
    Recreational vehicle parks may be approved as a conditional use in the following Zoning Districts: 
(1)  A - Agricultural District; 
(2)  MH - Manufactured Home Park District; 
(3)  C-3 - Highway Commercial District; 
(4)  LI - Light Industrial District; or 
(5)  TR - Transitional District. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-40. - Areas not permitted. 
    Recreational vehicle parks will not be permitted in any area zoned residential or in floodplain areas. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-50. - Park development standards. 
(a)  Site conditions. Conditions of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards. 
(b)  Soil and ground cover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of the recreational vehicle park shall be paved or covered with stone screening or other solid materials or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust. 
(c)  Drainage requirements. A drainage plan in accordance with the provisions of the Town of Wellington Standard Design Criteria and Construction Requirements shall be developed for the recreational vehicle park. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-60. - Park size and density. 
(a)  Park size. The minimum gross area for a recreational vehicle park is five (5) acres. The maximum gross area allowed is ten (10) acres. 
(b)  Park density. The maximum density shall not exceed twelve (12) recreational vehicles per gross acre. 
(c)  Minimum site size. Each recreational vehicle site shall contain a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet and shall have a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(d)  Site pads. Each site shall contain a vehicle parking pad of concrete or asphalt paving. The minimum length of the parking pad shall be thirty-five (35) feet. No part of a recreational vehicle or other unit placed on the lot pad shall be closer than five (5) feet to the edge of the lot. 
(e)  Required separation between RV vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall be separated from each other and from other structures by at least ten (10) feet. Any accessory structure such as attached awnings or comports for purposes of this separation requirement shall be considered to be part of the recreational vehicle. 
(f)  Site identification. Each site for the parking of the recreational vehicle shall be identified by numbers, a minimum of three (3) inches in height, posted in a conspicuous place at the front of the site. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-70. - Roadways and parking. 
(a)  Interior roads. All interior two-way roads shall be twenty-eight (28) feet minimum width and all interior one-way roads shall be twenty (20) feet minimum width. All roads shall be paved with asphalt and crowned to facilitate drainage. Roadways shall be designed for the safe and convenient movement of vehicles. 
(b)  Parking requirements. At least one and one-half (11/2) off-road parking spaces shall be provided in the park per recreation vehicle site. At least one (1) off-road parking space shall be provided at each site. No on-street parking will be permitted. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-80. - Access and locations of entrances and exits. 
    No entrance or exit from a recreational vehicle park shall be permitted through a residential district nor require movement of traffic from the park through a residential district. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-90. - Design of access to park. 
(a)  Entrances and exits to recreational vehicle parks shall be designed for the safe and convenient movement of traffic into and out of the park and to minimize marginal friction with free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. 
(b)  Each recreational vehicle park shall have a separate entrance and exit roadway, each of which shall not be less than twenty-eight (28) feet wide from flow line to flow line, shall be hard-surfaced with asphalt or concrete and shall connect to a dedicated public right-of-way not less than forty (40) feet in width. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-100. - Access onto state highways. 
    Access onto state-controlled highways or roads will require a permit from the Colorado Department of Transportation. The design of the access will be according to CDOT requirements. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-110. - Distance from intersection. 
    Entrance driveways shall be located not closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the intersection of public streets. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-120. - Accessory uses. 
(a)  Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, dumping stations, showers, coin-operated laundry facilities and other uses and structures customarily incidental to the operation of a recreational vehicle park and campground are permitted as accessory uses to the park. 
(b)  In addition, stores, restaurants and other convenience establishments shall be permitted as accessory uses in recreational vehicle parks in districts where such uses are not allowed as principal uses, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Such establishments and the parking areas primarily related to their operations shall not occupy more than five percent (5%) of the gross area of the park. 
(2)  Such establishments shall be restricted in their uses to occupants of the park. 
(3)  Such establishments shall present no visible evidence from any street outside the park of their commercial character which would attract customers other than occupants of the park. 
(4)  The structure housing such facilities shall not be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any public street, but shall be accessible only from a street within the park. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-130. - Open space and recreational areas. 
(a)  A general area amounting to not less than ten percent (10%) of the gross area of the recreational vehicle park, excluding any area dedicated as a public right-of-way, shall be provided for recreation and open space use. 
(b)  Such areas shall not include any area designated as a recreational vehicle space, storage area, required yard, service building or sanitary facility or waste station area. 
(c)  Recreational facilities shall be included in the ten percent (10%) requirement for open space. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-140. - Yards and setbacks. 
    Each recreational vehicle park shall set aside along the perimeter of the park the following areas which shall be landscaped and used for no other purpose: 
(1)  Minimum front setback - Twenty-five (25) feet, except when the recreational vehicle park fronts on a state highway; then the minimum shall be fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  Minimum side setback - When abutting residential districts, the side setback shall be fifty (50) feet. When abutting a dedicated public right-of-way, the side setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet on the side street. When abutting any other zone district, the side setback shall be fifteen (15) feet along the interior lot line. 
(3)  Minimum rear setback - If the rear yard abuts a dedicated public right-of-way, the minimum shall be twenty-five (25) feet. If the rear yard abuts any other zoning district, the setback shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
Summary of Yard Setbacks If yard abuts a: Residential District Other District Public Right-of-Way State Highway Front yard Not allowed Not allowed 25' 50' Side yard 50' 15' 25' 50' Rear yard 50' 15' 25' 50'  
(Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-150. - Landscaping. 
    A landscaping plan illustrating the placement and type of trees and shrubs must be submitted as part of the park development plan. The design of the landscaping must mitigate the visual impact of the recreational vehicle park on the surrounding area. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-160. - Boundary fencing. 
    Except for the front boundary, each recreational vehicle park shall be enclosed by a solid fence of wood or wall of concrete block or brick not less than eight (8) feet in height. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-170. - All utilities underground. 
    All public utilities within the recreational vehicle park shall be underground. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-180. - Water supply. 
    The water supply for the recreational vehicle park shall be provided by the Town or a Water District. The water system shall be connected by pipes to all service buildings and all recreational vehicle spaces. The water distribution system within the park shall meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  The water distribution system shall be designed, constructed and maintained in compliance with the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment regulations and recommendations to provide a safe, potable and adequate supply of water. 
(2)  The distribution system shall not be connected to any nonpotable water supply nor be subject to any backflow or back siphonage. 
(3)  The distribution system shall deliver water at a minimum pressure of at least twenty (20) pounds per square inch and a minimum flow of at least one (1) gallon per minute at all outlets. 
(4)  The distribution system shall deliver a minimum volume of one hundred (100) gallons per day per recreational vehicle site. 
(5)  Water service lines, riser pipes and valves shall be installed and protected from damage by freezing, ground movement, vehicles or other damage sources. 
(6)  The riser pipe at each recreational vehicle site shall be at least one-half (1/2) inch in diameter and shall extend at least four (4) inches vertically above the ground elevation. It shall be equipped with a one-half-inch valve outlet with a threaded male spigot for attaching a standard garden hose. 
(7)  Tent camping sites shall be provided with common-use water faucets located no more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any campsite. 
(8)  Drinking fountains, if provided, shall be approved angle-jet type with adequate water pressure. 
(9)  Spillage, overflow, drainage or wastewater from faucets and drinking fountains shall be discharged to approved drains to prevent impoundment of water, creation of mud holes or other nuisance conditions. 
(10)  A water station for filling camping vehicle water storage tanks shall be provided at a rate of one (1) station for every one hundred (100) campsites. These shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from a sanitary station. The station shall be posted with signs of durable material, not less than two (2) square feet, which state: 
POTABLE WATER - DO NOT USE TO FLUSH CANTING VEHICLE WASTE TANKS. 
Such water stations shall consist of at least a three-quarter-inch pipe and valve outlet and shall be protected against the hazards of backflow and back siphonage by an approved vacuum breaker located downstream from the shutoff valve. The fill hose shall be suspended so that no part of the hose and its appurtenances will come into contact with the ground. A sign shall be posted at the entrance of the park indicating the provision of a sanitary station and water station. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-190. - Sewage disposal. 
    Facilities shall be provided and properly maintained for the collection and disposal or treatment and disposal of sewage. 
(1)  Where a public sewer system is available, all plumbing fixtures, building sewers and campground sewers shall be connected thereto. If a public sewer system is not available, a private sewage collection and disposal facility meeting requirements of the State Water Quality Control Commission, the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment and other applicable local government sewage disposal requirements shall be installed and all building sewers and campground sewers connected thereto. 
(2)  Solid and liquid wastes shall not be discharged or otherwise disposed of on the surface of the ground or into any well, cave, open ditch, stream, lake or reservoir. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-200. - Sewage collection. 
(a)  The sewer collection system shall meet the requirements of the Town of Wellington Standard Design Criteria and Construction Standards. 
(b)  Individual sewer connections shall meet the following requirements: A four-inch inside diameter sewer lateral and riser pipe with the surrounding ground graded to drain from the rim of the riser pipe. The sewer lateral shall be properly trapped and vented if camping vehicles without individually trapped and vented plumbing fixtures are accommodated. 
(c)  Dependent camping vehicles with a drain hose less than three (3) inches in diameter shall be connected with reducers and a screw or clamp-type fittings. 
(d)  Drain outlets from independent camping vehicles shall be capped or connected with a durable, readily cleanable, nonabsorbent, corrosion-resistant drain hose having an inside diameter of not less than three (3) inches. The sewer service connection shall be installed and maintained with a grade not less than one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot. 
(e)  When the campsite is not occupied, the sewer riser pipe shall be adequately covered. 
(f)  A flushing sink or other means of disposal shall be provided for disposal of liquid wastes from dependent camping vehicles, unless a sanitary waste station is provided and is conveniently located. The flushing sink shall be easily accessible and located at a distance of not more than three hundred (300) feet from any campsite. The sinks shall not be located in a room containing a toilet, lavatory or bathing facilities and toilets shall not be used for disposal of liquid wastes. Common-use faucets or hydrants and lavatories in service buildings shall not be used for cleaning fish and food or for washing dishes, utensils, clothing or other articles of household use. 
(g)  A sanitary waste station shall be provided for each one hundred (100) campsites or part thereof not equipped with individual sewer connections. Unless other approved means are used, the sanitary station shall be designed and constructed to include the following: 
(1)  Easy ingress and egress from a service road for camping vehicles and located not less than fifty (50) feet from a campsite. 
(2)  Connection to the sewer system by a trapped four-inch sewer riser pipe and vented not more than ten (10) feet downstream from the trap by a four-inch vent, adequately supported and extending at least eight (8) feet above the ground surface. 
(3)  The sewage inlet surrounded by a curbed concrete apron or trough of at least three (3) feet by three (3) feet, sloped to the inlet, and provided with a suitable hinged cover milled to fit tightly. 
(4)  A means for flushing the immediate area and a camping vehicle holding tank provided at each sanitary waste station. It shall consist of a properly supported water riser pipe, terminating two (2) feet above the ground with a three-quarter-inch valved outlet which shall be protected against back siphonage and backflow by an approved vacuum breaker installation located downstream from the shutoff valve. 
(5)  A sign, constructed of durable material and not less than two (2) feet square, posted adjacent to the water flushing outlet and inscribed with the warning: 
UNSAFE WATER FACILITY 
(h)  The plumbing shall be installed according to the most recent edition of the Plumbing Code as adopted by the Town. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-210. - Electricity and natural gas. 
(a)  An electric outlet approved by an electric utility shall be provided for each recreational vehicle space. The installation shall comply with all state and local electrical codes. Such electrical outlets shall be weatherproof. 
(b)  Street and yard lights shall be provided in such number and intensity as to ensure safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. A light shall be located at each outside entrance of the service buildings, which shall be kept lighted during hours of darkness. 
(c)  Where natural gas is provided, the installation will comply with all applicable state and Town building code regulations. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-220. - Refuse disposal. 
    The storage, collection and disposal of refuse shall be performed so as to minimize accidents, fire hazards, air pollution, odors, insects, rodents or other nuisance conditions. 
(1)  Durable, watertight, easily cleanable refuse containers, sufficient to contain all the refuse, shall be provided at each service building and sanitary waste station or at a central storage area readily accessible and located not more than three hundred (300) feet from any campsite. Refuse containers shall be provided at the rate of eight (8) cubic feet (60 gallons) for each five (5) campsites. Individual trash cans at each recreational vehicle site may be provided. All containers for refuse shall be covered with close-fitting, fly-tight covers. 
(2)  Refuse shall be collected and removed from the premises as often as necessary, but not less than once weekly, and disposed of at a lawful disposal site. 
(3)  No burning of refuse will be permitted at the recreational vehicle park. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-230. - Insect and rodent control. 
    Insects and domestic rodents shall be controlled by elimination of breeding and harborage sources, proper sanitary practices, extermination, vermin-proofing of buildings and other approved control methods. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-240. - Fire prevention and protection. 
(a)  All recreational vehicle parks shall comply with the current Fire Code of the Town. 
(b)  Hand fire extinguishers of a type approved by the Fire Department shall be maintained in effective working order and located in convenient places in the ratio of one (1) fire extinguisher to eight (8) recreational vehicle spaces. The location of fire extinguishers must be approved by the Fire Chief. 
(c)  No outdoor fires shall be allowed except in grills, ovens, stoves or park-provided fire boxes. Park-provided boxes must be approved by the Fire Department. No open fires shall be allowed. 
(d)  Fire plugs shall be located so that every site within the park can be reached with three hundred (300) feet of hose. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-250. - Sanitary facilities. 
(a)  Sanitary facilities shall be provided and installed in accordance with the latest edition of the Plumbing Code adopted by the Town. 
(b)  Required toilet, lavatory and bathing facilities shall be provided in the following minimum numbers: 
Campsites Toilets Urinals Lavatories Showers M F M M F M F 15 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 16-30 1 2 1 2 2 1 1 31-45 2 2 1 3 3 1 1 16-60 2 3 2 3 3 2 2 61-80 3 4 2 4 4 2 2 81-100 3 4 2 4 4 3 3 101-120 4 5 3 5 5 4 4  
M = Male 
F = Female 
(c)  At least one (1) toilet and shower facility shall be provided to accommodate handicapped persons. 
(d)  No portable toilets will be allowed in recreational vehicle parks. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-260. - Service buildings. 
    Service buildings shall be constructed of easily cleanable, nonabsorbent materials, maintained in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. They shall be conveniently located at a distance of not less than ten (10) feet or more than four hundred (400) feet from any dependent camping vehicle lot or persons served in a recreational area. 
(1)  Separate rooms containing required plumbing fixtures shall be provided for each sex and clearly marked "men" and "women." If located in the same building, they shall be separated by a solid, sound-resistant wall extending from floor to ceiling. The entrances shall be designed so that the plumbing fixtures are not visible from the outside. A landing shall be provided beyond each exterior door opening and shall have a width and length not less than the door opening. 
(2)  The floors of service buildings shall have a smooth, impermeable and easily cleaned surface, sloped to drain. Floor drains, properly trapped, shall be provided in all shower baths and shower rooms to remove wastewater and to facilitate cleaning. The walls and ceilings of such buildings shall be finished, and the walls shall have a smooth, nonabsorbent, easily cleanable surface extending to a height of four (4) feet in toilet rooms and six (6) feet in shower rooms. 
(3)  Every service building shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven and one-half (71/2) feet. In rooms with sloping ceilings, the required ceiling height shall be provided in at least fifty percent (50%) of the rooms, and no portion of any room having a ceiling height of less than five (5) feet shall be considered as contributing to the minimum required areas. 
(4)  Every service building shall have at least one (1) window with direct and unobstructed opening to the outside for natural light and ventilation, unless other approved means of light and ventilation to the outside air are provided. 
(5)  When necessary for exclusion of flies, mosquitoes and other insects, all exterior openings of service buildings shall be protected with fly screening of not less than sixteen (16) mesh per square inch, unless other approved protective devices are provided. 
(6)  Every service building shall be provided with at least one (1) ceiling-type light fixture, at least one (1) separate double convenience outlet adjacent to the lavatories and a light fixture at the outside entrance of the service building. All lights shall have wall switches. No pull cords shall be allowed. 
(7)  Illumination levels of at least thirty (30) foot-candles shall be maintained at lavatory mirrors and laundry room work areas, and at least five (5) foot-candles shall be maintained for general seeing tasks and at the service building entrance area. 
(8)  Service buildings shall be provided with approved heating facilities which are properly installed, maintained in a safe working condition and capable of maintaining a room temperature of sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(9)  Toilets and showers shall be separately installed to be individually accessible and to permit simultaneous use. 
(10)  Each toilet shall be individually partitioned with a door to ensure privacy. The compartment shall be at least thirty (30) inches in width with at least twenty-four (24) inches of clear space in front of a toilet. The dividing partitions shall be at least five (5) feet in height with not less than six (6) inches nor more than twelve (12) inches separating the partition bottom and the floor. Toilets shall be provided with open-front seats. 
(11)  Each shower shall be individually partitioned with a curtain, screen or door to afford privacy. Shower stalls shall not be less than thirty (30) inches by thirty (30) inches in area and shall be constructed to prevent water flow into the dressing room space. Shower floors shall be skid resistant or provided with disposable or with nonslip impervious mats. Wooden racks (dust boards) over shower floors are prohibited. Where impervious mats are used, they must be cleaned, dried and kept off the shower floor when not in use. 
(12)  Dressing room space, screened from view and equivalent to the size of the shower floor area, shall be provided adjacent to bathing facilities and shall be equipped with a bench and clothes hooks. 
(13)  Hot and cold water under pressure shall be supplied to all required plumbing fixtures, except that cold water only shall be supplied to toilets. Tempered water may be delivered to showers and sinks to conserve heated water and heating equipment. The system shall be designed to prevent discharge of water in excess of one hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit at shower heads. 
(14)  Hot water heating facilities shall have the capacity to provide a minimum of three (3) gallons of hot water (one hundred [100] degrees Fahrenheit rise) per hour per each campsite during times of peak demand. 
(15)  Required plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in good working order and in a clean and sanitary condition. Every service room containing sanitary fixtures shall be provided with a wastebasket. 
(16)  Toilets shall be provided with a toilet paper holder or dispenser, a supply of toilet paper and a covered receptacle, and lavatory areas shall be provided with clothes hooks, shelves and trash receptacles. 
(17)  Service building construction shall conform to applicable provisions of the Building Code and existing local building codes, regarding "Specifications for making buildings and facilities accessible to and useable by the physically handicapped." (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-270. - Safety. 
(a)  All electrical wiring, equipment and appurtenances shall be installed and maintained in accordance with provisions of the Electrical Code currently adopted by the Town. 
(b)  Liquid petroleum gas, fuel oil, gasoline and other flammable liquids shall be handled and used in a safe manner and shall not be stored inside or beneath any camping vehicle or within five (5) feet of a door of a camping vehicle. 
(c)  The grounds, buildings and related facilities shall be constructed, maintained and used in accordance with applicable local and state fire prevention regulations. 
(d)  Play equipment, when provided for children, shall be designed for safety, maintained in good repair and located in areas free from hazards. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-280. - Miscellaneous regulations. 
(a)  L.P. tanks shall be limited to a one-hundred-pound size. 
(b)  Storage buildings, lean-tos, bins or other outside storage facilities shall not be allowed at recreational vehicle sites. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-290. - Permanent occupancy prohibited. 
(a)  No recreational vehicle shall be used as a permanent place of abode, dwelling or business or for indefinite periods of time. Continuous occupancy extending beyond three (3) months in any twelve-month period shall be presumed to be permanent occupancy. 
(b)  Any action toward removal of wheels of a recreational vehicle except for temporary purposes of repair or to attach the trailer to the grounds for stabilizing purposes is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-300. - Development application and site plan requirements. 
    Before any permit is issued for construction and/or operation of any recreational vehicle park, a site plan and required documentation shall be submitted to and approved by the Board of Trustees. The plan shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor or a registered professional engineer, shall be drawn to a scale of no less than 1" = 100' and shall include as a minimum the following: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The interest of the applicant in the proposed park. 
(3)  The location, address and legal description of the entire proposed recreational vehicle park site. 
(4)  The existing zoning of the subject property and all adjacent properties. 
(5)  The names and addresses of adjacent property owners. 
(6)  Complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed recreational vehicle park showing: 
a.  The area and dimensions of the entire tract of land. 
b.  The land uses occupying the adjacent properties. 
c.  The number, size and location of the proposed vehicle sites and other parking areas. 
d.  The location, right-of-way and surfaced roadway width and surfacing material of roadways and walkways. 
e.  The proposed interior vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns. 
f.  The location of service buildings, sanitary stations and any other existing or proposed structure. 
g.  The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes. 
h.  Plans and specifications of the water supply, sewage disposal and refuse facilities. 
i.  The locations and details of lighting, electric and gas systems. 
j.  Plans for drainage, flood control and landscaping. 
k.  Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed within the recreational vehicle park. 
l.  The preliminary plat plan shall be drawn on 24" × 36" sheet size in blue or black ink. 
m.  An application fee as established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs. 
(7)  Where a recreational vehicle park development is proposed for construction in a series of stages, a master plan for the development of the entire tract of land shall be submitted along with the detailed plans and specifications for the initial stage, as well as any subsequent stages. 
(8)  After final approval of the preliminary plat by the Board of Trustees, two (2) Mylar originals and seven (7) black-on-white or blue-on-white prints of the final plat with supporting documents shall be submitted to the Town Administrator/Clerk. The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved at public hearings and shall include all changes specified thereon or alterations of the preliminary plat required by the Board of Trustees. One (1) original shall remain with the Town Administrator/Clerk for the Town's records, and one (1) original shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder. All recording fees shall be paid by the developer. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-310. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any recreational vehicle park within the limits of the Town unless he or she holds a valid recreational vehicle park license issued annually by the Board of Trustees in the name of such person for the specific recreational vehicle park. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-320. - Application for license and fee. 
    Application for a recreational park license shall be filed each calendar year with the Town Administrator/Clerk. Applications shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of applicant. 
(2)  The location and legal description of the recreational vehicle park. 
(3)  A complete plan drawn to scale, showing all recreational vehicle lots, structures, roads, walkways and other service facilities. Plans shall be filed in subsequent years only if changes in the plan of the recreational vehicle park are to be made. 
(4)  Such further information as may be requested by Town officials to enable them to determine if the proposed recreational vehicle park will comply with the requirements of this Article or other applicable laws and ordinances. 
(5)  An annual license fee plus a fee per each recreational vehicle site, whether occupied or not, shall be assessed as established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-330. - License transfer. 
    Every person holding a license shall give written notice to the Town Administrator/Clerk within twenty-four (24) hours after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any recreational vehicle park. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such recreational vehicle park. Upon application in writing for transfer of the license and deposit of a fee as established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's costs, the license shall be transferred if the recreational vehicle park is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Article and regulations issued hereunder. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-340. - License to be posted. 
    The license certificate shall be conspicuously posted in the office of the recreational vehicle park at all times. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-350. - Registration. 
    All recreational vehicles in the park must have a current valid registration. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-360. - Inspection. 
    Any officer of the Town or the Fire Department may inspect each recreational vehicle park to determine compliance with the provisions of this Article and all other applicable ordinances, rules, regulations or codes. Such official shall have the authority to enter upon the premises for the purpose of such inspections at any reasonable time without notice to the owner or manager. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-370. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  When it appears to any officer of the Town that any person holding a license under this Article has violated or may have violated any of the provisions hereof, a written notice shall be served on such licensee and/or recreational vehicle park manager in person or by certified United States mail, specifying the manner in which it is believed he or she has violated or may have violated this Article. Said notice shall require the owner and/or recreational park manager to appear before the Board of Trustees at a time specified therein, not less than ten (10) days after the service of said notice, and show cause why such license should not be suspended or revoked. 
(b)  At such time, said licensee or recreational vehicle park manager and officer of the Town or Fire Department may produce such evidence as may be relevant to determine whether the violation charged in the notice has been committed. If the Board of Trustees finds from the evidence that such violation has not been committed, it shall so advise the licensee and/or recreational vehicle park manager and dismiss the charge. If the Board of Trustees finds from the evidence that such violation has been committed, it shall so advise the licensee or recreational vehicle park manager and may forthwith put said person on probation for thirty (30) days. If the violation is not corrected within such probationary period, the Board of Trustees may revoke or suspend the license held by such person or continue the probation for such period and on such conditions as it shall determine. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person whose license has been revoked or suspended to operate, continue to operate or offer to operate any recreational vehicle park after the date of such revocation or during the term of such suspension, as the case may be. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-380. - Enforcement of regulations. 
    The owner or operator of any recreational vehicle park shall arrange for the management and supervision of such recreational vehicle park so as to enforce or cause compliance with the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-390. - Maintenance. 
    The owner, operator or attendant of every recreational vehicle park shall assume full responsibility for maintaining in good repair and condition all facilities of the recreational vehicle park as required herein. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-400. - Office. 
    In every recreational vehicle park there shall be a designated office building in which shall be located the office of the person in charge of said park. A copy of all required Town and state licenses and permits shall at all times be kept in said office. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-9-410. - Management duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the attendant or person in charge, together with the owner or operator, to: 
(1)  Keep at all times a register of all tenants (which shall be open at all times to inspections by state, county and federal officers and officers of the Town), showing for all tenants: 
a.  Dates of entrance and departure. 
b.  License numbers of all recreational vehicles and towing vehicles or automobiles. 
c.  States issuing such license. 
(2)  Maintain the park in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times. 
(3)  See that provisions of this Article are complied with and enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any violations of law which may come to his or her attention. 
(4)  Report to local health authorities all cases known to the owner to be infected with any communicable diseases. 
(5)  Pay promptly to the Town all license fees required by Town ordinances or other laws. 
(6)  Prohibit the use of any recreational vehicle by a greater number of occupants than that which it is designed to accommodate. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 10 - Floodplain Regulations[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2-2014 , adopted January 14, 2014, repealed the former Art. 10, §§ 16-10-10-16-10-30, 16-10-110-16-10-170, 16-10-210-16-10-280, and enacted a new Art. 10 as set out herein. The former Art. 10 pertained to similar subject matter. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for complete derivation. 

Division 1 - Purpose and Definitions 

Sec. 16-10-10. - General purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this Article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions to specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-20. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this Article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-30. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application: 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH or VO zone on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within the community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building: (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, A99, B, C, D and X, to have the top of the elevated floor or, in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water; and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, A99, B, C, D and X, elevated building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zones V1-30, VE or V, elevated building also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of elevated building, even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the standards of Section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. Existing construction may also be referred to as existing structures. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map or FIRM means an official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles and water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means this Chapter, Chapter 17 of this Code, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood-proofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
c.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For flood-plain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
a.  Built on a single chassis; 
b.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
c.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act [Pub. L. 97-348]) includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structural damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the Code Enforcement Officer and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this Article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this Article. (For full requirements, see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Division 2 - General Provisions 

Sec. 16-10-110. - Lands to which this Article applies. 
    This Article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard and areas removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) within the jurisdiction of the Town. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-120. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Larimer County, Colorado, and Incorporated Areas," dated February 6, 2013, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and FBFM), and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Article. The Flood Study and FIRM is on file at the Town Hall. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-130. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-140. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This Article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Article and another Code provision, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-150. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this Article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the Town; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-160. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this Article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Article shall not create liability on the part of the Town, any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-170. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Division 3 - Administration 

Sec. 16-10-210. - Designation of Town official for administration. 
    The Town Administrator/Clerk or Building Official, if a Building Official Clerk other than the Town Administrator/Clerk has been appointed (the Town Administrator/Clerk or Building Official, if appointed, is hereinafter referred to as the Building Official) is hereby appointed to administer and implement this Article by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-220. - Designation of Floodplain Administrator. 
    The Town Administrator/Clerk is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this Article and other appropriate sections of 44 C.F.R. (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-230. - Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Article. 
(2)  Review permit applications to determine whether the proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of the ordinance codified herein. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Colorado Water Conservation Board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation has not been provided in accordance with Section 16-10-120 of this Article, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article 6. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, require that no new construction, substantial improvements or other development, including fill, shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half (1/2) foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE and AH on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half (1/2) foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (Conditional Letter of Map Revision). 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-240. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  The Town Administrator/Clerk shall accept applications on forms including but not limited to the following information: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of Section 16-10-120 above; 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  Maintenance of a record of all such information in accordance with Section 16-10-120 above. 
(b)  Approval or denial of a development permit by the Town shall be based on all of the provisions of this Article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding or erosion damage for the proposed use; and 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan for that area. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-250. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this Article. 
(b)  The Board of Adjustment shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this Article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment may appeal such decision in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the relevant factors in Subsection 16-10-240(b) above have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(f)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this Article, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this Article as set forth in Section 16-10-10. 
(g)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(h)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(i)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(j)  Variances may be issued by the Town for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that: 
(1)  The criteria outlined in Subsections (a) through (i) of this Section are met; and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-260. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base level, provided that Subsections (a) through (j) in Section 16-10-250 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justifications required for issuing the variance increase. 
(b)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(c)  Variances shall be issued only upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(d)  Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(1)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, creation of nuisances, fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection 16-10-250(j) above or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(e)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Division 4 - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 

Sec. 16-10-310. - General standards for flood hazard reduction. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  Anchoring. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  Construction materials and methods. 
a.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
b.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. 
c.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(3)  Utilities. 
a.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; 
b.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
c.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(4)  Subdivision proposals. 
a.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with Sections 16-10-10 and 16-10-20 of this Article; 
b.  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development permit requirements of Sections 16-10-170 and 16-10-240 and the provisions of Sections 16-10-270 and 16-10-280 of this Article; 
c.  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less) if not otherwise provided pursuant to Section 16-10-120 or Paragraph 16-10-230(8) of this Article. 
d.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
e.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(5)  Encroachments. In Zones AE and AH the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half (1/2) foot at any point. In areas of special flood hazards, where base flood elevation data has not been provided, the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-320. - Specific standards for flood hazard reduction. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Section 16-10-120, Subsection 16-10-230(8) and Subparagraph 16-10-270(4), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air condition equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this Subsection as proposed in Subsection 16-10-240(a)(3) is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that, below the base flood level, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this Subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures, new construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on the Town's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the Town's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the base flood elevation, and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movements. 
c.  Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the Town's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of this Paragraph shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles that are placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the Town's FIRM shall either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 16-10-240 of this Article and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Paragraph (4) above. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect types utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-330. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones). 
    Located within the Special Flood Hazard Area established in Section 16-10-120, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Residential construction. All new construction and Substantial Improvements of residential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three feet if no depth number is specified). Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer, architect, or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in Section 16-10-340, all new construction and Substantial Improvements of non-residential structures, must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three feet if no depth number is specified), or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure is watertight to at least one foot above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. A registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this Section, as proposed in Section 16-10-240, are satisfied. 
Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are required to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-340. - Floodways. 
    Floodways are administrative limits and tools used to regulate existing and future floodplain development. The State of Colorado has adopted floodway standards that are more stringent than the FEMA minimum standard (see definition of Section 16-10-30). Located within special flood hazard area established in Section 16-10-120, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed by a licensed Colorado Professional Engineer and in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase (requires a no-rise certification) in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If Section 16-10-300(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 16-10-270. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision through FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-350. - Alteration of a watercourse. 
    For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a special flood hazard area, the following standards apply: 
(1)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition, and channel migration and properly mitigate potential problems through the project as well as upstream and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability should be considered, when appropriate, to assist in determining the most appropriate design. 
(2)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the residual 100-year floodplain. 
(3)  Any channelization or other stream alteration activity proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance with all applicable Federal, State and local floodplain rules, regulations and ordinances. 
(4)  Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer or Certified Professional Hydrologist. 
(5)  All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all applicable Federal, State and Town floodplain requirements and regulations. 
(6)  Within the regulatory floodway, stream alteration activities shall not be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a floodway analysis and report, sealed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer, that there is not more than a 0.00-foot rise in the proposed conditions compared to existing conditions floodway resulting from the project, otherwise known as a no-rise certification, unless the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision in accordance with Section 16-10-300. 
(7)  Maintenance shall be required for any altered or relocated portions of watercourses so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-360. - Properties removed from the floodplain by fill. 
    A floodplain development permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure or addition to an existing structure on a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F), unless such new structure or addition complies with the following: 
(1)  Residential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that the structure or addition is watertight to at least one foot above the base flood level that existed prior to the placement of fill with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-370. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision or other development proposal is in a flood-prone area, the proposal shall minimize flood damage. 
(2)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of Sections 16-10-130, 16-10-240 and the provisions of Division 4 of this Article. 
(3)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Section 16-10-120 or Section 16-10-230 of this Article. 
(4)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(5)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
Sec. 16-10-380. - Standards for critical facilities. 
    A critical facility is a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Rule 6 of the Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. 
(1)  Classification of critical facilities. It is the responsibility of the Town Board of Trustees to identify and confirm that specific structures in their community meet the following criteria: 
Critical facilities are classified under the following categories: (a) essential services; (b) hazardous materials; (c) at-risk populations; and (d) vital to restoring normal services. 
a.  Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities, and transportation lifelines. 
These facilities consist of: 
i.  Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle and equipment storage, and, emergency operation centers); 
ii.  Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent care centers having emergency treatment functions, and non-ambulatory surgical structures but excluding clinics, doctors' offices, and non-urgent care medical structures that do not provide these functions); 
iii.  Designated emergency shelters; 
iv.  Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio, and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines, cables, and conduits); 
v.  Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution (hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines, transmission lines, distribution lines, and service lines); and 
vi.  Air transportation lifelines (airports (municipal and larger), helicopter pads and structures serving emergency functions, and associated infrastructure (aviation control towers, air traffic control centers, and emergency equipment aircraft hangars). 
Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), non-potable water treatment and distribution systems, and hydroelectric power generating plants and related appurtenances. 
Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Town Board of Trustees that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with the provisions of this Article, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the Town Board of Trustees on an as-needed basis upon request. 
b.  Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. 
These facilities may include: 
i.  Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical manufacturing); 
ii.  Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials; 
iii.  Refineries; 
iv.  Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and 
v.  Above ground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers. 
Facilities shall be determined to be critical facilities if they produce or store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to keep a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the work place, and the chemical(s) is stored in quantities equal to or greater than the threshold planning quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that facility shall be considered to be a Critical Facility. The TPQ for these chemicals is: either five hundred (500) pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is lower) for the three hundred fifty-six (356) chemicals listed under 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010), also known as Extremely Hazardous Substances (EHS); or 10,000 pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the Colorado Department of Health and Environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found in 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010). The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulation "Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification," 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010) and OSHA regulation "Occupational Safety and Health Standards," 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010) are incorporated herein by reference and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation this ordinance, but exclude later amendments to or editions of the regulations. 
Specific exemptions to this category include: 
i.  Finished consumer products within retail centers and households containing hazardous materials intended for household use, and agricultural products intended for agricultural use. 
ii.  Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local authority having jurisdiction by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified professional (as determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a major threat to the public. 
iii.  Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage, and distribution centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products. 
These exemptions shall not apply to buildings or other structures that also function as critical facilities under another category outlined in this Article. 
c.  At-risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care, and schools. These facilities consist of: 
i.  Elder care (nursing homes); 
ii.  Congregate care serving twelve (12) or more individuals (day care and assisted living); 
iii.  Public and private schools (pre-schools, K-12 schools), before-school and after-school care serving twelve (12) or more children); 
d.  Facilities vital to restoring normal services including government operations. These facilities consist of: 
i.  Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails, building permitting and inspection services, community administration and management, maintenance and equipment centers); 
ii.  Essential structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories, offices, and classrooms only). 
These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the Town Board of Trustees that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with this ordinance, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the Town Board of Trustees on an as-needed basis upon request. 
(2)  Protection of critical facilities. All new and substantially improved critical facilities and new additions to critical facilities located within the special flood hazard area shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be critical facilities. For the purposes of this Article, protection shall include one of the following: 
a.  Location outside the special flood hazard area; or 
b.  Elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to at least two feet above the base flood elevation. 
(3)  Ingress and egress for new critical facilities. New critical facilities shall, when practicable as determined by the Town Board of Trustees, have continuous non-inundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a 100-year flood event. 
(Ord. No. 2-2014 , 1-14-14) 
ARTICLE 11 - Sexually Oriented Businesses 

Sec. 16-11-10. - Operation of sexually oriented businesses. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in violation of any of the following restrictions: 
(1)  Zoning district. Sexually oriented businesses are only allowed in the Industrial District if approved as a conditional use. 
(2)  Distance restriction. It is unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within seven hundred fifty (750) feet, measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, objects or Town limits, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which the sexually oriented business is located to the property line of any of the following: 
a.  A church; 
b.  A use approved for residential purposes; 
c.  A school or licensed child care facility; or 
d.  A park, recreational center or community center. 
(3)  Single building restriction. No sexually oriented business shall be operated in the same building, structure or portion thereof as any other sexually oriented business. 
(4)  Discontinued operations. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating is not rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location of any use outlined in Paragraph (1) above; however, if the sexually oriented business ceases operation for a period of sixty (60) days or more regardless of any intent to resume operation, it may not recommence operation in that location. (Ord. 4-2005 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-11-20. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to this Article: 
    Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store means a commercial establishment which devotes a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, advertising, floor space, shelf space or storage space to, or receives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from, any one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  The sale, rental or viewing (for any form of consideration) of books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction, description, display or exhibition of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
b.  The sale or rental of instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with, or marketed primarily for engaging in, specified sexual activities, excluding condoms and other medically recognized birth control devices and disease-prevention products. 
    Child care facility means any facility, by whatever name known, licensed by the State and maintained for compensation, for the whole or any part of a day, for the care of five (5) or more children under the age of sixteen (16) years who are not related to the owner, operator or manager thereof. 
    Community center means a building or other structure which is Town-owned or used by the Town that provides services to the community and is open to the general public. 
    Park means a park, reservation, playground, recreation area, bikeway, trail, greenbelt or other area in the Town owned or used by the Town or landowner's association and devoted to use as a park, reservation, playground, recreation area, bikeway, trail, greenbelt for members of that association and devoted to active or passive recreation, including developed and undeveloped land. 
    Residential property means any area subdivided and approved by the Town for residential land use or any property or lot devoted to full-time residential use. 
    School means a facility that provides a curriculum of elementary and secondary academic instruction, including kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high schools and high schools. 
    Sexually oriented business means: 
a.  Any business where individuals appear in a state in such a manner as to intentionally display specified anatomical areas or which encourages specified sexual activities, whether as the primary, or principal, use of the premises or whether as a secondary, or incidental or accessory, use of the premises for the purpose of entertaining the patrons of such establishments (but not including performances in which persons appear in a state of nudity and which, taken as a whole, contain serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value). 
b.  An adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the areolae; or 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
a.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, tumescence or arousal; 
b.  Acts, actual or simulated, of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral copulation, bestiality or sodomy; 
c.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast; 
d.  Flagellation, mutilation, sadism, sadomasochism or torture for purposes of sexual arousal, gratification or abuse; and 
e.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in Subparagraphs a through d of this definition. (Ord. 4-2005 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-11-30. - Hours of operation. 
    Sexually oriented businesses may only operate from the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. each day. Businesses falling within the definition of a sexually oriented business may be open for such additional hours as their owners in their discretion desire, provided that no activities carried on by a sexually oriented business may be available during such additional hours, that is other lawful activity not involving sexually oriented businesses may freely occur. (Ord. 4-2005 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-11-40. - Business premises. 
    Sexually oriented businesses shall only conduct or offer sexually oriented business activities indoors (within an enclosed structure), and no sexually oriented business may permit or cause any sexually oriented business activity from outside the structure in which it is enclosed. (Ord. 4-2005 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-11-50. - Age limits. 
    No one under eighteen (18) years of age shall be admitted to or be present in any nude entertainment establishment from the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. on any day. This minimum age limitation also applies to any employees, agents, servants or independent contractors working on the premises. Notice of this minimum age limitation shall be posted prominently outside all entrances to any nude entertainment establishment. (Ord. 4-2005 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-11-60. - Signage and exterior. 
(a)  In addition to the other requirements of this Code or the Land Use Code, it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person to erect, construct or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than one (1) primary sign and one (1) secondary sign, as provided herein. 
(b)  Primary signs shall have no more than two (2) display surfaces. Each such display surface shall: 
(1)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(2)  Not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in area; and 
(3)  Not exceed ten (10) feet in height or ten (10) feet in length. (Ord. 4-2005 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 12 - Home Occupations 

Sec. 16-12-10. - Home occupations. 
(a)  A home occupation, when allowed as a permitted principal or conditional use in any residential district, shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Such use shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants of the dwelling. With the exception of daycare businesses which shall be allowed to commence operations as of 6:00 a.m. the hours of operation during which clients or customers are allowed to come to the home in connection with the business activity are limited to between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(2)  Such use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and shall not change the character thereof. 
(3)  The total area used for such purposes shall not exceed one-half (1/2) the floor area of the user's dwelling unit. 
(4)  There shall be no exterior advertising other than identification of the home occupation. 
(5)  There shall be only the incidental sale of stocks, supplies or products conducted on the premises. 
(6)  There shall be no exterior storage on the premises of material or equipment used as a part of the home occupation. 
(7)  There shall be no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare noticeable at or beyond the property line. 
(8)  A home occupation shall provide additional off-street parking areas adequate to accommodate all needs created by the home occupation. 
(b)  In particular, a home occupation may include, but is not limited to, the following, provided that all requirements contained herein are met: 
(1)  Art studio; 
(2)  Dressmaking or millinery work; 
(3)  Professional office; 
(4)  Office for insurance or real estate sales; and 
(5)  Teaching. 
(c)  A home occupation shall not be interpreted to include the following: 
(1)  Animal hospital; 
(2)  Long-term care facility; 
(3)  Restaurant; 
(4)  Bed and breakfast; 
(5)  Group home; 
(6)  Adult-oriented use; or 
(7)  Vehicle repair, servicing, detailing or towing if vehicles are: 
a.  Dispatched from the premises; 
b.  Are brought to the premises; or 
c.  Are parked or stored on the premises or on an adjacent street. 
(d)  A home occupation shall be permitted only after the owner or inhabitant of the dwelling in which such occupation is conducted has obtained a home occupation license and business license from the Town. The fee for such a license shall be an amount established by resolution by the Board of Trustees to offset the Town's cost. At the time the time ownership of the property is transferred or the home occupation is discontinued for a period of six (6) months or more the home occupation license terminates. Following termination the license may be issued again upon the submission and review of a new application and the payment of an additional fee. If the Town is conducting an investigation of a violation of this Land Use Code with respect to the particular home occupation at the time such renewal application is made, the license will not be reissued until the investigation is completed and, if necessary, all violations have been corrected. The term of the previous license shall continue during the period of investigation. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 5-2008 , § 1, 3-11-08) 
ARTICLE 13 - Commercial Animal Establishments 

Sec. 16-13-10. - Commercial animal establishments. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate the following commercial animal establishments within the Town: guard dog training facility, animal auction, riding school or stable. It shall only be lawful for a kennel or cattery to operate if first approved as a conditional use in districts where allowed as a conditional use. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-13-20. - Kennels and catteries. 
(a)  With approval of the Board of Trustees, kennels and catteries, as defined by Section 7-4-10 of this Code, may be conditionally maintained in commercial and industrial areas according to the following requirements, which shall be met in addition to the conditions contained in Section 16-13-10 above: 
(1)  At no time shall a kennel or cattery be used to board or house more than twenty (20) dogs per acre of lot area. At no time shall a kennel or cattery be used to board or house more than twenty (20) cats per acre of lot area. Under no circumstances shall more than fifty (50) dogs be kept on a lot, fifty (50) cats be kept on a lot or a total of one hundred (100) animals, including dogs and cats, be maintained on any lot. Multiple animals shall not be housed in the same enclosure except for animal, with the same owner, at the request of the owner. The total number of dogs and/or cats allowed, including in any structure, shall not apply to offspring under five (5) months of age belonging to one (1) of the adult animals. 
(2)  A building permit shall be obtained for all kennels, pens, shelters or other similar structures. Said building permit application shall be reviewed and approved by the Town Administrator/Clerk, and any land use approval of a kennel or cattery shall be contingent on approval by the Town Administrator/Clerk (or, in the event of a denial, the Board of Trustees) of the building plans. 
(3)  All buildings and grounds on any lot where a kennel or cattery is operated shall be kept at all times in a safe, clean, repaired and sanitary condition. 
(4)  Maintenance of a kennel or cattery shall be allowed so long as the business is operated by or has employed on staff a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine by the State. 
(5)  All dogs and/or cats shall be contained on the building at all times unless under the control of a handler; no exterior animal runs will be allowed, including animal runs extending off of any structure. A kennel or cattery may maintain a fenced area on the exterior of the building where animals may be exercised by a handler. Except within the fenced exercise pen, animals outside the building shall be leashed at all times. Dogs shall be exercised by a handler at least twice each day for a period of not less than ten (10) minutes each. Dogs may not be exercised except during the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. A handler shall be present at all times that dogs are left within any exercise pen. No handler shall oversee more than five (5) dogs in the exercise pen at one (1) time and no handler shall oversee more than two (2) dogs outside the exercise pen at any one (1) time. Any exercise pen shall be located outside of any buffer yard. 
(6)  Kennels and catteries shall meet setback standards for the district in which they are located, but the depth of setback yards shall be increased to twenty-five (25) feet from commercial property and fifty (50) feet from residential property. Fenced exercise pens shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet from commercial property and seventy-five (75) feet from residential property. 
(7)  The following minimum space requirements shall be applicable to all kennels: 
a.  Dogs. Each dog shall be provided a minimum space equal to the following equation: 
Width of kennel = Length of dog from nose to base of tail + 2 feet Length of kennel = Width of kennel + 2 feet Height of kennel = 11/2 times the height of the dog at the shoulder  
At a minimum, no individual kennel for housing any dog shall have less than six (6) square feet of floor space nor be required to have more than four hundred thirty-five (435) square feet of floor area. 
b.  Cats. Each adult cat shall be provided a minimum of six (6) cubic feet of area. Adult female cats with kittens below three (3) months of age shall be provided with a minimum of eight (8) cubic feet of area. 
(8)  All animal and food wastes (including waste from exercise areas or pens), bedding, debris and other organic wastes shall be handled and disposed of regularly in a sanitary manner so as to avoid vermin infestation, odors, disease hazards and nuisances. Disposal shall be as approved by the Town, but under no circumstances shall any solid waste be placed in the sanitary sewer. At a minimum, wastes will be bagged, sealed and properly disposed of offsite at least every other day. Trash enclosures shall be covered at all times, shall be enclosed in a separate trash area and shall be placed a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the lot line of the property. 
(9)  Areas occupied by animals shall be cleaned and all surfaces sanitized regularly and at all times when one (1) animal ceases to occupy an area and another occupies the same space. 
(10)  Records showing compliance with kennel and cattery requirements, including cleaning and waste removal, shall be maintained and kept for a minimum of eight (8) months and shall be available for inspection by the Town on request. 
(11)  Environmental and/or chemical and scientific controls approved by the Colorado Department of Agriculture or other appropriate enforcement agency shall be provided for pest control. 
(12)  Adequate drainage facilities, catch basins or other improvements shall be constructed to protect any adjacent rivers, streams or other bodies of water from pollution. 
(13)  At least one (1) washroom consisting of a basin or sink and a lavatory shall be provided to maintain cleanliness among animal caretakers. 
(14)  Dogs shall not be housed in the same primary enclosure but shall be maintained in separate rooms with full walls separating such room from other enclosures with cats and animals in the stage of estrus (heat) or whelping. 
(15)  All operators of kennels or catteries shall provide annual verification to the Town that state licensing requirements, if any, have been met. 
(16)  All dogs and/or cats shall be cared for in a humane and sanitary manner as approved by the responsible governmental agency. 
(17)  The following information shall be required in addition to the information required with a conditional use application, 
a.  Plans and methods of disposal of sewage and other wastes. 
b.  Plans and methods of water supply. 
c.  Plans and methods of drainage facilities. 
d.  Plans for noise abatement, including types and explanations of berming, walls and landscaping. 
e.  An area map showing the location of surrounding buildings, structures, residences, roads, subdivisions and performance districts within a one-thousand-foot radius. 
f.  The names and addresses of property owners within a one-thousand-foot radius of the lot or property on which the kennel or cattery is to be located. However, the Town Administrator/Clerk may require the names of property owners in excess of one thousand (1,000) feet. 
g.  Written approval of at least one (1) owner of one-half (1/2) of all properties within the one-thousand-foot radius of the proposed use. 
h.  A map showing building, exercise pen and facility setbacks from each adjoining property. 
(b)  The applicant for any kennel or cattery use shall establish to the satisfaction of the Board of Trustees the compatibility of the proposed kennel or cattery with the surrounding area, that the business can be operated in harmony with the character of the neighborhood, that there will be no detrimental effects to the immediate area, to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the area or to the animals proposed to be cared for, and that noise issues will be adequately addressed. 
(1)  All animals maintained in a kennel or cattery shall be properly licensed as required by Section 7-4-310 of this Code and have proof of legally required vaccinations. 
(2)  All kennels and catteries shall comply with all noise regulations of this Code. 
(3)  The Town, by an authorized representative during the kennel's or cattery's operation, may inspect the kennel or at reasonable times review records maintained by the kennel to confirm compliance with this Section. 
(4)  Four (4) or more violations of the noise, sanitary, licensing or other applicable ordinances of the Town within one (1) year shall allow the Town to terminate any kennel or cattery for up to three (3) weeks; six (6) or more violations within one (1) year shall authorize the Board of Trustees to terminate kennel or cattery approvals granted under this Section. No previously approved right to operate a kennel or cattery shall be terminated without an opportunity of the property owner to be heard and to present evidence. (Ord. 3-2006 §1; Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 6-2015 , §§ 1, 2, 5-18-15) 
ARTICLE 13.5 - Medical Marijuana Establishments 

Sec. 16-13.5-10. - Medical marijuana establishments. 
    To the extent that the Town is allowed to impose prohibitions by Colorado Law, the sale of medical marijuana, and medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation operations, and medical marijuana-infused products manufacturers' licenses as defined by Colorado Law, shall be prohibited within the Town. 
(Ord. No. 6-2010 , § 1(A), 7-13-10) 
ARTICLE 14 - Sign Regulations 

Sec. 16-14-10. - Purpose. 
    The regulations in this Article are intended to coordinate the use, placement, physical dimensions and design of all signs within the Town. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-14-20. - Definition. 
    A sign is any object, device, display, structure or part thereof, situated outdoors or visible from outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images. Signs do not include the flag or emblem of any nation, state, city, religious, fraternal or civic organization; merchandise and pictures or models or products or services incorporated in a window display; works of art which in no way identify a product; or scoreboards located on athletic fields. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-14-30. - Applicability of regulations. 
(a)  No person shall erect, alter or relocate any sign without first obtaining approval from the Town and obtaining a building permit. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from these sign regulations: 
(1)  Signs existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified herein which do not conform to the regulations contained in this Article. This exemption shall terminate upon change or discontinuance of the use of an establishment in accordance with Section 16-4-50 below. 
(2)  Address numerals and signs not exceeding one (1) square foot in area. 
(3)  Legal notices. 
(4)  Traffic and parking signs which bear no advertising. 
(5)  Political signs displayed on private property with the permission of the property owner in accordance with an official election or signs erected on behalf of candidates for public office, provided that: 
a.  All such signs may be erected no sooner than ninety (90) days in advance of the election for which they were made. 
b.  The signs are removed within seven (7) days after the election for which they were made. 
c.  A building permit will be required for any such signs over sixteen (16) square feet. 
(6)  Banners used to decorate or attract attention to a business establishment, provided that: 
a.  The banners are displayed in conjunction with a grand opening celebration or special sale for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
b.  The banners are displayed no more than two (2) times per calendar year per establishment. 
c.  The total area of all signs and banners does not exceed two hundred percent (200%) of the allowable sign area for the establishment. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-14-40. - Review procedure. 
    Unless exempted from all review as described above, all signs must be approved as a site plan review under Chapter 17, Article 5 of this Code. If the sign is an integral part of a proposed land use change requiring review under this Code, review of the sign shall be combined with review of the land use change of which it is a part. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-14-50. - General sign regulations. 
(a)  All signs shall be compatible with the use of the property upon which they are located and with property in the general vicinity. 
(b)  Except for time and/or temperature signs, no flashing or moving signs shall be permitted. 
(c)  No sign shall be affixed to a tree or utility pole. 
(d)  No signs, including traffic signs and similar regulatory notices except those of the Town, County or State, shall be allowed within road or street rights-of-way. 
(e)  Any spotlights or floodlights permitted to illuminate signs shall be shielded such that their light source shall not cause a safety hazard or glare into adjacent residential property. 
(f)  Signs identifying the use of the premises shall be located on the lot except as may be allowed by the Town after review as a Conditional Use. 
(g)  Signs advertising the sale or lease of property shall be located on the property advertised, shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and shall not be located on a wall or extend over a pedestrian walkway. 
(h)  The maximum size and height of signs allowed under this Article as set forth in the following table: 
Principal Use of Premises Total Area of Signage (wall signs + freestanding signs) Height if on Structure Height if Freestanding Residential 4 sq. ft. No higher than structure 6 ft. Industrial/commercial The greater of: One sq. ft. per lineal foot of building visible from a public way 50 sq. ft. No higher than primary structure Public/quasi-public 100 sq. ft. Subdivision or commercial complex entrance sign 100 sq. ft. N/A 8  
(i)  Within a seven-hundred-fifty-foot radius of the center of the Interstate 25 and Colorado Highway 1 interchange, the Board of Trustees may increase the maximum height and size allowed for freestanding signs as necessary to allow visibility from the interstate for businesses which rely on interstate highway traffic for a significant portion of their business revenue. The burden of showing necessity for any increase in height or size shall be upon the business, and the decision to increase height or size shall be in the sole discretion of the Board of Trustees. No sign shall have more than two (2) faces with signs of more than one hundred fifty (150) square feet per face or be more than sixty (60) feet in height. All lighting associated with said signs shall be prevented from shining upon the ground. 
(j)  Window signs. 
(1)  Nonilluminated window signs do not count toward the allowable square footage, provided that the total area of all window signs fills less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of the window. 
(2)  The maximum total area of all window signs shall not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the window in which they are located. 
(k)  Signs existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified herein which conformed to the prior Wellington Land Use Code of 1985 or other applicable ordinances of the Town and which do not conform to the regulations contained in this Section shall be nonconforming. 
(l)  Nonconforming signs shall be removed by the property owner upon a change in use of the property. 
(m)  Whenever a business, industry, service or other use is discontinued, the signs pertaining to the use shall be removed or obscured by the person owning or having possession over the property within sixty (60) days of the discontinuance of such use. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 6-2012 , § 2, 9-11-12) 
ARTICLE 15 - Vested Property Rights 

Sec. 16-15-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to provide the procedures necessary to implement the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-15-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Landowner means any owner of a legal or equitable interest in real property and includes the heirs, successors and assignees of such ownership interests. 
    Property means all real property subject to land use regulation by the Town. 
    Site-specific development plan means and is limited to the final plat of a subdivision or a development agreement when approved by the Board of Trustees by ordinance duly adopted. 
    Vested property rights means the right to undertake and complete the development and use of the property under the terms and conditions of a site-specific development plan. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-15-30. - Request for site-specific development approval. 
    For those developments for which the landowner wishes the creation of vested property rights pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., the landowner shall request the approval in writing at least thirty (30) days prior to the date said approval is to be considered. Failure of the landowner to request such an approval renders the plan not a site-specific development plan, and no vested property rights shall be deemed to have been created. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-15-40. - Notice and hearing. 
    No site-specific development plan shall be approved until after a public hearing called for that purpose, preceded by notice of such hearing published as provided by law at least fourteen (14) days before the hearing. Such notice may, at the Town's option, be combined with any other required notice. At such hearing, all interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-15-50. - Approval, conditional approval, effective date, amendments, referendum and review. 
(a)  A site-specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of the ordinance granting final approval of the plan. The vested property right shall attach to and run with the applicable property and shall confer upon the landowner the right to undertake and complete the development and use of said property under the terms and conditions of the site-specific development plan, including any amendments thereto. 
(b)  The Board of Trustees may approve a site-specific development plan upon such terms and conditions as may reasonably be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Such conditional approval will result in a vested property right, although failure to abide by such terms and conditions will result in a forfeiture of vested property rights. 
(c)  In the event amendments to a site-specific development plan are approved, the effective date of such amendments, for purposes of duration of a vested property right, shall be the date of the approval of the original site-specific development plan, unless the Board of Trustees specifically finds to the contrary and incorporates such findings in its approval of the amendment. 
(d)  The approval of vested property rights shall be subject to all rights of referendum and judicial review; except that the period of time permitted by law for the exercise of such rights shall not begin to run until the date of publication of a notice to the general public of the site-specific development plan and creation of vested property rights. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-15-60. - Notice of approval. 
    Each plat or development agreement constituting a site-specific development plan shall contain the following notice: 
Approval of this plan may create a vested property right pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended. 
Failure to contain this statement shall invalidate the creation of the vested property right. In addition, a notice describing generally the type and intensity of the use approved and the specific parcel or parcels of property affected and stating that a vested property right has been created shall be published once, not more than fourteen (14) days after approval of the site-specific development plan, in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town. Publication of the notice of creation of the vested property right shall be the obligation of the landowner. The Town shall have no obligation to see that the notice is properly published. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-15-70. - Duration of vested property right. 
    A property right which has been vested as provided herein shall remain vested for a period of three (3) years; except that the Board of Trustees may, in its sole discretion, grant vested property rights for a longer period when warranted in light of all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the size and phasing of the development, economic cycles and market conditions. The vesting period shall not be extended by any amendments to a site-specific development plan unless expressly authorized by the Board of Trustees in the Article approving such amendments. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-15-80. - Other provisions unaffected. 
    Approval of a site-specific development plan shall not constitute an exemption or waiver of any other provisions of this Code pertaining to the development or use of the property. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-15-90. - Payment of costs. 
    In addition to any and all other fees and charges imposed by this Code, the applicant for approval of a site-specific development plan shall pay all costs occasioned to the Town pertaining to such application, including but not limited to publication of notices, public hearing and review costs, county recording fees and review costs. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-15-100. - Limitations. 
    Nothing in this Article is intended to create any vested property right, but only to implement the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S. In the event of the repeal of said article or a judicial determination that said article is invalid or unconstitutional, this Article shall be deemed to be repealed and the provisions hereof no longer effective. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 16 - Wireless Telecommunication Services, Facilities and Equipment 

Sec. 16-16-10. - Permitted zoning district. 
    Wireless telecommunication services facilities shall be permitted only in the industrial zoning districts (I or LI). (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-16-20. - Use permitted by conditional review. 
    It is unlawful for any person to install or operate such a wireless telecommunication services facility unless a use by conditional review has first been approved by the Board of Trustees as provided in Section 16-7-20 of this Chapter. The approval of such use by conditional review does not relieve the operator from otherwise complying with all applicable regulatory requirements of the Town, state and federal governments. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-16-30. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Site plans. The site plans for a wireless telecommunication service facility shall be submitted on one (1) or more plats or maps, at a scale not less than 1" = 50', showing the following information: 
(1)  The proposed size, location and boundaries of the commercial mobile radio service facility site, including existing and proposed topography at two-foot intervals, referenced to USGS data, state plane coordinates and a legal description of the proposed site. 
(2)  Elevations of all towers and equipment, indicating materials, overall exterior dimensions and colors. 
(3)  True north arrow. 
(4)  Locations and size of existing improvements and existing vegetation, if any; and location and size of proposed improvements, including any landscaping. 
(5)  Existing utility easements and other rights-of-way of record, if any. 
(6)  Location of access roads. 
(7)  The names of abutting subdivisions or the names of owners of abutting, unplatted property within four hundred (400) feet of the site; and zoning and uses of adjacent parcels. 
(8)  Proof of ownership in a form acceptable to the Town. 
(b)  Vicinity maps. The vicinity maps submitted with an application under this Article shall include one (1) or more maps showing the location of existing and planned commercial mobile radio service facilities belonging to the applicant, within five (5) miles of the proposed facility. Planned facilities may be identified in general terms and need not be address-specific. 
(c)  Written narrative. The application shall include the following in narrative form: 
(1)  The applicant's and surface owner's names, addresses, signatures and designation of agent, if applicable. 
(2)  An explanation of the need for such a facility, operating plan and proposed coverage area. 
(3)  If a freestanding facility is proposed, an analysis of alternatives to a freestanding facility within a one-mile radius of the facility. 
(4)  A list of all permits or approvals obtained or anticipated to be obtained from local, state or federal agencies other than the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 
(5)  Affirmation that the proposed facility, alone or in combination with other like facilities, will comply with current FCC standards for cumulative field measurements of radio frequency power densities and electromagnetic fields. 
(6)  Affirmation that the facility will comply at all times with current FCC regulations prohibiting localized interference with reception of television and radio broadcasts. 
(7)  Affirmation that the facility will not interfere with any public safety frequencies servicing the Town and its residents. 
(8)  Affirmation that, if approved, the applicant and surface owner will make the facility available, on a reasonable basis, to other service providers. 
(9)  An explanation of compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-16-40. - Height and setback requirements. 
    In all performance districts where wireless telecommunications service facilities are allowed as uses by conditional review, the following apply: 
(1)  Roof- or building-mounted commercial mobile radio service facilities may protrude no more than five (5) feet above the parapet line of the building or structure, nor more than two-and-one-half (21/2) feet outside of the building wall unless sufficient screening methods are demonstrated and accepted as part of the approval; 
(2)  Roof- or building-mounted whip antennas of no more than three (3) inches in diameter, in groupings of five (5) or less, may extend up to twelve (12) feet above the parapet wall; and 
(3)  Applicable zoning setback requirements of this Article must be met. At a minimum, all freestanding facilities shall be set back at least three hundred (300) feet from all residentially zoned properties or residential structures on properties otherwise zoned. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-16-50. - Accessory buildings requirements. 
(a)  Accessory buildings located on the ground shall be no larger than four hundred (400) square feet and must be constructed of durable, low-maintenance materials, architecturally compatible and integrated with existing buildings and structures. Sites with greater than one hundred (100) cubic feet of cabinet area, visible from a public right-of-way or residentially zoned or used area, must enclose the equipment in accessory buildings. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and facilities are to be screened, to the extent possible, from public streets and sidewalks, either by screening, landscaping, location or other techniques deemed sufficient. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-16-60. - Building- or roof-mounted facilities requirements. 
    Building- or roof-mounted facilities are to be screened from public view, either by screening, location or other techniques deemed sufficient. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-16-70. - Freestanding wireless telecommunications facilities requirements. 
    All freestanding wireless telecommunications facilities shall be designed and constructed in such a manner that they are: 
(1)  Capable of serving, through original construction, expansion or replacement, a minimum of two (2) users. 
(2)  Constructed as a monopole, which tapers toward the top of the pole to the degree allowed by structural requirements, unless some other decorative type of structure is proposed and approved. 
(3)  Of a neutral color, including fencing, buildings and cabinets, or to match existing buildings. 
(4)  Hold only lighting required by the Federal Aviation Administration, and no signage. 
(5)  No higher than fifty (50) feet from the ground, with an additional twenty (20) feet per co-locating user permitted, up to seventy (70) feet. Exceptions may be granted upon request by the applicant. 
(6)  Constructed in accordance with a certified engineer's specifications and in compliance with all applicable Building Code provisions. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-16-80. - Conditional mitigation measures co-location. 
(a)  The Town encourages co-location of wireless telecommunications facilities to minimize the number of sites. 
(b)  No wireless telecommunications facility owner or operator shall unfairly exclude a competitor from using the same facility or location. Unfair exclusion of use by a competitor may result in the revocation of the use by conditional review or site development plan. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 16-16-90. - Abandonment. 
    At the request of the Town, the operator must furnish a statement to the Town indicating the operational status of the facility. If the use has been discontinued, the date on which the facility was last used shall also be provided. Commercial mobile radio service facilities not used for a continuous period of six (6) months shall be disassembled within twelve (12) months of the last use. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
CHAPTER 17 - Subdivisions 
ARTICLE 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 17-1-10. - General provisions. 
(a)  The provisions of this Article, the Subdivision Regulations, in conjunction with Chapter 16 of this Code, shall apply to any and all development of land within the municipal boundaries of the Town, unless expressly and specifically exempted or provided otherwise in these Regulations. No development shall be undertaken without prior and proper approval or authorization pursuant to the terms of these Regulations in conjunction with Chapter 16 of this Code. All development shall comply with the applicable terms, conditions, requirements, standards and procedures established in these Regulations in conjunction with Chapter 16 of this Code. 
(b)  Except as herein provided, no building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, moved or structurally altered except in conformance with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, nor shall a yard, lot or open space be reduced in dimensions or area to an amount less than the minimum requirements set forth herein. 
(c)  These Regulations, in conjunction with Chapter 16 of this Code, establish procedural and substantive rules for obtaining the necessary approval to develop land and construct buildings and structures. Development applications will be reviewed for compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and with adopted regulations, policies and other guidelines. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 17-1-20. - Intent. 
    This Article is designed and enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the Town by: 
(1)  Encouraging new subdivision developments to relate to the Town's historic development pattern. 
(2)  Promoting compact, well-defined neighborhoods that enhance the Town's character. 
(3)  Creating livable neighborhoods that foster a sense of community. 
(4)  Encouraging the proper arrangement of streets in relation to existing or planned streets and ensuring streets facilitate safe, efficient and pleasant driving, walking and biking. 
(5)  Providing a variety of lot sizes and housing types in every neighborhood. 
(6)  Protecting sensitive natural and historic areas and the Town's environmental quality. 
(7)  Providing for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of fire apparatus, recreation, light and air and for the avoidance of congestion of population. 
(8)  Providing open spaces for adequate stormwater management. 
(9)  Providing adequate spaces for educational facilities. 
(10)  Providing protection from geologic hazards and flood-prone areas. 
(11)  Ensuring compliance with Chapter 16 of this Code, the Comprehensive Plan and the Design and Development Standards. 
(12)  Regulating such other matters as the Board of Trustees may deem necessary in order to protect the best interest of the public. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 17-1-30. - Administration. 
    All plats, plots and replats of land laid out in subdivision or building lots, and the streets, highways, alleys or other portions of the same, intended to be dedicated to a public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and Board of Trustees for review and subsequent approval, conditional approval or disapproval. No plat shall be recorded in any public office unless the same shall bear thereon, by endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the Board of Trustees. Acceptance of proposed dedications to the public shall be given by separate action of the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 17-1-40. - Plat and other approval expiration. 
(a)  Unless the Town Board otherwise specifically grants extensions, or provides otherwise, any plat, including: 
(1)  Any Final Plat, 
(2)  Any plat, plot or replat approved by the Town Board under any prior land use provisions of the Town Code or any prior version of the Town Code, 
(3)  Any minor subdivision plat, or 
(4)  Any annexation or annexation map which has not, within the later of: 
a.  January 1, 2010, or 
b.  One year from the date of final approval by the Town Board, 
Been properly submitted for recordation, including being executed by all owners and proprietors as defined by CRS § 31-23-111, with payment of all fees and all other submissions or requirements as set forth in the Town Code or the approving ordinance, shall be deemed expired and any Town Board approvals shall be deemed lapsed and resubmission and reconsideration of the development or plat application by the Town Board shall be required. 
(b)  No conditional approval of a plat as described in this section shall toll the required one year submission period; rather, unless the Town Board otherwise specifically provides, any condition must be satisfied within the one year submission period. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008 , 10-28-08) 
ARTICLE 2 - Types of Subdivisions 

Sec. 17-2-10. - Major subdivisions. 
(a)  Definition. A major subdivision is required when any one (1) or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The entire tract to be subdivided is greater than five (5) acres; or 
(2)  The resultant subdivision will produce more than four (4) additional lots or parcels. 
(b)  Major subdivision process. The major subdivision process is as follows: 
(1)  Preliminary plat. 
a.  Preapplication conference. 
b.  Application submittal. 
c.  Staff certifies application is complete. 
d.  Staff refers application to parties of interest. 
e.  Staff reviews application and prepares comments. 
f.  Applicant addresses staff comments. 
g.  Final staff review and report to Planning Commission. 
h.  Town schedules public hearing and completes public notification process. 
i.  Planning Commission public hearing and recommendation. 
j.  Applicant addresses to conditions of approval. 
k.  Board of Trustees action. 
(2)  Final plat. 
a.  Application submittal. 
b.  Staff certifies application is complete. 
c.  Staff refers application to parties of interest. 
d.  Staff reviews application and prepares comments. 
e.  Applicant addresses staff comments. 
f.  Final staff review and report to Planning Commission. 
g.  Town schedules public hearing and completes public notification process. 
h.  Planning Commission public hearing and recommendation. 
i.  Applicant addresses Planning Commission conditions. 
j.  Staff notifies parties of interest. 
k.  Town schedules public hearing and completes public notification process. 
l.  Board of Trustees public hearing and action. 
m.  Record final plat. 
n.  Post-approval actions. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 17-2-20. - Minor subdivisions. 
(a)  Definition. A minor subdivision is permitted under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The property has previously been platted within the Town; 
(2)  The entire tract to be subdivided is five (5) acres or less in size; 
(3)  The resulting subdivision will produce four (4) or fewer additional lots or parcels. 
(4)  There will be no exceptions to the Subdivision Design Standards. 
(b)  Process. The minor subdivision process is as follows: 
(1)  Preapplication conference. 
(2)  Application submittal. 
(3)  Staff certifies application is complete. 
(4)  Staff refers application to parties of interest. 
(5)  Staff reviews application and prepares comments. 
(6)  Applicant responds to staff comments. 
(7)  Town schedules public hearing and completes public notification process. 
(8)  Planning Commission public hearing and recommendation. 
(9)  Applicant responds to Planning Commission conditions of approval. 
(10)  Board of Trustees action. 
(11)  Record minor subdivision plat. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 3 - Major Subdivisions 

Sec. 17-3-10. - Preliminary plat purpose. 
    The purpose of the preliminary plat is to provide the Town with an overall master plan for the proposed development. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 17-3-20. - Preliminary plat application process. 
    All major subdivisions shall be required to submit to and complete the following process: 
(1)  Step 1: Preapplication conference. A preapplication conference with a representative from the Town is required before the applicant may submit a preliminary plat application. The applicant shall submit a sketch plan and written description of the project. Topics to be discussed will include: 
a.  Town regulations and standards; 
b.  The application and review process; 
c.  Submittal requirements; and 
d.  Schedule. 
(2)  Step 2: Preliminary plat application submittal. The applicant shall submit one (1) copy of the complete preliminary plat application to the Town Administrator/Clerk. The application must be submitted a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the application will be reviewed. The preliminary plat application package shall include the following items: 
a.  Land use application form. 
b.  Application fee and fee agreement. A nonrefundable fee is collected to cover the cost of review by Town staff and notice and publication expenses. In addition, the applicant is liable for review costs by the Town Attorney, Town Engineer and any other expert whom the Town may wish to employ. A signed Form D-5, Agreement for Payment of Review Expenses, shall accompany the application. 
c.  Title commitment. The title commitment must be current and dated no more than thirty (30) days from the date of preliminary plat application submittal. 
d.  Surrounding and interested property ownership report. Provide the Town Administrator/Clerk with a current list (not more than thirty [30] days old) of the names and addresses of the surrounding property owners (within three hundred [300] feet of the property), mineral interest owners of record, mineral and oil and gas lessees for the property and appropriate ditch companies. The applicant shall certify that the report is complete and accurate. 
e.  Preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall be twenty-four (24) inches high by thirty-six (36) inches wide and provide the following information: 
1.  Title of project. 
2.  North arrow, scale (not greater than 1" = 100') and date of preparation. 
3.  Vicinity map. 
4.  Names and addresses of owners, applicant, designers, engineers and surveyors. 
5.  Legal description. 
6.  Total acreage of property. 
7.  Existing contours at two-foot intervals (contours shall be based on USGS datum). 
8.  Name and location of abutting subdivisions or owners of abutting property (if land is not platted). 
9.  Lots, blocks and street layout with approximate dimensions and square footage for each lot. 
10.  Consecutive numbering of all lots and blocks. 
11.  Existing and proposed rights-of-way and easements on and adjacent to the property. 
12.  Existing and proposed street names for all streets on and adjacent to the property. 
13.  Existing and proposed zoning on and adjacent to the property. 
14.  Location and size of existing and proposed sewer lines, water lines and fire hydrants. (Note: The applicant must consult with the appropriate utility service providers regarding the design of all utilities through the subdivision.) 
15.  Existing and proposed curb cuts on and adjacent to subject property. 
16.  Location by field survey or aerial photography of existing and proposed watercourses and bodies of water such as irrigation ditches and lakes. Watercourses shall include direction of flow. 
17.  Floodplain boundary with a note regarding source of information (if a floodplain does not exist on the property, please state this on the plan). 
18.  General location of existing surface improvements such as buildings, fences or other structures which will remain on the property as part of the subdivision. 
19.  Location and acreage of sites, if any, to be dedicated for parks, playgrounds, schools or other public uses. 
20.  Location, function, ownership and manner of maintenance of any private open space. 
21.  Land use table. The table shall include: land uses, approximate acreage of each land use and percentage of each land use (including how twelve percent [12%] public/semipublic requirement will be met). 
22.  Total number of lots. 
23.  Number of each type of dwelling unit proposed. 
f.  General development information. Provide a written description of the existing conditions on the site and the proposed development, including an explanation of how the plan is consistent with the Land Use Code and Comprehensive Plan. 
g.  Preliminary grading and drainage plan and report. This plan and report must be certified by a Colorado-registered professional engineer, including storm drainage concepts such as locations for on-site detention or downstream structural improvements and soil erosion and sedimentation control plans and specifications. It must also discuss the impacts on and to any existing floodways and/or floodplains on and adjacent to the site as well as any FEMA applications required. 
h.  Preliminary utility plan. This plan shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer. It is necessary that the engineer consult with the appropriate utility service providers regarding the design of all utilities through the subdivision. Town utilities shall be designed in conformance with the Town's Standard Design Criteria and Standard Construction Requirements. 
i.  Preliminary landscape and open space plan. 
j.  Traffic study. This study must be prepared by a professional traffic engineer in conformance with the Division 1 Section 01300 Standard Design Criteria and Standard Construction Requirements. 
k.  Draft of proposed covenants and architectural design guidelines. 
l.  Mineral, oil and gas rights documentation. Evidence that the surface owner has contacted all lessees of mineral, oil and gas rights associated with the site and is working towards resolution. Included in the evidence must be the name of the current contact person, their phone number and mailing address. 
m.  Soils report. 
n.  Public hearing notification envelopes. Provide the Town Administrator/Clerk with one (1) set of stamped, addressed, certified (return receipt requested) envelopes. The envelopes shall have the Town's address as the mailing address and return address and the envelopes shall be addressed to the surrounding property owners (within three hundred [300] feet of the property), mineral interest owners of record, mineral and oil and gas lessees for the property and the appropriate referral agencies (as discussed in the preapplication conference). 
(3)  Step 3: Application certification of completion. Within a reasonable period of time, Town staff shall either certify the application is complete and in compliance with all submittal requirements or reject it as incomplete and notify the applicant of any deficiencies. The applicant shall then correct any deficiencies in the application package, if necessary, and submit the required number of copies of the application to the Town Administrator/Clerk. The original application and all documents requiring a signature shall be signed in blue ink. 
(4)  Step 4: Refer application to parties of interest. Not less than thirty (30) days before the date scheduled for the initial public hearing, Town staff shall send information about the application by first class mail to: surrounding property owners within three hundred (300) feet, mineral interest owners of record, mineral and oil and gas lessees for the property and other parties of interest. The referral information shall include the time and place of the public hearing, the nature of the hearing, the location of the subject property and the applicant's name. 
(5)  Step 5: Staff reviews application and prepares comments. Staff will complete a review of the preliminary plat based on the preliminary plat review criteria and referral comments received. Staff will then prepare a report identifying issues of concern for the applicant to address and forward this report to the applicant. 
(6)  Step 6: Applicant addresses staff comments. The applicant shall submit the following to the Town Administrator/Clerk: 
a.  Letter explaining how all of the comments have been addressed; and 
b.  Revised maps and other documents. 
(7)  Step 7: Final staff review and report to Planning Commission. Staff will complete a final review of the resubmitted materials and then prepare a report to the Planning Commission explaining how the application is or is not consistent with the preliminary plat review criteria. 
(8)  Step 8: Schedule preliminary plat public hearing and complete public notification process. The Town Clerk shall schedule a public hearing for the purpose of taking action on the preliminary plat. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall publish notice in a newspaper of general circulation. The hearing may be held no less than thirty (30) days from the date of advertising. 
(9)  Step 9: Planning Commission public hearing and recommendation. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing to review the application based on the preliminary plat review criteria. The Planning Commission shall then make a recommendation to the Board of Trustees to approve, conditionally approve or deny the application. 
(10)  Step 10: Applicant addresses Planning Commission conditions. The applicant shall revise the preliminary plat based on the Planning Commission's conditions of approval and submit it to the Town Clerk. 
(11)  Step 11: Board of Trustees action. The preliminary plat shall be presented to the Board of Trustees for its review and action. The Board of Trustees may approve, conditionally approve or deny the preliminary plat based on the preliminary plat review criteria. Approval and conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for one (1) year unless otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees. If the plat is denied, the request or one that is substantially similar may not be heard by the Planning Commission for a period of one (1) year from the date of denial unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission. If a final plat is not submitted within said time limit or an extension has not been granted, a preliminary plat must again be submitted before action may be taken on a final plat. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 17-3-30. - Preliminary plat review criteria. 
    The Town shall use the following criteria to evaluate the applicant's request for a major subdivision: 
(1)  The preliminary plat represents a functional system of land use and is consistent with the rationale and criteria set forth in this Code and the Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  The land use mix within the project conforms to the Town's Zoning District Map and furthers the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan including: 
a.  The proposed development promotes the Town's small town, rural character; 
b.  Proposed residential development adds diversity to the Town's housing supply; 
c.  Proposed commercial development will benefit the Town's economic base; 
d.  Parks and open space are incorporated into the site design; 
e.  The proposed project protects the Town's environmental quality; and 
f.  The development enhances cultural, historical, educational and/or human service opportunities. 
(3)  The utility and transportation design is adequate, given existing and planned capacities of those systems. 
(4)  Negative impacts on adjacent land uses have been identified and satisfactorily mitigated. 
(5)  There is a need or desirability within the community for the applicant's development and the development will help achieve a balance of land use and/or housing types within the Town, according to the Town's goals. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 17-3-40. - Final plat purpose. 
    The purpose of the final plat is to complete the subdivision of land consistent with the technical standards. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 17-3-50. - Final plat application process. 
(a)  Step 1: Final plat application submittal. The final plat application shall conform with the preliminary plat as approved at the public hearing and shall address all conditions of approval required by the Board of Trustees. The final plat application for the first phase of development must be submitted not more than twelve (12) months after approval of the preliminary plat unless otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees. In addition, the application must be submitted a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the Board of Trustees meeting at which the application will be reviewed. The applicant shall submit one (1) copy of the complete final plat application package to the Town Administrator/Clerk and shall request that the application be reviewed by the Planning Commission and Board of Trustees. The final plat application shall include: 
(1)  Land use application form. 
(2)  Application fee and fee agreement. A nonrefundable fee is collected to cover the cost of review by the Town staff and notice and publication expenses. In addition, the applicant is liable for review costs by the Town Attorney, Town Engineer and any other expert whom the Town may wish to employ. A signed Form D-5, Agreement for Payment of Review Expenses, shall accompany the application. 
(3)  Title commitment. The title commitment must be current and dated no more than thirty (30) days from the date of final plat application submittal. 
(4)  Surrounding and interested property ownership report. Provide the Town Administrator/Clerk with a current list (not more than thirty [30] days old) of the names and addresses of the surrounding property owners (within three hundred [300] feet of the property), mineral interest owners of record, mineral and oil and gas lessees for the property and appropriate ditch companies. The applicant shall certify that the report is complete and accurate. 
(5)  Final plat. The final plat drawing shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  The plat shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor and meet applicable State of Colorado requirements. 
b.  Parcels not contiguous shall not be included in one (1) plat, nor shall more than one (1) plat be made on the same sheet. Contiguous parcels owned by different parties may be included on one (1) plat, provided that all owners join in the dedication and acknowledgment. 
c.  Lengths shall be shown to the nearest hundredth of a foot and bearings shall be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds. 
d.  The perimeter survey description of the proposed subdivision shall include at least one (1) tie to an existing section monument of record and a description of monuments. The survey shown shall not have an error greater than one (1) part in ten thousand (10,000). 
e.  Bearings, distances and curve data of all perimeter boundary lines shall be indicated outside the boundary line, not inside, with the lot dimensions. 
f.  All signatures shall be made in black drawing ink. 
g.  The final plat shall be twenty-four (24) inches high by thirty-six (36) inches wide and shall provide the following information: 
1.  Title of project. 
2.  North arrow, scale (not greater than 1"=100') and date of preparation. 
3.  Vicinity map. 
4.  Legal description. 
5.  Basis for establishing bearing. 
6.  Names and addresses of owners, applicant, designers, engineers and surveyors. 
7.  Total acreage of subdivision. 
8.  Bearings, distances, chords, radii, central angles and tangent links for the perimeter and all lots, blocks, rights-of-way and easements. 
9.  Lot and block numbers, numbered in consecutive order, and square footage of each lot or tract. 
10.  Existing and proposed rights-of-way in and adjacent to subject property (labeled and dimensioned). 
11.  Existing and proposed street names for all streets on and adjacent to the property. 
12.  Existing and proposed easements and their type in and adjacent to subject property (labeled and dimensioned). 
13.  Location and description of monuments. 
14.  Floodplain boundary with a note regarding source of information (if a floodplain does not exist on the property, please state this on the plat). 
15.  Signature block for registered land surveyor certifying to accuracy of boundary survey and plat. 
16.  Signature block for certification of approval by the Board of Trustees with a signature for the Mayor and Town Administrator/Clerk. 
17.  Signature blocks for utility providers. 
18.  Certification of ownership and dedication of streets, rights-of-way, easements and public sites. 
h.  As required by the Town Attorney or Town Administrator/Clerk, the following certification language, completed with signature lines, including any amendments required by the Town, shall be included on any final plat or land use approval by the Town: 
1.  DEDICATION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY. 
The owner of the real property described in this Plat has caused the real property to be surveyed, laid out and subdivided under the name of _______________________. and does hereby sell, grant, dedicate, and convey to the Town of Wellington in fee simple, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, and set apart all of the streets, roads, alleys, easements, and other public ways and places, and Tracts _____, ____, and _____ as shown on the accompanying plat to the use of the public forever. The owner shall be responsible for construction and maintenance of all improvements of said streets, alleys, easements, public ways and places, until acceptance of maintenance therefor by the Town as provided in the Wellington Municipal Code. 
2.  CERTIFICATE OF TITLE. 
I, _____________________, an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Colorado, certify to the Town of Wellington, Colorado, that I have examined the title to the property being subdivided and being dedicated to the Town of Wellington, Colorado, and that all owners and proprietors as defined by CRS § 31-23-111 have signed this plat. 
The language of this certification may be altered, including allowing certification by a title insurer licensed to do business in the State of Colorado, with approval of the Town Attorney. 
3.  CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP. 
I/We certify that _______________________ ________________ is/are the owners of the property, _________________ are all of the mortgagees and holders of liens upon the property, and each and all hereby consent to this plat and join in the conveyance and dedication of all streets, roads, alleys, easements, public ways, and places shown hereon. 
4.  SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE. 
I, _________________________, PLS #_____________, a duly registered land surveyor in the State of Colorado, do hereby certify that this Plat of _____________ was performed by me or under my direct supervision, and that this plat has been prepared in compliance with all applicable laws of the State of Colorado at the time of this survey and within my control and is accurate to the best of my knowledge, information and belief. 
5.  PLANNING COMMISSION CERTIFICATE. 
Approved this ________ day of ______________, 200_, by the Town Planning and Zoning Commission, Wellington, Colorado. 
6.  BOARD OF TRUSTEES CERTIFICATE. 
Approved this ______________ day of _____________ _________, 200_, by the Board of Trustees, Wellington, Colorado. This approval is conditioned upon all expenses involving necessary improvements for all utility services, paving, grading, landscaping, curbs, gutters, street lights, street signs and sidewalks shall be financed by others and not the Town. 
(All signers, except the Town, Planning Commission and Surveyor must have signatures notarized) 
(6)  General development information. Provide a written description confirming that the final plat conforms with the preliminary plat. In addition, the description shall address how the proposed development conforms with the Design and Development Standards. 
(7)  Complete engineering plans and specifications. 
a.  Construction plans and profiles. The plans and profiles shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State, shall be twenty-four (24) inches high by thirty-six (36) inches wide and provide the following information: 
1.  The horizontal to vertical scales shall be chosen to best depict the aspects of the design. 
2.  Minimum horizontal scale: 1"=100'. 
3.  Minimum vertical scale: 1"=10'. 
4.  The typical road geometric and structural cross-section is to be shown on each plan sheet. 
5.  The plan must show right-of-way lines and widths, road names, lot lines, tangent lengths and bearings, curve radii, delta angles, curve lengths, chord lengths and bearings, stationing at all beginning of curves and end of curves, intersections, structures, angles, curb lines, cross pans, traffic control devices (islands, striping, signs, etc.), drive cuts, curb returns and radii, and all other features to enable construction in accordance with approved standards and standard engineering practice. Construction plans shall also include water, sewer, sanitary sewer and any other utilities such as irrigation ditches. (Note: The developer/owner is responsible for coordinating with the appropriate dry utility companies (i.e., gas, electric, telephone, cable). 
6.  The profiles shall include ground lines, grade lines of curb and gutter or centerline of street elevation at point of intersection of vertical curves, intersections and other critical points, structures and all other features required to enable construction in accordance with approved standards. 
7.  Signature blocks for all utility providers unless otherwise provided in agreement form. 
b.  Structure details. Sufficient data shall be given to construction of major structures and road appurtenances such as bridges, culverts, gutters, drives, walks, cross pans, etc.; detail shall include orientation line and grade, cross-sections, dimensions, reinforcement schedules, materials, quality specification, etc. 
c.  Sewage collection and water supply distribution plans, profiles and specifications. The plans, profiles and specifications shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall conform to the Standard Design Criteria and Standard Construction Requirements. 
d.  Final drainage plans and reports. Based upon the approved preliminary drainage plan, a final report is to be submitted in accordance with applicable storm drainage design criteria as determined at the initial preapplication conference. The plan and report must provide: 
1.  Cross-sections of each water carrier showing high water elevations for one-hundred-year runoff and adjacent features that may be affected thereby. 
2.  Written approvals, as may be required, from other agencies or parties that may be affected by the drainage proposals (i.e., FEMA, Larimer County, ditch companies). 
3.  Supporting calculations for runoffs, times of concentration and flow capacity, with all assumptions clearly stated with proper jurisdiction when needed or requested. 
4.  Erosion control plans, when required, to be submitted as a result of preliminary plan review. 
e.  Final grading plan. The final grading plan shall be twenty-four (24) inches high by thirty-six (36) inches wide and illustrate existing and proposed contours and lot and block grading details (per FHA requirements if FHA insured). 
f.  Soils reports. The soils reports shall detail special foundation requirements (shall be submitted after overlot grading is complete) and pavement design (may be submitted prior to building permit). 
g.  Final street lighting plan. A final street lighting plan shall be prepared in conjunction with the electric utility. The plan must specify the number, kind and approximate location of street lights. 
h.  Final landscape plan. 
(8)  Special documents (as needed). 
a.  Special improvement district documents. 
b.  Maintenance bonds. 
c.  Special agreements (as may be required by the Town). 
d.  Work in Right-of-Way permit (from the Town). 
e.  Floodplain Use permit (from the Town). 
f.  Grading permit (from the Town). 
g.  State Highway Utility permit (from Colorado Department of Transportation). 
h.  State Highway Access permit (from Colorado Department of Transportation). 
i.  Construction Dewatering permit (from Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment). 
j.  404 permit (from Army Corps of Engineers). 
k.  Air Pollution Emission Notice (APEN) (from Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment). 
l.  Work in Ditch Right-of-Way permit (from individual ditch companies). 
m.  Rare Species Occurrence Survey (from U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service). 
n.  Memorandum of Public Improvements (MOAPI). This agreement assures construction of the required improvements. This document shall be signed by the developer and the Town, the signatures shall be notarized and the document shall be recorded by the Town Administrator/Clerk with the County Clerk and Recorder. 
o.  General warranty deed. This deed conveys to the Town all public lands other than streets shown on the plat or, in lieu of a deed, a check in an amount to be determined by the Town. 
p.  Improvements guarantee. Letter of credit from a bank in Colorado or other acceptable collateral in the amount stipulated to in the MOAPI or other agreements or contracts, posted in favor of the Town in an amount sufficient to assure construction of public improvements. 
q.  Approved adjudication of water rights and a plan of augmentation (if applicable). 
r.  Protective covenants, homeowners' association (HOA) documents, articles of incorporation for HOA, and Architectural Design Guidelines finalized and in a form for recording. If there are open space areas to remain in private ownership within the subdivision, the HOA documents must have in place a mechanism which will assure maintenance will be funded in perpetuity. 
s.  FEMA-approved applications (i.e., Conditional Letter of Map Revisions [CLOMR] or Letter of Map Revisions [LOMR]). 
t.  Documentation showing who will own and maintain the open space. 
u.  Documentation for dedication of public sites for open space or other civic purposes. 
(9)  "Clean" final plat for addressing. 
a.  Title of project. 
b.  North arrow, scale (not greater than 1 "=100') and date of preparation. 
c.  Vicinity map. 
d.  Lot and block numbers, numbered in consecutive order. 
e.  Rights-of-way and street names. 
f.  Property boundary. 
(10)  Public hearing notification envelopes. Provide the Town Administrator/Clerk with two (2) sets of stamped, addressed, certified (return receipt requested) envelopes. The envelopes shall have the Town's address as the mailing address and return address and the envelopes shall be addressed to the surrounding property owners (within three hundred [300] feet of the property), mineral interest owners of record, mineral and oil and gas lessees for the property and the appropriate referral agencies (as discussed in the preapplication conference). 
(b)  Step 2: Application certification of completion. Within a reasonable period of time, Town staff shall either certify the application is complete and in compliance with all submittal requirements or reject it as incomplete and notify the applicant of any deficiencies. The applicant shall then correct any deficiencies in the application package, if necessary, and submit the required number of copies of the application to the Town Administrator/Clerk. The original application and all documents requiring a signature shall be signed in blue ink. 
(c)  Step 3: Refer application to parties of interest. Not less than thirty (30) days before the date scheduled for the initial Planning Commission public hearing, Town staff shall send information about the application by first class mail to: surrounding property owners within three hundred (300) feet, mineral interest owners of record, mineral and oil and gas lessees for the property and other parties of interest. The referral information shall include the time and place of the public hearing, the nature of the hearing, the location of the subject property and the applicant's name. 
(d)  Step 4: Staff reviews application and prepares comments. Staff will complete a technical review of the final plat based on the Town's final plat review criteria and referral comments received. Staff will then prepare a report identifying any issues of concern that the applicant will need to address and forward this report to the applicant. 
(e)  Step 5: Applicant addresses staff comments. The applicant shall address all of the staff comments then submit the following to the Town Administrator/Clerk: 
(1)  Letter explaining how all of the comments have been addressed; and 
(2)  Revised maps and other documents. 
(f)  Step 6: Final staff review and report to the Planning Commission. Staff will complete a final review of the resubmitted materials and then prepare a report to the Planning Commission explaining how the application is or is not consistent with the final plat review criteria. 
(g)  Step 7: Schedule final plat public hearing and complete public notification process. The Town Clerk shall schedule a public hearing for the purpose of taking action on the final plat. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall publish notice in a newspaper of general circulation. The hearing may be held no less than thirty (30) days from the date of advertising. 
(h)  Step 8: Planning Commission public hearing and recommendation. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing to review the final plat based on the Town's final plat review criteria. They shall then make a recommendation to the Board of Trustees to approve, conditionally approve or deny the final plat application. 
(i)  Step 9: Applicant addresses Planning Commission conditions. The applicant shall revise the final plat based on the Planning Commission's conditions of approval and submit it to the Town. 
(j)  Step 10: Notify parties of interest. Not less than thirty (30) days before the date scheduled for the initial Board of Trustees public hearing, Town staff shall notify: surrounding property owners within three hundred (300) feet, mineral interest owners of record, mineral and oil and gas lessees for the property and other parties of interest. The referral information shall include the time and place of the public hearing, the nature of the hearing, the location of the subject property and the applicant's name. 
(k)  Step 11: Schedule final plat public hearing and complete public notification process. The Board of Trustees shall schedule a public hearing for the purpose of taking action on the final plat. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall publish notice in a newspaper of general circulation. The hearing may be held no less than thirty (30) days from the date of advertising. 
(l)  Step 12: Board of Trustees public hearing and action. The finalized final plat shall be presented to the Board of Trustees for its review and action at a public hearing. The Board of Trustees shall review the final plat based on the final plat review criteria. If approved, the Board of Trustees shall adopt the plat by ordinance and the Town Administrator/Clerk shall request two (2) original Mylars of the final plat ready for the Mayor and Town Clerk to sign and then record. The Town will provide the finalized Memorandum of Agreement for Public Improvements (MOAPI) for the applicant to sign. 
(m)  Step 13: Record final plat. Original Mylars (as required by Larimer County) of the final plat shall be recorded by the Town Administrator/Clerk in the office of the Larimer County Clerk and Recorder. The recording fee shall be paid by the developer. 
(n)  Step 14: Post-approval actions. The applicant shall submit the following documentation to the Town Administrator/ Clerk: 
(1)  List of contractors. List of all contractors that will be performing the improvements. 
(2)  Proof of insurance. Proof of workers' comprehensive insurance and liability insurance for each contractor. 
(3)  Open space deed restriction. Areas designated as open space shall be protected by a deed restriction or other appropriate method to ensure that they cannot be subdivided or developed in the future and will remain as open space in perpetuity. 
(4)  Other certificates, affidavits, enforcements or deductions. As required by the Planning Commission or Board of Trustees. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 17-3-60. - Final plat review criteria. 
    The Town shall use the following criteria to evaluate the applicant's request for approval of a final major subdivision plat: 
(1)  The final plat conforms with the approved preliminary plat and incorporates recommended changes, modifications and conditions attached to the approval of the preliminary plat unless otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees. 
(2)  The development will substantially comply with the Design and Development Standards as set forth in Chapter 16, Article 3 of this Code. 
(3)  All applicable technical standards have been met. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 4 - Minor Subdivision Plat 

Sec. 17-4-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the minor subdivision plat is to complete the subdivision of land consistent with the technical standards when the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The property has previously been platted within the Town; 
(2)  The entire tract to be subdivided is five (5) acres or less in size; 
(3)  The resulting subdivision will produce four (4) or fewer additional lots; and 
(4)  There will be no exceptions to the Subdivision Design Standards. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 17-4-20. - Application process. 
    All minor subdivisions shall be required to submit to and complete the following process: 
(1)  Step 1: Preapplication conference. A preapplication conference with a representative from the Town is required before the applicant may submit a minor subdivision plat application. The applicant shall submit a sketch plan on an eleven-by-seventeen-inch sheet indicating the size of the property, number and dimensions of lots and extension of utilities. Topics to be discussed will include: 
a.  Town regulations and standards. 
b.  The application and review process. 
c.  Submittal requirements. 
d.  Schedule. 
(2)  Step 2: Minor subdivision plat application submittal. The applicant shall submit one (1) copy of the complete minor subdivision plat application package to the Town Administrator/Clerk and shall request that the application be reviewed by the Planning Commission and Board of Trustees. The minor subdivision plat application shall include: 
a.  Land use application form. 
b.  Application fee and fee agreement. A nonrefundable fee is collected to cover the cost of review by Town staff and notice and publication expenses. In addition, the applicant is liable for review costs by the Town Attorney, Town Engineer and any other expert whom the Town may wish to employ. A signed Form D-5, Agreement for Payment of Review Expenses, shall accompany the application. 
c.  Title commitment. The title commitment must be current and dated no more than thirty (30) days from the date of minor subdivision plat application submittal. 
d.  Minor subdivision plat. The minor subdivision plat drawing shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The plat shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor and meet applicable state requirements. 
2.  Parcels not contiguous shall not be included in one (1) plat, nor shall more than one (1) plat be made on the same sheet. Contiguous parcels owned by different parties may be included on one (1) plat, provided that all owners join in the dedication and acknowledgment. 
3.  Lengths shall be shown to the nearest hundredth of a foot and bearings shall be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds. 
4.  The perimeter survey description of the proposed subdivision shall include at least one (1) tie to an existing section monument of record and a description of monuments. The survey shown shall not have an error greater than one (1) part in ten thousand (10,000). 
5.  Bearings, distances and curve data of all perimeter boundary lines shall be indicated outside the boundary line, not inside, with the lot dimensions. 
6.  All signatures shall be made in black drawing ink. 
7.  The minor subdivision plat shall be twenty-four (24) inches high by thirty-six (36) inches wide and in digital form as an AutoCad.dwg file, and shall provide the following information: 
a)  Title of project. 
b)  North arrow, scale (not greater than 1"=100') and date of preparation. 
c)  Vicinity map. 
d)  Legal description. 
e)  Basis for establishing bearing. 
f)  Names and addresses of owners, applicant, designers, engineers and surveyors. 
g)  Total acreage of subdivision. 
h)  Bearings, distances, chords, radii, central angles and tangent links for the perimeter and all lots, blocks, rights-of-way and easements. 
i)  Lot and block numbers, numbered in consecutive order, and square footage of each lot or tract. 
j)  Excepted parcels from inclusion noted as "not included in this subdivision" and the boundary completely indicated by bearings and distances. 
k)  Existing rights-of-way in and adjacent to subject property (labeled and dimensioned). 
l)  Existing and proposed street names for all streets on and adjacent to the property. 
m)  Existing easements and their type in and adjacent to subject property (labeled and dimensioned). 
n)  Location and description of monuments. 
o)  Floodplain boundary with a note regarding source of information (if a floodplain does not exist on the property, please state this on the plat). 
p)  Certificate blocks for signatures of owner, surveyor, utility providers and Town approval, as applicable. 
8.  Certifications in the form required for a major subdivision plat. 
e.  General development information. Provide a written description addressing how the proposed development conforms with the Design and Development Standards, Chapters 16 and 17 of this Code and the Comprehensive Plan. 
f.  Surrounding and interested property ownership report. Provide the Town Administrator/Clerk with a current list (not more than thirty [30] days old) of the names and addresses of the surrounding property owners (within three hundred [300] feet of the property), mineral interest owners of record, mineral and oil and gas lessees for the property and appropriate ditch companies. The applicant shall certify that the report is complete and accurate. 
(3)  Step 3: Application certification of completion. Within a reasonable period of time, Town staff shall either certify the application is complete and in compliance with all submittal requirements or reject it as incomplete and notify the applicant of any deficiencies. The applicant shall then correct any deficiencies in the application package, if necessary, and submit the required number of copies of the application (as specified in the Minor Subdivision Plat Technical Criteria form) to the Town Administrator/Clerk. The original application and all documents requiring a signature shall be signed in blue ink. 
(4)  Step 4: Refer application to parties of interest. Not less than thirty (30) days before the date scheduled for public hearing or staff decision, the staff shall send information about the application by first class mail to: surrounding property owners within three hundred (300) feet, mineral interest owners of record, mineral and oil and gas lessees for the property and other parties of interest. The referral information shall include the time and place of the public hearing, the nature of the hearing, the location of the subject property and the applicant's name. 
(5)  Step 5: Letters of support and commitment to serve. Within thirty (30) days from the date the application is deemed complete, the applicant shall provide the Town with letters of support and commitment to serve from all agencies identified at the preapplication conference. 
(6)  Step 6: Staff reviews application and prepares comments. Staff will complete a review of the minor subdivision plat based on the Town's minor subdivision plat review criteria. Staff will then prepare a report identifying any issues of concern that the applicant shall address and forward it to the applicant. 
(7)  Step 7: Applicant addresses staff comments. 
a.  The applicant shall address the staffs comments then submit the following to the Town Administrator/Clerk: 
1.  Letter explaining how all of the comments have been addressed; and 
2.  Revised maps and other documents. 
(8)  Step 8: Schedule minor subdivision public hearing and complete public notification process. The Planning Commission shall schedule a public hearing for the purpose of taking action on the minor subdivision. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall publish notice in a newspaper of general circulation. The hearing may be held no less than thirty (30) days from the date of advertising. 
(9)  Step 9: Planning Commission public hearing and recommendation. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing to review the application based on the minor subdivision review criteria. The Planning Commission shall then make a recommendation to the Board of Trustees to approve, conditionally approve or deny the application. 
(10)  Step 10: Applicant addresses Planning Commission conditions. The applicant shall revise the minor subdivision plat based on the Planning Commission's conditions of approval and submit it to the Town. 
(11)  Step 11: Board of Trustees action. The minor subdivision plat shall be presented to the Board of Trustees for its review and action. The Board of Trustees may approve, conditionally approve or deny the minor subdivision based on the minor subdivision review criteria. If approved, the Board of Trustees shall adopt the minor subdivision plat by ordinance and the Town Administrator/Clerk shall request two (2) original Mylars of the plat ready for the Mayor and Town Clerk to sign and then record. All final decisions of the Board of Trustees approving, approving subject to conditions or denying an application shall be subject to review by the District Court in Larimer County. Any applicant or other interested party may appeal such decisions in the manner provided by rules relating to civil proceedings before the District Court. 
(12)  Step 12: Record minor subdivision plat. One (1) original Mylar of the minor subdivision plat shall be recorded by the Town Administrator/Clerk in the office of the Larimer County Clerk and Recorder. The recording fee shall be paid by the developer. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 17-4-30. - Review criteria. 
    The Town shall use the following criteria to evaluate an applicant's request for a minor subdivision: the minor subdivision plat is in compliance with the Land Use Code and the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 5 - Site Plan 

Sec. 17-5-10. - Purpose. 
    The site plan shall he submitted in order to apply for a building permit for all permitted principle uses of multi-family, commercial and industrial developments. The site plan shows how the lot will be developed so that the Town can make sure that the site design will be in compliance with all Town regulations. A site plan shall also he submitted in order to apply for a building permit for any exterior modifications to an existing building within the C-2, Downtown Commercial District to show compliance with the Cleveland Avenue Architectural Standards. When a development requires approval as a conditional use, the site plan approval process shall be processed concurrently with the conditional use application. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 2-2013 , § 2, 3-26-13) 
Sec. 17-5-20. - Process. 
(a)  Step 1: Submit site plan application. 
(1)  Land use application form. 
(2)  Traffic study or waiver request. In accordance with the Standard Design Criteria and Standard Construction Requirements. 
(3)  Application fee and fee agreement. 
(4)  Site plan map. The site plan map shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches and shall provide the following information: 
a.  Title of project. 
b.  North arrow, scale (no greater than 1"=50') and date of preparation. 
c.  Vicinity map. 
d.  Address of project. 
e.  Legal description of property. 
f.  Name, address and phone number of property owner. 
g.  Name, address and phone number of person or firm responsible for plan. 
h.  Lot size (square footage). 
i.  Bearings and distances of all lot lines. 
j.  Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way. 
k.  Existing and proposed paved areas and sidewalks on the site and in the adjacent rights-of-way, all dimensioned, showing how pedestrians will have access to the site and buildings. 
l.  Gathering areas for people. 
m.  Existing and proposed curb cuts on the site and in the adjacent rights-of-way (on both sides of perimeter streets), all dimensioned. 
n.  Existing and proposed two-foot contours. 
o.  Existing waterways on or adjacent to the site. 
p.  Finished floor elevations for all structures. 
q.  Footprint (including roof overhangs and eaves, decks, balconies, outside stairs and landings) of all proposed structures and their use with their dimensions and locations noted with respect to the property lines. 
r.  Existing structures and their use. 
s.  Square footage of the proposed buildings and the footprint of the proposed buildings. 
t.  Proposed structure height. 
u.  For commercial and industrial uses, the type of activity and number of employees. 
v.  For multi-family residential, the number of residential units and bedrooms per unit. 
w.  Location of proposed signs and lights. 
x.  Specifications for the signs and lights, including type, height and general conformance to the Code. For commercial and industrial uses, a photometric plan prepared by a qualified electrical or lighting engineer shall be submitted that depicts all lighting fixtures and the light spread (in foot-candles) of these fixtures across the site to all property boundaries. 
y.  Proposed traffic controls and striping for parking areas (all lanes, driveways and parking spaces must be dimensioned). 
z.  Trash disposal areas and enclosures including specifications for enclosures. 
aa.  Location and size of existing and proposed water and sewer service connections and tap sizes (including those for irrigation systems). 
ab.  Location and size of water and sewer lines to which the service connections will be or are made. 
ac.  Location and size of water meters. 
ad.  Location and size of backflow prevention devices. 
ae.  Indication of how and where perimeter drain will drain (if one exists). 
af.  Location of existing electrical lines and poles on or adjacent to the site. 
ag.  Location of proposed electrical service connection and meter location. 
ah.  Location of electric transformer. 
ai.  Location of all fire hydrants. If none exist on site, note distance and direction of the closest hydrant adjacent to the site within five hundred (500) feet. 
aj.  Location of detention/retention areas and storm sewer infrastructure with the required drainage easements. 
ak.  The distance from the proposed buildings or structures to adjacent lot lines, easements and adjacent structures. 
al.  A land use chart (table). 
am.  Certificate blocks for signatures of owner, surveyor, utility providers and Town approval, as applicable. 
(5)  Community Design Principles And Development Standards description. Demonstrate in written or graphic form how the proposed structure is consistent with the Design and Development Standards found in Article 3 of this Chapter 16 of this Code. 
(6)  Final landscape plan. 
(7)  Exterior elevations of proposed structures/graphic visual aids. Provide complete building elevations, drawn to scale, with illustrations of all colors and identifying major materials to be used in the structures. In addition, Town staff may require building floor plans, sectional drawings, perspective drawings, models and/or computer visualizations when the impacts of a proposal warrant such information. 
(b)  Step 2: Application certification of completion. Within a reasonable period to time, Town staff shall either certify the application is complete and in compliance with all submittal requirements or reject it as incomplete and notify the applicant of any deficiencies. The applicant shall then correct any deficiencies in the application package, if necessary, and submit the required number of copies of the application to the Town Administrator/Clerk. The original application and all documents requiring a signature shall be signed in blue ink. 
(c)  Step 3: Staff reviews application and prepares comments. Staff will review the site plan map to ensure it is consistent with the site plan review criteria. Staff may consider comments received during the referral period in its review of the site plan. Following the review, staff will prepare a written report outlining any changes that the applicant must make before the site plan can be approved. This report will be forwarded to the applicant. 
(d)  Step 4: Applicant addresses staff comments. The applicant makes all necessary changes to the site plan and resubmits a revised copy to the Town. 
(e)  Step 5: Memorandum of Agreement for Public Improvements. Staff may require that the applicant execute a MOAPI to assure the construction of on-site and off-site improvements as a condition of approval of the site plan. Guarantees in the site plan agreement shall be secured by an irrevocable letter of credit in an amount determined appropriate by Town staff. 
(f)  Step 6: Planning Commission review and action. The site plan shall be presented to the Planning Commission for its review and action at the Planning Commission's next available regularly scheduled meeting. The Planning Commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny the site plan based on the site plan review criteria. Any action taken by the Planning Commission shall become final unless appealed. If the site plan is denied, the request or one that is substantially the same may not be heard by the Planning Commission for a period of one (1) year from the date of denial unless otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees. Any aggrieved party, who wishes to appeal the action shall file a written appeal stating the reasons why the Planning Commission action is incorrect. The applicant shall file the appeal with the Town Administrator/Clerk within seven (7) days of the meeting at which such action was taken. 
(g)  Step 7: Board of Trustees consideration of appeals. The Board of Trustees shall consider any appeal within forty-five (45) days of the close of the appeal period, except an appeal associated with a concurrent development application requiring Board of Trustees review or approval, which the Board of Trustees shall consider with final action on the concurrent development application. The Board of Trustees shall apply the site plan review criteria to either uphold, modify or reverse the Planning Commission's decision. 
(h)  Step 8: Submit and record site plan. Upon approval by the Planning Commission or by the Board of Trustees, the applicant shall have thirty (30) days to submit two (2) original Mylar drawings of the approved site plan to the Town Administrator/Clerk for recording, accompanied by the recording fees and all other costs billed by the Town relative to the site plan. Inaccurate, incomplete or poorly drawn plans shall be rejected. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the site plan, the Town Administrator/Clerk shall submit the approved site plan to the Larimer County Clerk and Recorder's Office for recording. 
(i)  Step 9: Post-approval actions. 
(1)  Building permit. A building permit shall be issued only when a site plan has been approved. However, with the approval of the Town Administrator/Clerk, an applicant may submit a building permit application concurrent with the site plan application. Building permits shall not be issued for any development that is not in conformance with the approved site plan. 
a.  Exception. A building permit may be issued for the construction of a foundation and shell only for commercial and industrial uses to allow for the partial construction of a speculation building with unknown tenant and use. A partial site plan shall be submitted for approval by the Town Administrator with adequate information to show the building will comply with all applicable zoning and development standards including setbacks, architectural standards, grading and drainage, paved driveway, and adequate space for parking and landscaping. 
b.  No building permit shall be issued for the tenant finish until a site plan has been approved. 
c.  A shell building constructed prior to site plan approval shall not be given a certificate of occupancy and shall not be used for storage or any other purpose other than offering for sale as a to be finished structure and site. 
(2)  Certificate of Occupancy. When building construction and site development are completed in accordance with the approved site plan and building permits, a Certificate of Occupancy may be issued. 
(3)  Phasing and expiration of approval. The site plan shall be effective for a period of three (3) years from the date of approval, unless stated otherwise in the written site plan approval. Building permits shall not be issued based on site plans that have an approval date more than three (3) years old. For multi-phased plans, building permits shall not be issued based on an approval date more than three (3) years from the date of Phase I approval. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
(Ord. No. 13-2011 , § 1, 11-22-11) 
Sec. 17-5-30. - Review criteria. 
    The site plan must meet the following review criteria: 
(1)  All of the information required on a site plan is shown. 
(2)  The lot size and lot dimensions are consistent with what is shown on the approved final plat. 
(3)  No buildings or structures infringe on any easements. 
(4)  The proposed site grading is consistent with the requirements of ________ (insert reference to any applicable adopted storm drainage criteria or master drainage plans). 
(5)  The density and dimensions shown conform with Article 5 of Chapter 16 of this Code, Density and Dimensional Standards, or the approved PUD requirements. 
(6)  The applicable Design and Development Standards have been adequately addressed and the proposed improvements conform with Article 3 of Chapter 16 of this Code. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 17-5-40. - Amendments to approved site plans. 
(a)  Minor variations in the location of structures, improvements or open space areas caused by engineering or other unforeseen difficulties may be reviewed and approved by the Town staff. Such changes shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of any measurable standard or modify the use, character or density of an approved site plan. All plans so modified shall be revised to show the authorized changes and shall become a part of the permanent records of the Town. 
(b)  Changes to approved site plans that exceed the ten-percent threshold, or other major modifications (such as changes in building size or footprint, relocation of access points, changes to required parking, etc.), shall be considered as a new site plan application. Such amendments shall require Planning Commission review and approval to become effective. A complete site plan application shall be prepared and submitted in compliance with the requirements set forth in this Section. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
ARTICLE 6 - Plot Plan 

Sec. 17-6-10. - Purpose. 
    The plot plan shall be submitted in order to apply for a building permit for any building or structure constructed on a single-family home or duplex lot. The plot plan shows where the proposed building or structure will be located on the lot so that the Town can make sure that the proposed location will be in compliance with all Town regulations. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 17-6-20. - Process. 
(a)  Step 1: Submit plot plan application package. 
(1)  Building permit application. 
(2)  Plot plan map. The plot plan map shall be a minimum of eight and one-half (81/2) inches by eleven (11) inches and shall provide the following information: 
a.  Title of project. 
b.  North arrow, scale (1"=20' or as approved by the Town) and date of preparation. 
c.  Name, address and phone number of property owner. 
d.  Lot number, block number and name of subdivision. 
e.  Lot size (square footage). 
f.  Bearings and distances of all lot lines. 
g.  Existing easements on the lot. 
h.  Footprint of the proposed building or structure, dimensioned. 
i.  Square footage of the proposed building and the footprint of the proposed building. 
j.  Distance from the proposed building or structure to all lot lines. 
k.  All existing buildings or structures on the lot. 
l.  Driveway. 
m.  Existing and/or proposed water and sewer service lines on the lot. 
n.  Elevations of: 
1.  The finished floor for the house and garage. 
2.  The ground ten (10) feet away from the house and garage. 
3.  The lot corners. 
o.  Height of all proposed buildings. 
p.  Street trees (right-of-way landscaping). 
(3)  Drainage information. Provide the Town with information regarding how the lot will drain, if requested by the Town Administrator/Clerk. Submit a copy of the subdivision master drainage plan for the area of the lot, if available. 
(b)  Step 2: Staff reviews plot plan. Staff will review the plot plan map and if it is consistent with the plot plan review criteria, will submit the building permit application for plan review. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
Sec. 17-6-30. - Review criteria. 
    The plot plan must meet the following review criteria: 
(1)  All of the information needed on a plot plan is shown. 
(2)  The lot size and lot dimensions are consistent with what is shown on the approved final plat. 
(3)  No buildings or structures infringe on any easements. 
(4)  The proposed site grading is consistent with the subdivision grading and drainage plan, if applicable; otherwise, it shall meet the Town's approval. 
(5)  The density and dimensions shown conform with the Density and Dimensional Standards (Article 5 of Chapter 16 of this Code) or the approved PUD requirements. 
(6)  The applicable Design and Development Standards have been adequately addressed. (Ord. 11-2007 §1) 
CHAPTER 18 - Building Regulations 
ARTICLE 1 - International Building Code[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 1, adopted February 12, 2013, repealed the former Art. I, §§ 18-1-10-18-1-40, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to building code. See the Ordinance List and Disposition Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 18-1-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., there is adopted as the building code of the Town, by reference thereto, the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, Chapters 1 through 35 inclusive and Appendix Chapter I, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478, to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive provisions and standards regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings and structures for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 1, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-1-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Building Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 1, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-1-30. - Amendments. 
    IBC Section 101.1 IBC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "Town of Wellington" where indicated. 
    IBC Section 101.4.3 IBC Section 101.4.3 (Plumbing) is amended by deletion of the last sentence. 
    IBC Section 101.4.5 IBC Section 101.4.5 (Fire prevention) is amended by replacing "International Fire Code" with "adopted fire code". 
    IBC Section 101.4.6 IBC Section 101.4.6 (Energy) is amended by replacing the words "International Energy Conservation Code" to "2009 International Energy Conservation Code". 
    IBC Section 105.1 IBC Section 105.1 (Required) is amended by replacing the words "building official" with "town". 
    IBC Section 105.2 IBC Section 105.2 (Work exempt from permit) is amended by deleting; 
Adding #14 "Shingle repair or replacement work not exceeding one square (100 square feet in area) of covering per building." 
    IBC Section 109.6 IBC Section 109.6 (Refunds) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing the section with the following: 
"The town may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
The town may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent (80%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
The town may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent (80%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or cancelled before any plan reviewing is done. 
The town shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment." 
    IBC Section 111.3 IBC Section 111.3 (Temporary occupancy) is amended by deleting the words "building official" in the first and second sentence and replacing it with "town". 
    IBC Section 113.1 IBC Section 113.1 (General) is amended by deleting the last two sentences and inserting the following: 
"The members of the Board of Appeals shall be comprised of the members of the Town Board of Appeals." 
    IBC Section 113.3 IBC Section 113.3 (Qualifications) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
    IBC Section 202 IBC Section 202 (Definitions) is amended by addition of the following: 
"Sleeping Room" (Bedroom) is any enclosed habitable space within a dwelling unit, which complies with the minimum room dimension requirements of IBC Section 1208 and contains a closet, an area that is useable as a closet, or an area that is readily convertible for use as a closet. Living rooms, family rooms and other similar habitable areas that are so situated and designed so as to clearly indicate these intended uses, shall not be interpreted as sleeping rooms. 
    IBC Section 1013.2 IBC Section 1013.2 (Where required) is amended by the addition of a second paragraph inserted before the exceptions as follows: 
"All area wells, stair wells, window wells and light wells attached to any building that are located less than 36 inches (914.4 mm) from the nearest intended walking surface and deeper than 30 inches (762 mm) below the surrounding ground level, creating an opening greater than 24 inches (610 mm) measured perpendicular from the building, shall be protected with guardrails conforming to this section around the entire opening, or be provided with an equivalent barrier. 
    IBC Section 1029.5.1 IBC Section 1029.5.1 (Minimum Size) is amended by the addition of the following; 
"For all building permits issued after the effective date of Ordinance 9-2002, all escape and rescue windows requiring a window well pursuant to the International Building Code shall comply with the dimension requirements set forth in this section, whether or not said escape or rescue window is located in a sleeping room. 
With regard to building permits issued prior to the effective date of Ordinance 9-2002 for additions to or alterations of existing buildings or structures, any window well with a finished sill height below adjacent ground level shall be deemed in compliance with the Towns regulations if said window well meets the dimensions set forth in the 1991 Edition of the Uniform Building Code, previously in effect in the town." 
    IBC Section 1301.1.1 IBC Section 1301.1.1 (Criteria) is amended by replacing "International Energy Conservation Code" with the "2009 International Energy Conservation Code". 
    IBC Section 1612.3 IBC Section 1612.3 (Establishment of flood hazard areas) is amended by the insertion of "town of Wellington" where indicated in [Name of Jurisdiction] and the date of the latest flood insurance study for the town, February 4, 2013, where indicated in [Date of Issuance]. 
    IBC Section 3401.3 IBC Section 3401.3 (Compliance with other codes) is amended by deleting International Fire Code and inserting in its place "adopted fire code", deleting International Private Sewage Disposal Code, and deleting NFPA 70 and inserting in its place "National Electrical Code adopted by the State of Colorado". 
    IBC Section 3412.2 IBC Section 3412.2 (Applicability) is amended by the insertion of 04/01/2013 the effective date of building codes for the town where indicated in [DATE TO BE INSERTED BY JURISDICTION]. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 1, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-1-40. - Violations. 
    It is unlawful and constitutes a public nuisance for any person to maintain any property, building or any other structure in the Town in a condition which is in violation of the Building Code or this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 1, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-1-50. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates a provision of this Code or this Chapter or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the Code or Chapter, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 1, 2-12-13) 
ARTICLE 2 - International Residential Code[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 2, adopted February 12, 2013, repealed the former Art. 2, §§ 18-2-10-18-2-30, and enacted a new Art. 2 as set out herein. The former Art. 2 pertained to residential code. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 18-2-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., there is adopted as the building code of the Town, by reference thereto, the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Chapters 1 through 43 inclusive and Appendix Chapters G and H, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 604781, to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive provisions and standards regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings and structures for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 2, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-2-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Residential Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 2, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-2-30. - Amendments. 
    IRC Section R101.1 IRC Section R101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "Town of Wellington" where indicated. 
    IRC Section R105.1 IRC Section R105.1 (Required) is amended by replacing the words "building official" with "town". 
    IRC Section R105.2 IRC Section R105.2 (Work Exempt from Permit) is amended by deleting; 
Exception #2 and replacing with "Fences not over 6 feet high." 
Exception #10 in its entirety and replacing with "Roofing repair or replacement work not exceeding one square (100 square feet in area) of covering per building. 
    IRC Section R108.5 IRC Section R108.5 (Refunds) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing the section with the following: 
"The town may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
The town may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent (80%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
The town may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent (80%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or cancelled before any plan reviewing is done. 
The town shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment." 
    IRC Section R109.1.5 IRC Section R109.1.5 (Other inspections) is amended by the addition of a new subsection as follows: 
R109.1.5.2 Insulation Inspection. Inspection of the structure shall be made following installation of the wall, ceiling and floor insulation and exterior windows and before wall coverings are installed. 
    IRC Section R110.4 IRC Section R110.4 (Temporary occupancy) is amended by deleting the words "building official" in the first and second sentence and replacing it with "town". 
    IRC Section R112.1 IRC Section R112.1 (General) is amended by deleting the last three sentences and inserting the following: 
"The members of the Board of Appeals shall be comprised of the members of the Town Board of Appeals." 
    IRC Section R112.3 IRC Section R112.3 (Qualifications) is amended by deleting this section in its entirety. 
    IRC Section R202 IRC Section R202 (Definitions) is amended by addition of the following: 
"Sleeping Room" (Bedroom) is any enclosed habitable space within a dwelling unit, which complies with the minimum room dimension requirements of IRC Sections R304 and R305 and contains a closet, an area that is useable as a closet, or an area that is readily convertible for use as a closet. Living rooms, family rooms and other similar habitable areas that are so situated and designed so as to clearly indicate these intended uses, shall not be interpreted as sleeping rooms. 
    IRC Table R301.2 (1). IRC Table R301.2 (1) is filled to provide the following: 
"Table R301.2(1)
Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria 
Ground
Snow
Load Wind Design Seismic
Design
Category Subject to Damage From Winter
Design
Temp Ice
Barrier
Underlayment
Required Flood
Hazard Air
Freezing
Index Mean
Annual
Temp Speed
(mph) Topographic
effects Weathering Frost Line
Depth Termite 30 psf 90 No B Severe 30 in. Slight to Moderate 1 NO * 1,000 45°F"  
* The Flood Insurance Study for Larimer County, Colorado, and Incorporated Areas, Map #08069C0759F dated December 19, 2006, and amended February 4, 2013. 
    IRC Section R302.1 IRC Section R302.1 (Exterior walls) is amended by the deletion of the wording; "or dwellings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section P2904 shall comply with table R302.1(2)." 
    IRC Table R302.1 (2) IRC Table R302.1 (2) is deleted in its entirety. 
    IRC Section R302.2 IRC Section R302.2 (Townhouses) is amended by replacing "1-Hour fire resistance-rated wall" with 2-Hour fire resistance-rated wall". 
    IRC Section R302.3 IRC Section R302.3 (Two-family dwelling) is amended by replacing "1-Hour fire-resistance rating" with "2-Hour fire-resistance rating". 
    IRC Section R303.4 IRC Section R303.4 (Mechanical Ventilation) is amended by replacing "5 air changes per hour" with "7 air changes per hour" and replacing the words "in accordance with section N1102.4.1.2" with "in accordance with section 402.4.2.1 of the International Energy Conservation Code 2009 Edition. 
    IRC Section R309.5 IRC Section R309.5 (Fire sprinklers) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
    IRC Section R310.1 IRC Section R310.1 (Emergency Escape and Rescue Openings) is amended by the deletion of the first paragraph and replaced with "All windows located in basements, habitable attics and sleeping rooms shall meet all the requirements of section R310.1 through R310.2.2". 
    IRC Section R310.1.1 IRC Section R310.1.1 (Minimum opening area) is amended by the deletion of the exception. 
    IRC Section R310.2. IRC Section R310.2 (Window wells) is amended by the addition of the following; 
"For all building permits issued after the effective date of Ordinance 9-2002, all escape and rescue windows requiring a window well pursuant to the International Building Code shall comply with the dimension requirements set forth in this section, whether or not said escape or rescue window is located in a sleeping room. 
With regard to building permits issued prior to the effective date of Ordinance 9-2002, for additions to or alterations of existing buildings or structures, any window well with a finished sill height below adjacent ground level shall be deemed in compliance with the Towns regulations if said window well meets the dimensions set forth in the 1991 Edition of the Uniform Building Code, previously in effect in the town." 
    IRC Section R310.2.1. IRC Section R310.2.1 (Ladder and steps) is amended by the addition of the following exception to read as follows: 
"Exception: Only one window well ladder shall be required in an unfinished basement." 
    IRC Section R312.1 IRC Section R312.1 (Guards required) is amended by the addition of a third paragraph as follows: 
"All area wells, stair wells, window wells and light wells attached to any building that are located less than 36 inches (914 mm) from the nearest intended walking surface and deeper than 30 inches (762 mm) below the surrounding ground level, creating an opening greater than 24 inches (610 mm) measured perpendicular from the building, shall be protected with guardrails conforming to this section around the entire opening, or be provided with an equivalent barrier. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The access side of stairways need not be protected. 
2.  Area and window wells provided for emergency escape and rescue windows may be protected with approved grates or covers that comply with Section R310.4 of this code. 
3.  Covers and grates may be used over stairways and other openings used exclusively for service access or for admitting light or ventilation." 
    IRC Section R313 IRC Section R313 (Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
    IRC Section R401.2 IRC Section R401.2 (Requirements) is amended by the addition of the following: 
"Foundations shall be designed and the construction drawings stamped by a Colorado registered design professional. The foundation design must be based on an engineer's soils report. The drawings must be noted with the engineering firm name, specific location for design and soils report number. A site certification prepared by State of Colorado registered design professional is required for setback verification on all new Group R Division 3 occupancies." 
    IRC Section R405.1 IRC Section R405.1 (Concrete or masonry foundations) is amended with the addition of the following after the first sentence: All foundation drains shall be designed and inspected by a State of Colorado registered design professional. 
    IRC Section R501.3 IRC Section R501.3 (Fire protection of floors) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
    IRC Chapter 11 IRC Chapter 11 (Energy Efficiency) is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code. 
    IRC Section M1502.4.4.2 IRC Section M1502.4.4.2 (Manufactures instructions) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
    IRC Section G2415.12 IRC Section G2415.12 (Minimum burial depth) is amended by the addition of the following: All plastic fuel gas piping shall be installed a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) below grade. 
    IRC Section G2415.12.1 IRC Section G2415.12.1 (Individual outside appliances) is deleted in its entirety. 
    IRC Section G2417.4.1 IRC Section G2417.4.1 (Test pressure) is amended by changing 3 psig to 10 psig. 
    IRC Section G2417.4.2 IRC Section G2417.4.2 (Test Duration) is amended by replacing "10 Minutes" with "15 Minutes". 
    IRC Section P2503.5.1 IRC Section P2503.5.1 (Rough plumbing) is amended by deleting the first paragraph and replacing with "DWV systems shall be tested on completion of the rough piping installation by water or air with no evidence of leakage." 
    IRC Section P2603.5.1 IRC Section P2603.5.1 (Sewer depth) is amended by filling in both areas where indicated to read "12 inches (305 mm)". 
    IRC Section P3103.1 IRC Section P3103.1 (Roof extension) is amended by replacing the words "6 inches" with "12 inches". 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 2, 2-12-13) 
ARTICLE 3 - International Plumbing Code[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 3, adopted February 12, 2013, repealed the former Art. 3, §§ 18-3-10-18-3-30, and enacted a new Art. 3 as set out herein. The former Art. 3 pertained to similar plumbing code. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 18-3-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., there is adopted as the building code of the Town, by reference thereto, the International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, Chapters 1 through 13 inclusive, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 604781, to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The purpose of said code is to protect the health and sanitation of the residents of the Town by providing comprehensive regulations governing materials, installation methods and other matters pertaining to plumbing for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 3, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-3-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Plumbing Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 3, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-3-30. - Amendments. 
    IPC Section 101.1 IPC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "Town of Wellington" where indicated. 
    IPC Section 305.4.1 IPC Section 305.4.1 (Sewer depth) is amended by filling in both areas where indicated to read "12 inches (305 mm)". 
    IPC Section 312.3 IPC Section 312.3 (Drainage and vent air test) is amended by deleting the first paragraph. 
    IPC Section 904.1 IPC Section 904.1 (Roof extension) is amended by inserting the number "12" (152.4 mm) where indicated in the second sentence. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 3, 2-12-13) 
ARTICLE 4 - International Mechanical Code[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 4, adopted February 12, 2013, repealed the former Art. 4, §§ 18-4-10-18-4-30, and enacted a new Art. 4 as set out herein. The former Art. 4 pertained to mechanical code. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 18-4-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., there is adopted as the building code of the Town, by reference thereto, the International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, Chapters 1 through 15 inclusive, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 604781, to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The purpose and subject matter of the adopted code is to include comprehensive provisions and standards relating to the mechanical installations in or in connection with the construction, erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, maintenance or use of heating, ventilating, cooling and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances within the Town for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 4, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-4-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Plumbing Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 4, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-4-30. - Amendments. 
    IMC Section 101.1 IMC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "Town of Wellington" where indicated. 
    IMC Section 504.6.4.2 IMC Section 504.6.4.2 (Manufactures Instructions) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 4, 2-12-13) 
ARTICLE 5 - International Fuel Gas Code[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 5, adopted February 12, 2013, repealed the former Art. 5, §§ 18-5-10-18-5-30, and enacted a new Art. 5 as set out herein. The former Art. 5 pertained to mechanical code. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 18-5-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., there is adopted as the gas code of the Town, by reference thereto, the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, Chapters 1 through 13 inclusive, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 604781, to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted code establishes minimum regulations for fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 5, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-5-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Fuel Gas Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 5, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-5-30. - Amendments. 
    IFGC Section 101.1 IFGC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "Town of Wellington" where indicated. 
    IFGC Section 404.12 IFGC Section 404.12 (Minimum burial depth) is amended by the addition of the following: All plastic fuel gas piping shall be installed a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) below grade. 
    IFGC Section 406.4.1 IFGC Section 406.4.1 (Test pressure) is amended by changing 3 psig to 10 psig. 
    IFGC Section 406.4.2 IFGC Section 406.4.2 (Test duration) is amended by changing the second paragraph to read; "When testing a system having a volume less than 10 cubic feet or a system in a single family dwelling, the test duration shall be not less than 15 minutes". 
    IFGC Section 614.6.5.2 IFGC Section 614.6.5.2 (Manufactures instructions) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 5, 2-12-13) 
ARTICLE 6 - National Electric Code - 2005[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1-2008 , § 1, adopted February 12, 2008, repealed the former Art. 6, §§ 18-6-10-18-6-30, and enacted a new Art. 6 as set out herein. The former Art. 6 pertained to electric code - 2002 edition. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 18-6-10. - Adoption. 
    The Town adopts the National Electrical Code, 2008 edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, One Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 022692008 in the form adopted by the State of Colorado, in the form and as the Code may be amended from time to time by the State including the State acting through the state electrical board (the "Electrical Code"). The purpose of the adopted code is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town. The subject matter of the adopted code includes comprehensive rules and regulations governing the inspection of electrical installations in public and private structures, including mobile homes and other premises, such as yards, lots and industrial substations in the Town. In all sections of this Code where a reference is made to the National Electrical Code, said reference shall be to the Electrical Code. 
(Ord. No. 1-2008 , § 1, 2-12-08; Ord. No. 12-2008 , 8-12-08) 
Sec. 18-6-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the National Electrical Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk at a moderate price. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall maintain sufficient copies of the National Electrical Code as required by law in Town Hall. 
(Ord. No. 1-2008 , § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 18-6-30. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: The Town has entered into an agreement with the Colorado Inspection Agency, to provide plan review and building inspection services. Fee Schedules for Electrical Permits and Permits for Manufactured Homes shall be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees, and be shall be maintained in the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1-2008 , § 1, 2-12-08) 
ARTICLE 7 - Fire Code[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-2014 , § 1, adopted July 22, 2014, repealed the former Art. 7, §§ 18-7-10-18-7-30, and enacted a new Art. 7 as set out herein. The former Art. 7 pertained to Uniform Fire Code. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 18-7-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., there is adopted as the fire code for the Town, by reference thereto, the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, as promulgated by the International Code Council, being particularly the 2012 Edition thereof, and the whole thereof, including Chapters 1 through 68 in the 2012 International Fire Code, inclusive, and appendices, save except as any portion of the code or appendices which is hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. 
(Ord. No. 13-2014 , § 1, 7-22-14) 
Sec. 18-7-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the Uniform Fire Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk at a moderate price. The Town Administrator/Clerk shall maintain sufficient copies of the Uniform Fire Code as required by law in the Town Hall. 
(Ord. No. 13-2014 , § 1, 7-22-14) 
Sec. 18-7-30. - Amendments. 
    The Uniform Fire Code, and the Uniform Fire Code Standards are hereby amended as follows: 
    The International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
(3)  Section 108.1 is deleted and readopted to read as follows: 
103.1.4 Appeals. In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and type of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of the provisions of this code, there shall be and hereby is created a Board of Appeals to be known as the Fire Board of Appeals. Three members of the Board of Trustees of the Town of Wellington and two members of the Wellington Fire Protection District Board or the Town of Wellington Building Review Board, as appointed from time to time, shall constitute the Fire Board of Appeals. The Chief of the Wellington Fire Protection District, or his designated representative, shall attend the meetings of such Board. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the Chief of the Wellington Fire Protection District, with a duplicate copy to the appellant, and may recommend to the executive body such new legislation as is consistent therewith. 
"Whenever a Town official or the Chief of the Wellington Fire Protection District shall disapprove any application made pursuant to this code, as amended, or refuse to grant a permit applied for hereunder or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the fire code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted or when any person requests a variance from the literal terms of the fire code, the applicant or person affected may appeal the decision of the Fire Chief of the Wellington Fire Protection District to the Fire Board of Appeals established pursuant to Section 103.1.4 of this code. 
"Such board shall have the power to vary or modify any requirement made by a Town official or the Fire Chief of the Wellington Fire Protection District hereunder, provided that an appeal to the board is made within thirty (30) days of the date of the action complained of. Final decisions of the board are subject to the right of appeal to the Town Board of Trustees as contained in Section 2-47 et seq., of this Code, except that the Fire Chief of the Wellington Fire Protection District shall be included as a party-in-interest with standing to appeal a decision which, in his or her judgment, adversely affects public safety." 
Section 108.3 is deleted in its entirety. 
(4)  Section 109.4 is amended to read as follows. 
"109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties, costs and orders. The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all persons shall be required to correct or remedy the violations or defects. The application of any penalty pursuant thereto shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions nor the suspension or removal of a permit or license issued there under. Each day that a violation continues is deemed a separate offense." 
(5)  Section 109.5 is hereby added to read as follows: 
"109.5 Work commencing before permit issuance. In addition to penalties set forth in Section 109.4, any person or firm who, before obtaining the necessary permit(s), commences any construction of, or work on, a building, structure, fire protection system, fire alarm system, fire extinguishing system that is not otherwise exempted from obtaining a permit, shall be subject to a processing and penalty fee in addition to the standard prescribed permit fee. Such additional fee shall be equal to the permit fee, except that such fee shall not be less than $50 nor more than $1,000 for the first such violation. A person or firm committing the same such violation repeatedly is subject to processing and penalty fees equal to double the amount of the permit fee or double the amount of the preceding violation, whichever is greater, for every same such subsequent violation committed thereafter within any 180-day period." 
(7)  Section 202 - Definitions is hereby amended to read as follows: 
A definition of "Bed and Breakfast" is added as follows: 
"Bed and breakfast" means an establishment operated in a private residence or portion thereof, which provides temporary accommodations to overnight guests for a fee and which is occupied by the operator of such establishment. 
A definition of "Family" is added as follows: 
"Family" means an individual living alone, or either of the following groups living together in a single dwelling unit and share common living, sleeping, cooking and eating facilities: 
a.  Any number of persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or other duly authorized custodial relationship, unless such number is otherwise specifically limited in this Code; or 
b.  Any unrelated group of persons consisting of (i) not more than four (4) persons; or (ii) not more than two (2) unrelated adults and their related children, if any. 
c.  and includes family foster care of up to four children which is licensed according to the statutes of the state but does not include individuals living in a Group Home. 
A definition "[B] AREA, BUILDING" is added to read as follows: 
1131 AREA, BUILDING. The area within surrounding exterior walls (or exterior walls and fire walls) exclusive of vent shafts and courts. Areas of the building not provided with surrounding walls shall be included in the building areas if such areas are included within the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above." 
A definition "FIRE-CONTAINMENT AREA" is added to read as follows: 
"FIRE-CONTAINMENT AREA. A portion of a story or basement which is totally enclosed by a smoke and draft barrier of not less than 1-hour, fire-resistive construction. All door openings penetrating such fire-containment areas shall be protected by a tight-fitting, smoke and draft control assembly as specified in the 2012 International Building Code Sections 716.5.3, 716.5.7 and 716.5.9. Openings other than doors and ducts shall be protected as specified in the 2012 International Building Code Sections 716.6 and 716.5.3 and shall be limited to a maximum of 25 percent of any one wall, in compliance with the 2012 International Building Code Section 716.6.7.2. All duct penetrations shall be protected by dampers as specified in the 2012 International Building Code Section 717, Table 717.3.1, (Section 717.3.2.2-smoke dampers), except that such dampers shall be those that are automatic closing by actuation of a smoke detector. Self-closing devices may be used in lieu of automatic closing devices on doors unlikely to be fixed open during normal conditions. Examples are: Doors at toilet rooms, stairways, closets and small storage rooms and similar areas." 
(8)  The Definition of Residential Group R is amended to add the following exceptions: 
Exceptions: 
1.  Bed & Breakfast facilities providing accommodations for 6 guests or less that are also occupied as the single family residence of the proprietor are permitted to comply with the International Residential Code. 
2.  Resort lodge cabin that is a building or group of buildings, under single management and ownership, containing rooms and/or dwelling units available for temporary rental to guests where the primary attraction is generally recreational features or activities, are permitted to comply with the International Residential Code. {Resort lodge cabins may be subject to the State of Colorado Accessibility Standards.} 
(9)  A new Subsection 307.2.2 is added to read as follows: 
"307.2.2 Time and Atmospheric Restrictions. Open burning shall only be performed when time and atmospheric conditions comply with the limits set forth in the Open Burning Permit." 
(10)  Section 507.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
"507.2 Type of water supply. A water supply shall consist of pressure tanks, elevated tanks, water mains or other fixed systems capable of providing the required sustainable fire flow." 
(11)  Subsection 605.11.3.2.1 is deleted in its entirety and readopted to read as follows: 
"605.11.3.2.1 Residential buildings with hip roof layouts. Panels/modules installed on residential buildings with hip roof layouts shall be located in a manner that provides a 3-foot-wide (914 mm) clear access pathway from the eave to the ridge on each roof slope where panels/modules are located. 
Exceptions: 
1.  These requirements shall not apply to roofs with slopes of two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (2:12) or less 
2.  These requirements shall not apply to roofs where each panel/module array area on the roof is 1,000 square feet (92.90 m 2 ) or less in size, no continuous section of panels/modules is larger than 150 feet in length or width, a clear access pathway of not less than 12-inch-width is provided along each side of all horizontal ridges, and a clear access pathway of not less than 30-inch-width is provided from the eave to the ridge of one roof slope where panels/modules are located. 
3.  These requirements shall not apply to roofs where each panel/module array area on the roof is 1,000 square feet (92.90 m 1 ) or less in size, no continuous section of panels/modules is larger than 150 feet in length or width, a clear access pathway of not less than 12-inch-width is provided along each side of all horizontal ridges, and, where panels/modules are to be placed on both sides of a hip, a clear access pathway of not less than 18-inch-width is provided along each side of such hip. 
These requirements shall not apply to roofs where the total combined area of solar array does not exceed 33% as measured in plan view of the total roof area of the structure." 
(12)  Subsection 605.11.3.2.2 is deleted in its entirety and readopted to read as follows: 
"605.11.3.2.2 Residential buildings with a single ridge. Panels/modules installed on residential buildings with a single ridge shall be located in a manner that provides two, 3-foot-wide (914 mm) clear access pathways from the eave to the ridge on each roof slope where panels/modules are located." 
Exceptions: 
1.  This requirement shall not apply to roofs with slopes of two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (2:12) or less. 
2.  This requirement shall not apply to roofs where each panel/module array area on the roof is 1,000 square feet (92.90 m 2 ) or less in size, no continuous section of panels/modules is larger than 150 feet in length or width, and a clear access pathway of not less than 12-inch-width is provided along each side of the horizontal ridge provided that: 
a.  The total combined area of solar array does not exceed 33% as measured in plan view of the total roof area of the structure; or 
b.  A 30-inch-wide clear access path is provided from the eave to the ridge of a roof slope where panels/modules are located. 
(13)  Subsection 605.11.3.2.3 is deleted in its entirety and readopted to read as follows: 
"605.11.3.2.3 Residential buildings with roof hips and valleys. Panels/modules installed on residential buildings with roof hips and valleys shall be located no closer than 18 inches (457 mm) to a hip or a valley where panels/modules are to be placed on both sides of a hip or valley. Where panels are to be located on only one side of a hip or valley that is of equal length, the panels shall be permitted to be placed directly adjacent to the hip or valley. In addition, a 12-inch-wide clear access pathway shall be provided along each side of any horizontal ridge." 
Exceptions: 
1.  This requirement shall not apply to roofs with slopes of two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (2:12) or less. 
2.  These requirements shall not apply to roofs where a 30-inch-wide clear access pathway is provided from the eave to the ridge as well as 12-inch-wide clear access pathways along each side of any horizontal ridge. 
(14)  A new Subsection 605.11.3.2.5 is repealed and reenacted to read: 
"605.11.3.2.5 Pathways. All access pathways required under this Section 605.11.3.2 shall be provided in a structurally strong location on the building capable of supporting the live load of fire fighters accessing the roof." 
(15)  Section 702, Definitions, is amended to read as follows: 
The definition "FIRE-CONTAINMENT AREA" is added to read as follows: 
"FIRE-CONTAINMENT AREA. A portion of a story or basement which is totally enclosed by a smoke and draft barrier of not less than 1-hour, fire-resistive construction. All door openings penetrating such fire-containment areas shall be protected by a tight-fitting, smoke and draft control assembly as specified in the 2012 International Building Code Sections 716.5.3, 716.5.7 and 716.5.9. Openings other than doors and ducts shall be protected as specified in the 2012 International Building Code Sections 716.6 and 716.5.3 and shall be limited to a maximum of 25 percent of any one wall, in compliance with the 2012 International Building Code Section 716.6.7.2. All duct penetrations shall be protected by dampers as specified in the 2012 International Building Code Section 717, Table 717.3.1, (Section 717.3.2.2-smoke dampers), except that such dampers shall be those that are automatic closing by actuation of a smoke detector. Self-closing devices may be used in lieu of automatic closing devices on doors unlikely to be fixed open during normal conditions. Examples are: Doors at toilet rooms, stairways, closets and small storage rooms and similar areas." 
(16)  Section 903.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
"903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in this section." 
Exceptions: 
1.  Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic fire alarm system and are separated from the remainder of the building by fire barriers consisting of not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated walls and 2-hour fire-resistance rated floor/ceiling assemblies. 
2.  Maximum Allowable Fire-Contained Areas, as identified in amendment Table 903.1 are required when an approved automatic sprinkler system is not provided." 
(17)  A New Table 903.1 Maximum Allowable Fire Containment is hereby added as follows: 
TABLE 903.1 MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE FIRE-CONTAINMENT AREA (IN SQUARE FEET) 
Types of Construction 
Occupancy I A I B II A II B III A III B IV-HT VA VB A1 10,000 10,000 NP NP NP NP NP NP NP A2, 10,000 10,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 A3, 4 10,000 10,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 B, F1, S1, S2 M, U 10,000 10,000 7,000 5,000 7,000 5,000 7,000 7,000 5,000 F2 20,000 20,000 10,000 7,000 10,000 7,000 10,000 10,000 5,000 E 10,000 10,000 7,000 5,000 7,000 5,000 7,000 7,000 5,000  
NP = Not Permitted 
EXCEPTION: 
S2 Open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.5 
(18)  Section 903.2 Where required, is amended by adding an exemption number 2 to read as follows: 
"2. Except for Group R Occupancies an automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in all buildings which are not divided into fire containment areas as specified in Table 903.1." 
(19)  Section 903.2.11.1.3 Basements is amended to read as follows: 
"903.2.11.1.3 Basements. Where any portion of a. basement is located more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) from openings required by Section 903.2.11.1, or where walls, partitions or other obstructions are installed that restrict the application of water from hose streams, the basement shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system." 
(20)  A new Subsection 904.11.6.4, is hereby added, to read in its entirety as follows: 
"904.11.6.4 Existing automatic fire extinguishing systems. Where changes in the cooking media, positioning of cooking equipment or replacement of cooking equipment occur in existing commercial cooking systems, the automatic fire extinguishing system shall be required to comply with the applicable provisions of Sections 904.11 through 904.11.4." 
(21)  A new Section 907.20.6, is added to read as follows: 
"907.20.6 Excessive False Alarms. An excessive number of false alarms shall be defined as two (2) alarm activations for a fire alarm system within a 60-day period provided that any such activations are not the result of a cause reasonably beyond the control of the owner, tenant or operator of the building. In the event of an excessive number of false alarms, the fire code official may order the building owner, tenant or operator of the building, or party responsible for the building to take reasonable actions necessary to prevent false alarms. These actions may include: repair or replacement of the faulty alarm components, addition of tamper proof devices, modification of system design, and repair of other building components which affect alarm system performance. The fire code official may also require the building owner, tenant or operator or party responsible for the building to obtain an approved maintenance contract with a qualified fire alarm maintenance technician as required by NFPA 72 to provide continuous maintenance service of the system." 
(22)  Section 908.7 is amended by adding a sentence immediately after the first one to read as follows: 
"908.7 Carbon monoxide alarms. The carbon monoxide alarm shall be installed outside of or within each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms in dwelling units or sleeping units." 
(23)  Section 1008.5 is amended by adding Exception 6 and Exception 7 to read as follows: 
"1008.1.5 Floor elevation. 
EXCEPTIONS: 
6.  Exterior doors other than the main entrance/exit door, in Groups R-2 and R-3 occupancies, may open at one intervening exterior step that is equally spaced between the interior floor level above and the exterior landing below provided the intervening step has a minimum tread depth of 10 inches (254 mm), a maximum riser height of 7 3/4 inches (196.85 mm) and a minimum width equal to the openable door width; and provided the door does not swing over the step. 
7.  Doors serving building equipment rooms which are not normally occupied." 
(24)  A new Section 1013.9 is added to read as follows: 
"1013.9 Below grade opening. All area wells, stair wells and light wells attached to any building that are located less than thirty-six (36) inches (914.4 mm) from the nearest intended walking surface and deeper than thirty (30) inches (762 mm) below the surrounding ground level, creating an opening greater than twenty-four (24) inches (609.6 mm) measured perpendicular from the building and with side walls of such well having a slope steeper than 2 horizontal to 1 vertical, shall be barricaded with guardrails conforming to this section around the entire opening, or be provided with an equivalent barrier (intended walking surface would be defined as a sidewalk, pathway, patio slab or other like surface). 
EXCEPTIONS: 
1.  The access side of stairways need not be barricaded. 
2.  Area wells provided for emergency escape and rescue windows may be protected with grates or covers if such barricades comply with Section 1029.4 of this code. 
3.  Covers or grates may be used over stairways and other openings used exclusively for service access." 
(24)  Appendix A is deleted in its entirety: 
(26)  Appendix B is deleted in its entirety and readopted to read as follows: 
APPENDIX B 
FIRE-FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS 
SECTION .B101 GENERAL 
"B101.1 Scope. The procedure for determining fire-flow requirements for buildings or portions of buildings hereafter constructed shall be in accordance with this appendix. This appendix does not apply to structures other than buildings." 
SECTION B102 DEFINITIONS 
"B102.1 Definitions. For the purpose of this appendix, certain terms are defined as follows: 
FIRE-FLOW. The flow rate of a water supply, measured at 20 pounds per square inch (psi) (138 kPa) residual pressure, that is available for firefighting. 
FIRE-FLOW CALCULATION AREA. The floor area, in square feet (m2), used to determine the required fire flow." 
SECTION B103 MODIFICATIONS 
"B103.1 Decreases. The fire chief is authorized to reduce the fire-flow requirements for isolated buildings or a group of buildings in rural areas or small communities where the development of full fire-flow requirements is impractical." 
"B103.21 Increases. The fire chief is authorized to increase the fire-flow requirements where conditions indicate an unusual susceptibility to group fires or conflagrations. An increase shall not be more than twice that required for the building under consideration." 
"B103.3 Areas without water supply systems. For information regarding water supplies for fire-fighting purposes in rural and suburban areas in which adequate and reliable water supply systems do not exist, the fire code official is authorized to utilize NFPA 1142 or the International Wildland-Urban Interface Code. 
SECTION B104 FIRE-FLOW CALCULATION AREA 
"B104.1 General. The fire-flow calculation area shall be the total floor area of all floor levels within the exterior walls, and under the horizontal projections of the roof of a building, except as modified in Section B 104.3." 
"B104.2 Area separation. Portions of buildings which are separated by fire walls without openings, constructed in accordance with the International Building Code, are allowed to be considered as separate fire-flow calculation areas." 
"B104.3 Type 1A and Type 1B construction. The fire-flow calculation area of buildings constructed of Type 1A and Type 18 construction shall be the area of the three largest successive floors. 
Exception: 
Fire-flow calculation area for open parking garages shall be determined by the area of the largest floor." 
SECTION B105 FIRE-FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS 
"B105.1 One- and two-family dwellings. The minimum fire-flow requirements for one- and two-family shall be 1,000 gallons per minute in urban areas and 500 gallons per minute in rural areas. 
Exception: 
A reduction in required fire flow of 50 percent, as approved, is allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system." 
"B105.2 Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings. The minimum fire-flow and flow duration for buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings shall be as specified in Table B 105. 
Exception: 
A reduction in required fire-flow of up to 75 percent, as approved, is allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. The resulting fire-flow shall not be less than 1,500 gallons per minute (56781/min) for the prescribed duration as specified in Table B1 05 
APPLICATION FIRE FLOW REQUIREMENTS (gpm) SPACING BETWEEN HYDRANTS (feet) MAXIMUM DISTANCE FROM ANY POINT ON A STREET OR ROAD FRONTAGE TO A HYDRANT (feet) Commercial 1500 600 300 Urban 1000 800 400 Rural Residential 500 800 400  
SECTION B106 REFERENCED STANDARDS 
ICC IBC-12 International Building Code B104.2, Table B105.1 
ICC IWUIC-12 International Wildland-Urban Interface Code B 103.3 
NFPA 1142-12 Standard on Water Supplies for Suburban and Rural Fire Fighting B103.3 
(27)  Appendix C is deleted in its entirety and readopted to read as follows: 
SECTION C101 101 GENERAL 
"C101.1 Scope. Fire hydrants shall be provided in accordance with this appendix for the protection of buildings, or portions of buildings, hereafter constructed." 
SECTION C102 LOCATION 
"C102.1 Fire hydrant locations. Fire hydrants shall be provided along required fire apparatus access roads and adjacent public streets." 
SECTION C103 NUMBER OF FIRE HYDRANTS 
"C103.1 Fire hydrants available. The number of fire hydrants available to a complex or subdivision shall not be less than that determined by spacing requirements listed in Table B105 when applied to fire apparatus access roads and perimeter public streets from which fire operations could be conducted." 
SECTION C104 CONSIDERATION OF EXISTING FIRE HYDRANTS 
"C104.1 Existing fire hydrants. Existing fire hydrants on public streets are allowed to be considered as available. Existing fire hydrants on adjacent properties shall not be considered available unless fire apparatus access roads extend between properties and easements are established to prevent obstruction of such roads." 
SECTION C105 DISTRIBUTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS 
"C105.1 Hydrant spacing. The average spacing between fire hydrants shall not exceed that listed in Table B105. 
Exception: 
The fire chief is authorized to accept a deficiency of up to 10 percent where existing fire hydrants provide all or a portion of the required fire hydrant service. 
Regardless of the average spacing, fire hydrants shall be located such that all points on streets and access roads adjacent to a building are within the distances listed in Table B105." 
(28)  Appendix D is deleted in its entirety and readopted to read as follows. 
APPENDIX D 
FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS 
SECTION D101 GENERAL, 
"D101.1 Scope. Fire apparatus access roads shall be in accordance with this appendix and all other applicable requirements of the International Fire Code." 
SECTION D102 REQUIRED ACCESS 
"D102.1 Access and loading. Facilities, buildings or portions of buildings hereafter constructed shall be accessible to fire department apparatus by way of an approved fire apparatus access road with an asphalt, concrete or other approved driving surface capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least 80,000 pounds (36,287 kg)." 
"D102.2 Access road construction. All access roadways must be all weather driving surfaces capable of supporting fire apparatus. Surface shall be asphalt, concrete, or compacted road base. 
a.  Compacted road base or chip shall only be used for a temporary emergency access. Temporary access shall be available as long as the site is under construction. Thereafter permanent fire lanes shall be accessible and unobstructed at all times. 
b.  All permanent points of access shall be hard decks consisting of asphalt or concrete designed to HS 20 or support 40 ton. 
c.  All required access roads must be installed and serviceable before aboveground construction begins." 
SECTION D103 MINIMUM SPECIFICATIONS 
"D103.1 Access road width with a hydrant. Where a fire hydrant is located on a fire apparatus access road, the minimum road width shall be 26 feet (7925 mm) exclusive of shoulders. (See Figure D103.1)." 
"D103.2 Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed 10 percent in grade. Exception: 
Grades steeper than 10 percent as approved by the fire code official." 
"D103.3 Turning radius. The minimum turning radius shall be 25 feet inside radius and 50 feet outside radius." 



D103.4 Dead ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads I excess of 150 feet (45.720 m) shall be provided with width and turnaround provisions in accordance with Table D103.4" 
TABLE 103.4 
REQUIREMENTS FOR DEAD-END FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS 
LENGTH (FEET) WIDTH (FEET) TURNAROUNDS REQUIRED 0-150 20 None Required 151-660 20 100-foot hammerhead, 100-foot Cul-de-sac in accordance with Figure D103.1 660 Special Approval Required  
"D103.4.1 Second Point of Access Required. A second point of access shall be required when the primary access roadway exceeds 660' in length." 
"D103.4.2 Third Point of Access Required. A third point of access will be required when any access road exceeds a distance of 1,320 (1/4 mile) in length." 
"D103.4.3 Fourth Point of Access Required. A fourth point of access will be required when access road exceeds a distance of 2,640 feet (1/2 mile) in length. 
Note: Distances are measured as the hose would lay." 
"D103.4.4 Where two or more points of access are required, they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one half of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served, measured in a straight line." 
"D103.5 Fire apparatus access road gates. Gates securing the fire apparatus access roads shall comply with all of the following criteria: 
1.  The minimum gate width shall be 20 feet (6096 mm). 
2.  Gates shall be of the swinging or sliding type. 
3  Construction of gates shall be of materials that allow manual operation by one person. 
4.  Gate components shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and replaced or repaired when defective. 
5.  Electric gates shall be equipped with a means of opening the gate by fire department personnel for emergency access. Emergency opening devices shall be approved by the fire code official. 
6.  Manual opening gates shall not be locked with a padlock or chain and padlock unless they are capable of being opened by means of forcible entry tools or when a key box containing the key(s) to the lock is installed at the gate location. 
7.  Gate design and locking device specifications shall be submitted for approval by the fire code official prior to installation. 
8.  Electric gate operators, where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL325 
9.  Gates intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F 2200." 
"D103.6 Signs. Where required by the fire code official, fire apparatus access roads shall be marked with permanent NO PARKING-FIRE LANE signs complying with Figure D 103.6. Signs shall have a minimum dimension of 12 inches (305 mm) wide by 18 inches (457 mm) high and have red letters on a white reflective background. Signs shall be posted on one or both sides of the fire apparatus road as required." 

"D103.6.1 Roads 20 to 26 feet in width. Fire apparatus access roads 20 to 26 feet wide (6096 to 7925 mm) shall be posted on both sides as a fire lane." 
"D103.6.2 Roads more than 26 feet in width. Fire apparatus access roads more than 26 feet wide (7925 mm) to 32 feet wide (9754mm) shall be posted on one side of the road as a fire lane." 
SECTION D 104 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENTS 
"D104.1 Buildings exceeding three stories or 30 feet in height. Buildings or facilities exceeding 30 feet (9144 mm) or three stories in height shall provide fire apparatus access for each structure at least 30 feet in width." 
"D104.2 Buildings exceeding 62,000 square feet in area. Buildings or facilities having a gross building area of more than 62,000 square feet (5760 m 2 ) shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads. 
Exception: 
Projects having a gross building area of up to 124,000 square feet (II 520m 2 ) that have a single approved fire apparatus access road when all buildings are equipped throughout with approved automatic sprinkler systems." 
"D104.3 Remoteness. Where two access roads are required, they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one half of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served, measured in a straight line between accesses. 
SECTION D105 AERIAL FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS 
"D105.1 Where required. Where the vertical distance between the grade plane and the highest roof surface exceeds 30 feet (9144 mm), approved aerial fire apparatus access roads shall be provided. For purposes of this section, the highest roof surface shall be determined by measurement to the eave of a pitched roof, the intersection of the roof to the exterior wall, or the top of parapet walls, whichever is greater." 
"D105.2 Width. Fire apparatus access roads shall have a minimum unobstructed width of 30 feet (7925 mm) in the immediate vicinity of any building or portion of building more than 30 feet (9144 mm) in height." 
"D105.3 Proximity to building. At least one of the required access routes meeting this condition shall be located within a minimum of 15 feet (4572 mm) and a maximum of 30 feet (9144 mm) from the building, and shall be positioned parallel to one entire side of the building." 
"D105.4 Obstructions. Overhead utility and power lines shall not be located over the aerial fire apparatus access road or between the aerial fire apparatus road and the building. Other obstructions shall be permitted to be placed with the approval of the fire code official." 
SECTION D 106 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS 
"D106.1 Projects having more than 100 dwelling units. Multiple-family residential projects having more than 100 dwelling units shall be equipped throughout with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads. 
Exception: 
Projects having up to 200 dwelling units may have a single approved fire apparatus access road when all buildings, including nonresidential occupancies, are equipped throughout with approved automatic sprinkler systems installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2." 
"D106.2 Projects having more than 200 dwelling units. Multiple-family residential projects having more than 200 dwelling units shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads regardless of whether they are equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system." 
SECTION D 107 ONE- OR TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS 
"D107.1 One- or two-family dwelling residential developments. 
Developments of one- or two-family dwellings where the number of dwelling units exceeds 30 shall be provided with separate and approved fire apparatus access roads and shall meet the requirements of Section D104.3. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Where there are more than 30 dwelling units on a single public or private fire apparatus access road and all dwelling units are equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2 or 903.3.1.3.3, access from two directions shall not be required. 
2.  The number of dwelling units on a single fire apparatus access road shall not exceed 30 dwelling units unless fire apparatus access roads will connect with future development, as determined by the fire code official." 
D108 REFERENCED STANDARDS 
ASTM F 2200-05 Standard Specification for Automated Vehicular Gate Construction D103.5 
ICC IFC-12 International Fire Code D101.5, D107.1 
UL 325-02 Door, Drapery, Gate, Louver, and Window Operators and Systems, with Revisions through February 2006 D103.5 
(40)  Appendix H is hereby adopted in its entirety: 
(41)  Appendix I is hereby adopted in its entirety: 
(42)  Appendix J is hereby deleted in its entirety: 
(Ord. No. 13-2014 , § 1, 7-22-14) 
ARTICLE 8 - International Energy Conservation Code[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 6, adopted February 12, 2013, repealed the former Art. 8, §§ 18-8-10-18-8-30, and enacted a new Art. 8 as set out herein. The former Art. 8 pertained to similar energy code. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 18-8-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., there is adopted as the energy code of the Town, by reference thereto, The International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478, Chapters 1 through 5 inclusive, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 604781, to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted code establishes minimum regulations for energy conservation within the Town for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 6, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-8-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Energy Conservation Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 6, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-8-30. - Amendments. 
    IECC Section C101.1 IECC Section C101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "Town of Wellington" where indicated. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 6, 2-12-13) 
ARTICLE 9 - International Property Maintenance Code[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 7, adopted February 12, 2013, repealed the former Art. 9, §§ 18-9-10-18-9-30, and enacted a new Art. 9 as set out herein. The former Art. 9 pertained to property maintenance code. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 18-9-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., there is adopted as the energy code of the Town, by reference thereto, The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478, Chapters 1 through 8 inclusive, The subject matter of the adopted code establishes minimum regulations for property maintenance within the Town for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 7, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-9-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Property Maintenance Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 7, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-9-30. - Amendments. 
    IPMC Section 101.1 IPMC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "Town of Wellington" where indicated. 
    IPMC Section 103.5 IPMC Section 103.5 (Fees) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
    IPMC Section 111.2 IPMC Section 111.2 (Membership of board) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and inserting the following: 
"The members of the Board of Appeals shall be comprised of the members of the Town Board of Appeals." 
    IPMC Section 111.2.1 IPMC Section 111.2.1 (Membership of Board) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
    IPMC Section 111.2.2 IPMC Section 111.2.2 (Chairman) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
    IPMC Section 111.2.3 IPMC Section 111.2.3 (Disqualification of member) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
    IPMC Section 111.2.4 IPMC Section 111.2.4 (Secretary) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
    IPMC Section 111.2.5 IPMC Section 111.2.5 (Compensation of members) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
    IPMC Section 302.4 IPMC Section 302.4 (Weeds) is amended by deleting this section in its entirety. 
    IPMC Section 302.8 IPMC Section 302.8 (Motor Vehicles) is amended by deleting this section in its entirety. 
    IPMC Section 308 IPMC Section 308 (Rubbish and Garbage) is amended by the deleting this section in its entirety. 
    IPMC Section 604.2 IPMC Section 604.2 (Service) is amended by replacing "NFPA 70" with "Electrical Code adopted by the state of Colorado." 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 7, 2-12-13) 
ARTICLE 10 - International Existing Building Code[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 8, adopted February 12, 2013, repealed the former Art. 10, §§ 18-10-10-18-10-30, and enacted a new Art. 10 as set out herein. The former Art. 10 pertained to existing building code. See Ordinance List and Disposition Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 18-10-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., there is adopted as the existing building code of the Town, by reference thereto, The International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478, Chapters 1 through 15 inclusive, The subject matter of the adopted code establishes minimum regulations for exceptions to the building codes for existing buildings within the Town for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 8, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-10-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Existing Building Code, certified to be a true copy, has been and is now on file in the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The code as finally adopted shall be available for sale to the public through the office of the Town Administrator/Clerk at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 8, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 18-10-30. - Amendments. 
    International Existing Building Code is amended by replacing all references to "ICC Electrical Code" with "Electrical Code adopted by the state of Colorado". 
    IEBC Section 101.1 IEBC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "Town of Wellington" where indicated. 
    IEBC Section 1301.1 IEBC Section 1301.1 (Conformance) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing it with the following: "Structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the provision of this code for new structures." 
(Ord. No. 1-2013 , § 8, 2-12-13) 
CODE COMPARISON TABLE 
Prior Code New Code 1.01.01 1-1-10 1.01.02 1-1-30 1.01.03 Deleted 1.01.04 1-1-50 1.01.05 1-1-60 1.03.01 1-1-80 1.03.02 1-3-10 1.03.03 Deleted 1.03.04 1-3-90 1.03.05 1-3-100 1.03.06 1-3-70 1.03.07 1-3-80 1.03.08 1-3-110 1.04.01 1-3-120 1.04.02 Deleted 1.04.05 1-3-130 1.05.02 1-2-10, 1-2-30 1-2-50, 1-3-20 1.05.03 Deleted 2.01.01 2-2-20 2.01.02 2-2-10 2.01.03 2-2-60-2-2-80 2.01.04 2-2-50 2.03 2-3-20 2.06.01 2-3-40 2.06.02 2-3-40 2.08.01-2.08.05 Deleted 2.09.01-2.09.06 Deleted 2.10.01-2.11.05 Deleted 2.11.06 2-5-10 2.11.07 2-5-20 2.11.08 Deleted 2.12.01 1-6-10 2.13.01 Deleted 2.14.01 2-9-10, 2-9-20 3.01.01 4-1-10 3.01.02 4-3-10 3.01.03 4-3-20 3.01.04 4-3-30 3.01.05 4-3-40 3.01.06 4-3-50 3.01.07 4-3-60 3.04.01-3.04.07 Deleted 3.04.08 10-8-60 3.04.09-3.04.22 Deleted 3.04.23 10-8-40, 10-8-50 3.04.24 Deleted 3.04.25 Deleted 3.05.01 4-2-40 3.05.02 Deleted 3.05.03 4-2-30 3.06.01 4-4-10 3.06.02 4-4-20 3.06.03 6-2-110-6-2-180 3.06.04 4-4-30-4-4-80 3.06.05 4-4-90 3.06.06 4-4-100 3.06.07 4-4-110 3.06.08 4-4-210 3.06.09 4-4-220 3.06.10 4-4-230 3.06.11 4-4-240 3.06.12 4-4-250 3.06.13 4-4-260 3.06.14 4-4-310 3.06.15 Deleted 3.06.16 4-4-320 3.06.17 Deleted 3.06.18 Deleted 3.07.01 4-5-10 3.07.02 4-5-20 3.07.03 4-5-40 3.07.04 4-5-50 3.07.05 4-5-80 3.07.06 4-5-60 3.07.07 4-5-70 3.08.01 4-6-10 3.08.02 4-6-20 3.08.03 4-6-30 3.08.04 4-6-40 3.08.05 4-6-50 3.08.06 4-6-60 3.08.07 4-6-70 3.08.08 4-6-80 3.08.09 4-6-90 3.08.10 4-6-100 3.08.11 4-6-110 3.08.12 4-6-120 3.08.13 4-6-130 3.08.14 Deleted 4.01.01-4.01.14 Deleted 4.01.15 2-1-30 5.01.03 2-4-30 5.01.04 2-4-40 5.01.05 2-4-50 5.01.06 2-4-70 5.01.07 2-4-80 5.01.08 2-4-90 5.01.11 2-4-190 6.01.01 6-1-10 6.01.02 6-1-20 6.01.03 6-1-30 6.01.04 6-1-40 6.01.05 6-1-50 6.01.06 6-1-60 6.01.07 6-1-70 6.01.08 6-1-80 6.01.09 6-1-90 6.01.10 6-1-100 6.01.11 6-1-110 6.01.12 6-1-120 6.01.13 6-1-130 6.01.14 6-1-140 6.01.15 6-1-150 6.01.16 6-1-160 6.01.17 6-1-170 6.01.18 6-1-180 6.01.19 6-1-190 6.01.20 6-1-200 6.01.21 6-1-210 6.01.22 6-1-220 6.02.01 6-2-10 6.02.02 6-2-20 6.02.03 6-2-30 6.02.04 6-2-40 6.02.05 6-2-50 6.03.01 6-4-10 6.03.02 6-4-20 6.03.03 6-4-30 6.03.04 6-4-40 6.03.05 6-4-50 6.03.06 6-4-60 6.03.07 6-4-70 6.03.08 6-4-80 6.03.09 6-4-90 6.03.10 6-4-100 6.03.11 6-4-110 6.03.12 Deleted 6.03.13 6-4-120 6.04.01 6-6-10 6.04.02 6-6-20 6.04.03 6-6-30 6.04.04 6-6-40 6.04.05 6-6-50 6.04.06 6-6-60 6.05.01-6.05.06 Deleted 6.06.01 6-5-10 6.06.02 6-5-20 6.06.03 6-5-30 6.06.04 6-5-40 6.06.05 6-5-50 6.06.06 6-5-60 6.06.07 6-5-70 6.06.08 6-5-80 6.06.09 6-5-90 6.06.10 6-5-100 6.06.11 6-5-110 6.06.12 6-5-120 6.06.13 6-5-130 6.06.14 6-5-140 6.06.15 6-5-150 6.06.16 6-5-160 6.06.17 6-5-170 6.06.18 6-5-180 6.06.19 6-5-190 6.06.20 6-5-200 6.07.01 6-3-10 6.07.02 6-3-20 6.07.03 6-3-30 6.07.04 6-3-40 6.07.05 6-3-50 6.08.01-6.08.05 Deleted 6.09.01 Deleted 6.09.02 Deleted 6.09.03 Deleted 6.09.04 Deleted 6.09.05 Deleted 6.09.06 Deleted 6.10.01 Deleted 6.10.02 Deleted 6.10.03 Deleted 6.10.04 Deleted 6.10.05 Deleted 6.10.06 Deleted 6.10.07 Deleted 6.10.08 Deleted 6.10.09 Deleted 6.10.10 Deleted 6.10.11 Deleted 6.10.12 Deleted 7.01.01 13-1-10-13-1-30 7.01.02 13-1-40 7.01.03 13-1-50 7.01.04 13-1-60 7.01.05 13-1-70 7.01.06 13-1-80 7.01.07 13-1-90-13-1-150 7.01.07.5 13-1-160 7.01.08 13-2-10-13-2-50 7.01.09 Deleted 7.02.06 13-3-10-13-3-110 7.03 Deleted 8.01.01 Deleted 8.01.02 7-2-140 8.01.03 Deleted 8.01.04 Deleted 8.01.05 7-4-640 10.01.03 7-2-180 10.01.04 6-7-10-6-7-70 10.01.05 7-1-20 12.01.01-12.01.12 Deleted 12.02.01-12.02.03 Deleted 12.02.04 11-5-10-11-5-70 12.02.05-12.02.11 Deleted 14.01.02 Deleted 14.01.03 Deleted  
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE -   
Ord. No. Subject Section Disposition 11-1986 Camper trailer storage 1 7-2-150 10-1987 Code of ethics 1 2-6-10 2 2-6-20 3 2-6-30 4 2-6-40 5 2-6-50 6 2-6-60 7 2-6-70 11-1987 Water and sewer utility 1 13-1-10-13-1-160 1-1988 Sidewalk maintenance 1 11-1-20 7-1988 Delinquent utility charges 1 13-1-90 11-1988 Delinquent utility charges 1 13-1-90 7-1990 Board of Trustees procedures 1 2-2-60 2 2-2-70 1-1991 Board of Trustees 1 2-2-10 5-1991 Water and sewer rates 1 13-1-40 Delinquent utility charges 2 13-1-90, 13-1-130 3 13-1-130 4 13-1-130 5 13-1-130 7-1991 Municipal Court 2 2-4-40 8-1991 Parking restrictions 1 8-1-30 7-1992 Utility discontinuance 1 13-1-130 13-1992 Nuisance abatement 1 7-1-10, 7-1-20, 7-1-80, 7-1-100-7-1-130 2-1993 Energy Codes 3.5 18-8-10 4-1994 Sidewalk construction 1 11-1-30-11-1-60 18-1994 Violations code 1-101 Deleted 1-102 10-1-10 1-103 10-1-20 1-104 Deleted 1-105 10-1-30 1-106 1-4-20 1-107 1-4-30 1-108 10-1-40 1-109 10-1-50 1-110 10-1-60 1-111 2-4-10, 2-4-20, 2-4-110 1-201 2-4-130 1-202 2-4-140 1-203 2-4-150 1-204 2-4-160 1-205 2-4-170 1-206 10-1-70 1-207 2-4-180 1-208 2-4-200 1-209 2-4-210 1-301 2-4-220 1-302 2-4-230 1-303 2-4-240 1-401 2-4-250 1-501 Deleted 1-502 Deleted 2-101 10-2-10 2-201 10-2-20 2-301 10-2-30 2-401 10-2-40 3-101 10-6-80 3-102 10-6-60 3-103 10-6-70 3-104 10-6-90 4-101 10-5-190 4-201 10-5-110 4-202 10-5-140 4-203 10-5-160 4-204 10-5-130 4-301 10-5-10 4-302 10-5-70 4-303 10-5-70 4-304 10-5-180 4-305 10-5-170 4-306 10-5-20 4-307 10-5-50 4-308 10-5-60 4-309 10-5-80 4-310 10-5-100 5-101 10-6-150 5-201 10-6-140 6-101 10-8-10 6-102 10-8-120 6-201 10-8-130 6-301 10-8-140 7-101 10-6-170 8-101 10-3-50 8-102 10-3-40 8-103 10-3-80 8-104 10-3-90 8-105 10-3-70 8-106 Deleted 8-201 10-3-60 9-101 10-6-10 9-102 10-6-20 9-103 10-6-30 9-104 10-6-40 9-105 10-5-30 9-106 10-4-30 9-107 10-6-50 9-108 10-10-30 9-109 10-6-160 10-101 10-9-20 10-102 10-9-30 10-103 10-9-40 11-101 10-8-10 11-102 10-8-10, 10-8-20 11-103 10-8-70 11-104 10-8-80 11-105 Deleted 11-106 10-8-10, 10-8-90 11-107 10-8-10, 10-8-60 11-108 10-8-10, 10-8-30 11-109 10-8-40 11-110 10-11-10 11-201 10-7-10 11-301 10-7-60 11-401 7-1-20, 7-3-20, 7-3-30 11-402 10-11-20 11-403 10-5-90 11-404 10-8-10, 10-8-110 11-501 8-2-10-8-2-90 11-601 10-11-30 12-101 Deleted 12-102 Deleted 12-103 Deleted 12-104 Deleted 19-1995 Business license fee 1 6-2-30 4-1996 Hazardous material transportation 13.02.01 8-3-10 13.02.02 8-3-20 13.02.03 8-3-30 13.02.04 8-3-40 13.02.05 8-3-50 13.02.06 8-3-60 13.02.07 8-3-70 13.02.08 8-3-80 13.02.09 8-3-90 8-1996 Model Traffic Code 1 8-1-10, 8-1-40, 8-1-60 9-1996 Town Administrator 1 2-3-20 30-1996 Model Traffic Code 1 8-1-30 31-1996 Model Traffic Code 1 8-1-30 32-1996 Excavations 12.03.01 11-3-10 12.03.02 11-3-20 12.03.03 11-3-30 12.03.04 11-3-40 12.03.05 11-3-50 12.03.06 11-3-60 12.03.07 11-3-70 12.03.08 11-3-80 12.03.09 11-3-90 12.04.01 11-4-10 12.04.02 11-4-20 12.04.03 11-4-30 12.04.04 11-4-40 12.04.05 11-4-50 12.04.06 11-4-60 12.04.07 11-4-70 4-1997 Library facilities 1 4-2-50 2 2-9-40 7-1997 Town Treasurer 1 2-3-30 9-1997 Model Traffic Code 1 8-1-30 10-1997 Sewer interceptors 1 13-3-40 11-1997 Municipal Court costs 1 2-4-190 20-1997 Water and sewer rates 1 13-1-40 21-1997 Capital investment fees 1 13-1-50 26-1997 Capital investment fees 1 13-1-50 5-1998 Nuisances 1 7-2-20, 7-2-40, 7-2-60, 7-2-70, 7-2-90-7-2-120, 7-2-160, 7-2-170 6-1998 Community Action Committee 1 2-7-10-2-7-60 8-1998 Building regulations 1 18-7-10, 18-7-20 3 18-8-10, 18-9-10 9-1998 Recreation and Sports Association 2.18.01 Deleted 2.18.02 Deleted 2.18.03 Deleted 2.18.04 Deleted 2.18.05 Deleted 2.18.06 Deleted 16-1998 Capital investment fees 6 13-1-50 19-1998 Curb and gutter 11.02.01 11-2-10 11.02.02 11-2-20 11.02.03 11-2-30 11.02.04 11-2-40 11.02.05 11-2-50 11.02.06 11-2-60 11.02.07 11-2-70 11.02.08 11-2-80 20-1998 Animal regulations 9.01.01 7-4-10 9.01.02 7-4-20 9.01.03 7-4-30 9.01.04 7-4-40 9.01.05 7-4-50 9.01.06 7-4-60 9.01.07 7-4-70 9.02.01 7-4-210 9.02.02 7-4-220 9.02.03 7-4-230 9.02.04 7-4-240 9.03.01 7-4-310-7-4-390 9.04.01 7-4-410 9.04.02 7-4-420 9.04.03 7-4-430 9.04.04 7-4-440 9.04.05 7-4-450 9.04.06 7-4-460 9.05.01 7-4-80-7-4-150 9.06.01 7-4-170 9.07.01 7-4-160 9.08.01 7-4-510 9.08.02 7-4-520 9.08.03 7-4-530 9.08.04 Repealed 9.08.05 7-4-540 9.09.01 7-4-610-7-4-620, 7-4-650-7-4-680 9.09.02 7-4-700 9.10.01 7-4-810, 7-4-820 9.10.02 7-4-830-7-4-850 24-1998 Sales tax 1 4-4-100, 4-4-230 25-1998 Trash-hauling trucks 1 6-7-40 5-1999 Public Library Board 1 2-9-20 17-1999 Capital investment fees 1 13-1-50 9-2000 Conduct on public property 1 10-4-10 3-2001 Library Board 2-9-10, 2-9-20 5-2001 Municipal Court 1 2-4-190 6-2001 Water Enterprise 1 13-4-10 2 13-4-20 3 13-4-30 4 13-4-40 5 13-4-50 6 13-4-60 7-2001 Wastewater Enterprise 1 13-5-10 2 13-5-20 3 13-5-30 4 13-5-40 5 13-5-50 6 13-5-60 9-2001 Water Enterprise and Wastewater Enterprise 1 13-4-40, 13-5-40 2-2002 Cable Television Franchise 1 5-1-10, 5-1-15 2 5-1-60-5-1-90 3 5-1-110-5-1-165 4 5-1-210-5-1-260 5 5-1-310-5-1-330 6 5-1-335, 5-1-340 7 5-1-345-5-1-375 8 5-1-410-5-1-425 9 5-1-430-5-1-475 10 5-1-480 11 5-1-510-5-1-655 12 5-1-710-5-1-735 13 5-1-750-5-1-770 14 5-1-810-5-1-855 15 5-1-860, 5-1-865 16 5-1-870 17 5-1-910-5-1-950 Exh. A Appx 5-A 3-2002 Animal regulations 1 7-4-820 9-2002 Housing Code 1 18-7-10 14-2002 Animal regulations 1 7-4-210 16-2002 Water and sewer rates 1 13-1-40 17-2002 Electrical Code 1 18-6-10 2, 3 18-6-30 7-2003 Fire Code 1 18-7-10 2 18-7-30 8-2003 Library Board 2-9-10-2-9-30 2-2004 Model Traffic Code 1 8-1-10 2, 3 8-1-20 4 8-1-60 5 8-1-40 8 8-1-50 18-2004 Animal regulations 1 7-4-830, 7-4-840 19-2004 Building regulations 1 18-7-10, 18-8-10, 18-9-10 24-2004 Model Traffic Code 1 8-1-20 26-2004 Community Action Commission 1 2-7-10-2-7-60 4-2005 Sexually oriented businesses 1 16-11-10-16-11-60 10-2005 Pollution of water supply 1-4 13-1-170 3-2006 Kennels and catteries 1 16-13-20 6-2006 Community Activities Commission membership 1 2-7-20 20-2006 Flood prevention and protection standards IC 16-10-10 ID 16-10-20 II 16-10-30 IIIA 16-10-110 IIIB 16-10-120 IIIC 16-10-170 IIID 16-10-130 IIIE 16-10-140 IIIF 16-10-150 IIIG 16-10-160 IVA 16-10-220 IVB 16-10-230 IVC 16-10-240 IVD 16-10-250 VA 16-10-270 VB 16-10-280 VC 16-10-270 3-2007 Building Code, Residential Code, Fuel Gas Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Existing Building Code and Property Maintenance Code 1 18-1-10, 18-1-30, 18-2-10, 18-2-30, 18-3-10, 18-3-30, 18-4-10, 18-4-30, 18-5-10, 18-5-30, 18-9-10, 18-9-30, 18-10-10, 18-10-30 4-2007 Noise 1 7-4-630 11-2007 Adopts municipal code 1 1-1-10-1-1-50, 1-1-70, 1-2-10-1-2-40, 1-2-60, 1-3-10-1-3-60, 1-3-80-1-3-130, 1-4-10-1-4-50, 1-5-10-1-5-30, 1-6-10, 2-1-10-2-1-30, 2-2-10-2-2-90, 2-3-10-2-3-60, 2-4-20-2-4-80, 2-4-100-2-4-130, 2-4-160, 2-4-170, 2-4-190-2-4-210, 2-5-10, 2-5-20, 2-6-10, 2-6-40-2-6-70, 2-7-10-2-7-60, 2-8-10-2-8-30, 2-9-10-2-9-40, 2-10-10-2-10-90, 2-11-10-2-11-50, 2-12-10, 4-2-10-4-2-30, 4-2-50-4-2-80, 4-3-10, 4-3-20, 4-3-40, 4-3-50, 4-4-10, 4-4-70, 4-4-100, 4-4-110, 4-4-240, 4-4-250, 4-5-10-4-5-30. 4-6-10, 4-6-20, 4-6-130, 5-1-10, 5-1-15, 5-1-85, 5-1-210, 5-1-325, 5-1-335, 5-1-340, 5-1-365, 5-1-435, 5-1-520, 5-1-565-5-1-575, 5-1-910, 5-1-915, 5-2-10-5-2-130, Appx 5-A, 6-1-20, 6-1-30, 6-1-50-6-1-100, 6-1-130, 6-1-160, 6-2-30, 6-2-110-6-2-130, 6-2-160, 6-2-170, 6-3-10, 6-3-20, 6-4-20-6-4-50, 6-4-70-6-4-90, 6-5-10-6-5-30, 6-5-160, 6-6-20, 6-6-30, 6-7-10-6-7-30, 6-7-60, 6-7-70, 7-1-20-7-1-110, 7-1-130, 7-2-10-7-2-180, 7-3-10, 7-3-20, 7-4-10-7-4-40, 7-4-70, 7-4-90, 7-4-160, 7-4-210-7-4-240, 7-4-360, 7-4-370, 7-4-410, 7-4-440, 7-4-530, 7-4-540, 7-4-610, 7-4-640, 7-4-650, 7-4-690, 7-4-810-7-4-840, 8-1-10-8-1-30, 8-1-60, 8-2-10, 8-2-20, 8-2-40, 8-2-50, 8-2-70, 8-2-80, 8-3-50-8-3-90, 8-4-10-8-4-30, 10-1-40, 10-2-20, 10-2-50, 10-3-10-10-3-50, 10-3-70, 10-4-10-10-4-40, 10-5-10, 10-5-40, 10-5-60, 10-5-70, 10-5-90-10-5-130, 10-5-150-10-5-170, 10-6-10-10-6-140, 10-6-160, 10-6-170, 10-7-10-10-7-60, 10-8-10, 10-8-30, 10-8-40, 10-8-60-10-8-140, 10-9-10-10-9-60, 10-10-10, 10-10-20, 10-11-10, 10-11-30, 11-1-10, 11-1-20, 11-1-40, 11-1-60, 11-2-10-11-2-30, 11-2-70, 11-3-30, 11-3-40, 11-3-100, 11-4-40, 11-4-70, 11-5-20, 11-5-30, 11-5-60, 13-1-10, 13-1-30-13-1-90, 13-1-110-13-1-130, 13-1-160, 13-1-170, 13-2-10-13-2-50, 13-3-40, 13-3-100, 13-4-10, 13-4-50, 13-5-10, 13-5-50, 15-1-10-15-1-60, 16-1-10-16-1-60, 16-2-10, 16-3-10-16-3-460, 16-4-10-16-4-60, 16-5-10-16-5-170, 16-6-10, 16-6-20, 16-7-10-16-7-30, 16-8-10-16-8-260, 16-9-10-16-9-410, 16-10-10-16-10-30, 16-10-110-16-10-170, 16-10-210, 16-10-230-16-10-280, 16-11-10-16-11-60, 16-12-10, 16-13-10, 16-13-20, 16-14-10-16-14-50, 16-15-10-16-15-100, 16-16-10-16-16-90, 17-1-10-17-1-30, 17-2-10, 17-2-20, 17-3-10-17-3-60, 17-4-10-17-4-30, 17-5-10-17-5-40, 17-6-10-17-6-30, 18-1-10-18-1-40, 18-2-10-18-2-30, 18-3-10-18-3-30, 18-4-10-18-4-30, 18-5-10-18-5-30, 18-6-10-18-6-30, 18-7-10-18-7-30, 18-8-10-18-8-30,18-9-10-18-9-30, 18-7-10-18-7-30, 18-8-10-18-8-30, 18-9-10-18-9-30, 18-10-10-18-10-30  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code 1-2008  2-12-08 1 18-6-10-18-6-30 5-2008  3-11-08 1 7-4-210(a) 15-1-30(a) 16-5-90 16-12-10 6-2008  7- 8-08 1-7 13-6-10-13-6-70 7-2008  7- 8-08 1 18-8-10-18-8-30 8-2008  7-22-08       Added 13-1-200-13-1-670 9-2008  7- 8-08 1-8       Added 13-7-10-13-7-70 10-2008  7-22-08 1 16-2-10 11-2008  7-22-08       Added 10-6-180 12-2008  8-12-08 18-6-10 13-2008  8-12-08 1 16-2-10 16-3-230 2       Rpld 8-1-30 15-2008 10-28-08       Added 10-7-70 16-2008 10-28-08       Added 17-1-40 17-2008 11-11-08 1 16-5-90 16-5-100 16-5-110 1-2009  4-28-09 10-11-30 2-2009  4-28-09 1 16-2-10 16-3-230 2       Rpld 8-1-30 3-2009  4-28-09 13-1-20(f) 7-2009 10-27-09 1       Added 7-4-700-7-4-760 13-2009 12- 8-09 Arts. 1-18 5-2-10-5-2-180 2-2010  4-13-10 1       Added 16-5-150(d)(30) 2       Added 16-5-150(e) 5-2010 5-2-20 6-2010  7-13-10 1(A)       Added 16-13.5-10 1(B) 10-8-130(d) 7-2010  7-27-10 1 16-2-10 2 16-6-10 8-2010  9-28-10 1       Added 7-4-210(e) 10-2010 11-23-10 1 7-4-30 2-2011  3- 8-11 1 4-4-250(2)-(4) 4-2011  3-22-11 1 16-2-10 7-2011  6-14-11 10-6-180 9-2011  8- 9-11 8-4-10-8-4-30 16-2-10 16-3-230 10-2011  8-23-11       Added 2-12-20 13-2011 11-22-11 1 17-5-20(i)(1) 1-2012  2-14-12 1 2-11-20 2-2012  2-14-12 1 6-1-170 2 6-2-30 4-2012  4-24-12 1 2-2-90 4-4-10 6-2012  9-11-12 1 16-3-230(f) 2 16-14-50(f) 1-2013  2-12-13 1 18-1-10-18-1-50 2 18-2-10-18-2-30 3 18-3-10-18-3-30 4 18-4-10-18-4-30 5 18-5-10-18-5-30 6 18-8-10-18-8-30 7 18-9-10-18-9-30 8 18-10-10-18-10-30 2-2013  3-26-13 1 16-3-460(a) 2 17-5-10 6-2013  5-28-13 1       Added 2-13.6-10 7-2013  6-11-13 1 7-1-90(a) 7-1-130(b) 7-3-20 7-3-30 8-2013  6-25-13 1 10-5-110 10-5-120(3) 10-5-130 10-5-150 9-2013  7- 3-13 1 16-5-90 11-2013  7-23-13 1 16-5-90 2-2014  1-14-14 16-10-10-16-10-30, 16-10-110-16-10-170, 16-10-210-16-10-340 4-2014  2-11-14 1 2-2-50 5-2014  3-11-14 1 16-5-130(b)(10) 2 16-5-130(c) 3       Added 16-5-130(d)(32) 4 16-5-150(c) 8-2014  4-22-14 1 7-4-680       Added 7-4-550-7-4-559 9-2014  5-20-14 1       Added 2-13-10-2-13-40 12-2014  6-24-14 1 8-1-10 2 8-1-20 4 8-1-60 13-2014  7-22-14 1 18-7-10-18-7-30 14A-2014  6-24-14 1       Added 4-2-90 2       Added 4-2-100 4-2015  3-10-15 1 6-3-10-6-3-70 2 10-1-40 6-2015  5-18-15 1 16-13-20(a)(6) 2 16-13-20(a)(17)a.-e. 16-13-20(a)(17)h. 1-2016WE  9-13-16 13-1-10-13-1-100 13-1-120-13-1-170 5-2016  4-12-16 1 16-4-10-16-4-60 6-2016  5-10-16 1 16-5-90(b)(2) 16-5-90(c)(1) 2 16-5-110(b)(2) 16-5-110(c)(1) 9-2016  5-10-15 1 2-9-10-2-9-30 13-2016  6-14-16 10-6-180(c) 16-2016 6-28-16 10-11-30 23-2016 12-13-16 1 16-5-100 3-2017  1-24-17 5-1-70 6-2017  4-25-17       Added 13-1-60(e), (f) 9-2017  6-27-17 1 2-3-20(b) 2 2-3-30(b) 1-2018  2-13-18 2-2-60 4-2018  2-23-18 2-7-20-2-7-50 2-13-20, 2-13-30       Added 2-13-40       Rnbd 2-13-40       as 2-13-50 7-2018  4-24-18 1 16-2-10 2 16-3-150 3 16-3-160(b) 4 16-5-130(c)(2), (3) 5 16-5-140(c)(3) 6 16-5-150(c)(2), (3) 8-2018  5-22-18 2-7-20(a) 12-2018  9-11-18       Rpld 10-6-40(b)(1)  
