CITY OF WESTMINSTER, COLORADO - HOME RULE CHARTER 
Reprinted October 2007 
The original Charter of the City of Westminster was adopted at a Special Election held on Tuesday, November 7, 1958, and duly filed by the City Clerk with the Secretary of State. 
Other amendments to the City Charter have been adopted by the voters as noted. 
Table of Contents CHAPTER TOPIC PAGE Prefatory Synopsis 2 Preamble 5 Chapter I Name and Boundaries 5 Chapter II Municipal Powers 5 Chapter III Elections 6 Chapter IV Organization of Government 9 Chapter V General Provisions Regarding Officers and Personnel of the City 15 Chapter VI Civil Service System 21 Chapter VII The Council: Procedure, Miscellaneous Powers and Duties 23 Chapter VIII Legislation 25 Chapter IX General Finance-Budget, Audit 29 Chapter X Taxation 33 Chapter XI Borrowing Power 33 Chapter XI.V Land Development and Public Improvements 35 Chapter XII Improvement Districts 36 Chapter XIII Purchases-Contracts-Leases 37 Chapter XIV Municipal Utilities 39 Chapter XV Public Utility Franchises 41 Chapter XVI Municipal Court 43 Chapter XVII Miscellaneous 44 Chapter XVIII Transitional Provisions 48  
PREFATORY SYNOPSIS 
In conformity with the provisions and under the authority granted to cities by Article XX of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, the twenty-one delegates elected by the citizens of Westminster, or duly appointed according to law, have formulated and submit herewith this Charter to meet the special needs of the City of Westminster. 
Since its organization on September 12, 1957, the Westminster Charter Convention and its committees have worked earnestly and unceasingly at the very difficult task assigned to them. In this process, the opinions and views of many people have been secured, public hearings held, suggestions and advice invited at all times, and detailed studies of a large number of charters carried on. 
The Convention submits the results of its effort in the form of a proposed Charter for the consideration of the voters of Westminster at a special city election to be held on January 7, 1958. 
Under provisions of this Charter, a Council-Manager form of government is established. The Council is composed of seven members, to be elected from the City at large. Provision is made for overlapping terms with a majority of the Council to be elected every two years. 
The Council is the policy determining body or overall governing agency of the City, having power to pass ordinances, determine policy and appoint a City Manager. The City Manager will be chosen by the Council on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his experience in and knowledge of such City Manager work. He may be removed at any time he does not properly execute municipal policies or provide for effective administration of the city's departments, agencies and services. 
The Charter is designed to provide the maximum of teamwork among members of the Council. The Council selects its own team leader, the Mayor, to preside at meetings and represent the City at ceremonial functions. 
The organization of the City government has been drawn to assure maximum flexibility in organizational arrangements so that it will be possible for the government of the City to readily adjust to new demands and changing circumstances as our dynamic community grows and prospers. 
The Charter includes modern provisions for proper budgeting, fiscal control, and auditing. Many provisions have been included to assure economical and business-like fiscal procedures. 
The direct democratic techniques of initiative and referendum and recall have been included in the Charter. Such provisions provide the means by which the people can, if necessary, directly control the policies of their city government at all times, enact or reject legislation as they see fit, and rid themselves of an elected official who fails to perform his duties properly. In addition, other safeguards have been included in the Charter to prevent abuse of any office with the City. 
The Charter may be amended if desirable in accordance with provisions in the Constitution. Every section has been written, insofar as possible, in accordance with sound and well-established principles of good government and administration with the best interest of the citizens of Westminster in mind. 
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF 
WESTMINSTER, COLORADO [1] 
Preamble Chapter I Name and Boundaries, § 1.1 Chapter II Municipal Powers, §§ 2.1-2.2.3 Chapter III Elections, §§ 3.1-3.18 Chapter IV Organization of Government, §§ 4.1-4.17 Chapter V General Provisions Regarding Officers and Personnel of the City, §§ 5.1-5.14 Chapter VI Civil Service System, §§ 6.1, 6.2 Chapter VII The Council: Procedure, Miscellaneous Powers and Duties, §§ 7.1-7.9 Chapter VIII Legislation, §§ 8.1-8.14 Chapter IX General Finance-Budget, Audit, §§ 9.1-9.11 Chapter X Taxation, §§10.1-10.3 Chapter XI Borrowing Power, §§ 11.1-11.3 Chapter XI.V Land Development and Public Improvements, §11.5-1 Chapter XII Improvement Districts, §§ 12.1-12.4 Chapter XIII Purchases-Contracts-Leases, §§ 13.1-13.4 Chapter XIV Municipal Utilities, §§ 14.1-14.6 Chapter XV Public Utility Franchises, §§ 15.1-15.11 Chapter XVI Municipal Court, §§ 16.1-16.4 Chapter XVII Miscellaneous, §§ 17.1-17.13 Chapter XVIII Transitional Provisions, §§ 18.1-18.8 Certificate of Final Adoption  
PREAMBLE 
We, the people of Westminster, Colorado, under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, do ordain, establish, and adopt this Charter for our municipal government. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- As stated in the Prefatory Synopsis, this Charter was adopted by the Westminster Charter Convention on November 8, 1957, and approved by the electorate at a special election held January 7, 1958. Amendments have been included in their proper places and are identified by a history note following the amended section, giving the date of the election amending the particular section. Absence of a history note indicates the section is derived from the original Charter. The text has been set out essentially as enacted, with only minor stylistic adjustments made for purposes of consistency. Editorial emendations made for purposes of clarity are included in brackets [ ]. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without comment. 

CHAPTER I - NAME AND BOUNDARIES 

Section 1.1. - Name and Boundaries. 
    The municipal corporation heretofore existing as the "City of Westminster" in Adams County, Colorado, shall remain and continue a body of politic and corporate in Adams County and Jefferson County, Colorado, and under this Charter shall be known as "City of Westminster" with the boundaries existing as of the effective date of this Charter amendment until changed in the manner authorized by law. 
(Amended 7-29-80) 
CHAPTER II - MUNICIPAL POWERS 

Section 2.1. - Powers, Rights and Liabilities. 
By the name of the City of Westminster the municipal corporation shall have perpetual succession; shall own, possess and hold all property, real and personal heretofore owned, possessed and held by the City of Westminster and does assume and shall manage and dispose of all trusts in any way connected therewith; shall succeed to all the rights and liabilities and shall acquire all benefits and does assume and shall pay all bonds, obligations and indebtedness of said City of Westminster; may, by the name of the City of Westminster, sue and defend, plead and be impleaded in all courts and places and in all matters and proceedings; may purchase, receive, hold and enjoy, or sell and dispose of real and personal property; may have and use a common seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
The City shall have all the power of local self-government and home rule and all power possible for a city to have under the Constitution of the State of Colorado. The City shall also have all powers that now or hereafter may be granted to municipalities by the laws of the State of Colorado, and the enumeration of particular powers in this Charter is not exclusive of others. All such powers shall be exercised in the manner prescribed in this Charter or, if not provided for herein, in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance of the Council of the City. All ordinances of the City of Westminster in force at the time this Charter goes into effect shall continue in force except insofar as they may conflict with the provisions of this Charter or shall be amended or repealed by ordinances enacted under the authority of this Charter. 
Section 2.2. - Form of Government. 
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "Council-Manager Government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the State Constitution and by this Charter all powers of the City shall be vested in an elective Council. 
Section 2.3. - Park Properties Outside of city. 
The City shall have the power to acquire, hold and manage property outside of the City limits by gift, lease or purchase for park or recreation purposes, and to adopt rules, regulations and schedules of charges for the use of such property. 
(Amended 11-2-65) 
CHAPTER III - ELECTIONS 

Section 3.1. - Applicability of State Law. 
City elections shall be conducted according to the provisions of the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965 (Article 10 of Title 31, C.R.S.) and the Uniform Election Code of 1992 (Article 1 to 13 of Title 1, C.R.S.), as said codes are amended from time to time, provided however, that when City Council finds it to be in the interest of the City, the Council may, by Ordinance, adopt provisions which modify or add to the provisions of said codes, and the provisions adopted shall prevail over any conflicting provisions in said codes. (Amended 11-7-95) 
Section 3.2. - Elective Officers and Terms of Office. 
(a)  The elective officers of the City shall be six (6) Councillors and a Mayor, all of whom shall be nominated and elected from the City at large. 
(Amended 11-2-93) 
(b)  The Mayor shall be elected by the popular vote of the electorate at the City's regular election, beginning in 1995, for a term not to exceed four years. The City Council shall, by ordinance, establish the term of office, the required percentage of votes to be elected Mayor, and any other procedures or requirements for electing the Mayor not inconsistent with this Charter. 
(Amended 11-2-93) 
(c)  At each regular City election beginning in 2003, there shall be elected three (3) Councillors. The three (3) candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall each be elected for a term of office of four (4) years. 
(Amended 11-2-93 and 11-5-02) 
(d)  The terms of office of Councillors and the Mayor shall commence at 8:00 p.m. on the Monday next following the regular city election at which they are elected. 
(Amended 11-2-93) 
(e)  Neither the Mayor nor any Councillor shall hold any elective public office other than a City of Westminster elective office. 
(Amended 11-2-93) 
Section 3.3. - Wards and Precincts. 
    The City of Westminster shall consist on one (1) ward. The election precincts of the City shall remain as they existed on the effective date of this Charter, until altered by the Council as hereinafter provided. The Council shall by resolution from time to time establish convenient election precincts in accordance with this Charter and statutes. 
Section 3.4. - Election Date. 
A regular City election shall be held on the first Tuesday in November in 1959, and of each off-numbered year thereafter. Special City elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
Section 3.5. - Special Elections. 
Special City elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Council at least forty (40) days in advance of such election, or when required by this Charter or statute. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. 
Sections 3.6-3.9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sections 3.6-3.9, which pertained to notice of election, voting hours, nominations, and acceptance of nomination, respectively, were repealed by an election on November 7, 1995. Section 3.6 had been amended by election on November 2, 1993; § 3.8 had been amended by election on November 5, 1985; and § 3.9 had been amended by election on November 2, 1993. 
Section 3.10. - Election Commission. 
An Election Commission is hereby created, consisting of the City Clerk and four (4) qualified and registered electors of the City, who during their term of office shall not be City officers or employees or candidates or nominees for elective City office. Such four (4) members shall be appointed by the Council for a term of two (2) years at the first January Council meeting following a regular City election. They shall serve without compensation. The City Clerk shall be chairperson. The Election Commission shall appoint the Board of Election, judges and clerks for each precinct and have charge of all activities and duties required of it by statute and this Charter relating to the conduct of elections in the City. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the Election Commission shall prescribe the procedure to be followed. The Election Commission shall provide for ballots and sample ballots, voting machines or electronic voting equipment, for determination of the winner in event of a tie vote, for canvas of returns, and for issuance of appropriate certificates. 
(Amended 7-29-80) 
Sections 3.11-3.15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sections 3.11-3.15, which pertained to form of ballots, election procedure, canvass of vote, judges and clerks, and compensation of judges and clerks, respectively, were repealed by an election on November 7, 1995. Section 3.11 had been amended by election on November 2, 1993. 
Section 3.16. - Informalities. 
No informalities in conducting City elections shall invalidate the same, if they have been conducted fairly and in substantial conformity with the requirements of this Charter. 
Section 3.17. - Registration. 
Registration of all voters shall be as provided for in the statutes of the State of Colorado as they now exist or may be amended hereafter, including the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965 and all other applicable statutes relating to registration of voters, maintenance of the registration list and related matters. 
(Amended 11-2-71, 11-1-83) 
Section 3.18. - Recall. 
(Amended 11-7-06) 
Any incumbent of an elective office may be removed from office by the qualified electors of the City after he has held office for six (6) months. 
A petition demanding the recall of the officer sought to be removed and signed by registered electors equal in number to twenty-five (25) percent of all votes cast for all the candidates for that particular office at the last preceding regular election, to conform with Article XXI of the Constitution, shall be addressed to the Council and delivered to the City Clerk not more than sixty (60) days after the affidavit making charges against said officer has been filed. Such petition shall meet the requirements of this Charter and the duly adopted Code of the City. Each registered elector signing the petition shall print his name, the date, his home address and County designation after his signature. Said petition may be in sections of one (1) or more sheets fastened securely at the top, and upon each section of the petition shall be written or printed a copy of the charges previously filed with the City Clerk. To each petition section there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the number of signers thereof and that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that each signature was made in the presence of the affiant. 
All sections of the petition shall be filed as one (1) instrument, with the endorsement of the names of three (3) persons designated as filing the same. Provided, however, that prior to the filing of any recall petition one (1) or more registered electors shall file with the City Clerk an affidavit of not more than two hundred (200) words stating the reasons for the recall of the officer sought to be removed. The City Clerk shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after the filing of said affidavit, mail a copy by registered mail to the officer sought to be recalled, who may file with the City Clerk a sworn statement of not more than three hundred (300) words in defense of charges made against him. 
Within fifteen (15) days of the filing of said petition the City Clerk shall ascertain by examination of the petition and the registration books whether the petition is signed by the requisite number of registered electors and shall attach thereto his certificate showing the result of such examination. If the petition is insufficient he shall forthwith, in writing, notify one (1) or more of the persons designated on the petition as filing the same. The petition may be withdrawn and amended within fifteen (15) days from the filing of the certificate. The City Clerk, within five (5) days after such amendment, shall make like examination of the amended petition and attach thereto his certificate of the result. If the petition is still insufficient, he shall return it to one (1) of the persons designated thereon as filing it, without prejudice to the filing of a new petition for the same person. 
If the petition or amended petition is found sufficient, the City Clerk shall submit the same with his certificate to the Council without delay and the Council, if the officer sought to be removed does not resign within (5) days thereafter, shall order an election. Such election shall be held on a Tuesday fixed by the Council not less than forty-five (45) nor more than sixty (60) days from the date that the City Clerk's said certificate was filed; provided that, if any other City election is to occur within ninety (90) days from the date of the City Clerk's certificate, the Council shall postpone and consolidate the recall election with such other City elections. 
There shall be printed on the official ballot, as to every officer whose recall is to be voted on, the words: "Shall (name of person against whom the recall petition is filed) be recalled from the office of (.....)?" Following such question shall be the words "Yes" and "No." 
On such ballots, under the question, there shall be printed the names of those persons who have been nominated as candidates to succeed the person sought to be recalled. Any qualified elector desiring to become a candidate at the recall election shall do so by petition as required by Sections 3.1 and 5.1 hereof, which petition if presented to the City Clerk shall entitle him to have his name placed on the ballot. The name of the person against whom the petition is filed shall not appear on the ballot as a candidate for the office. 
If the majority of those voting on said question of the recall of any incumbent from office shall vote "NO", said incumbent shall continue in said office; if a majority shall vote "YES", such incumbent shall thereupon be deemed removed from such office upon the qualification of his successor. 
If a vacancy occurs in said office after a recall election has been ordered, the election to fill the vacancy shall nevertheless proceed as in this article provided. 
No person who has been recalled or has resigned while recall proceedings were pending against him shall serve the City in any capacity within two (2) years after such removal or resignation. 
No person shall receive any compensation whatsoever for canvassing for signatures to a petition for recall of any official. 
(Amended 11-5-85) 
CHAPTER IV - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT 

Section 4.1. - The City Council. 
    The City Council shall consist of seven (7) members, six (6) Councillors and one (1) Mayor. The Council shall constitute the legislative and governing body of the City and shall have power and authority, except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by statute, to exercise all powers conferred upon or possessed by the City, and shall have the power and authority to adopt such laws, ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise thereof. 
(Amended 11-2-93) 
Section 4.2. - Qualifications of Councilmen. 
Members of the Council shall meet the eligibility requirements contained in Section 5.1 of this Charter. The Council shall be sole judge of the election and qualifications of its own members, subject only to review by the court. 
Section 4.3. - Compensation of Mayor and Councilmen. 
The members of the Council shall receive such compensation as the Council shall by ordinance prescribe; provided, however, they shall neither increase nor decrease the compensation of any member during his term of office, except members of the Council whose terms do not expire at the next regular City election, who shall receive the same salary as that provided for incoming members for the remainder of their term of office. The Mayor and Councilmen may, upon order of the Council, be paid such necessary bona fide expenses incurred in service in behalf of the City as are authorized and itemized. 
Section 4.4. - Appointment of Mayor Pro Tem. 
(a)  The Council shall, at its first meeting following each regular City election, and after the newly elected members take office, elect one (1) of its members to serve as Mayor Pro Tem, for a term expiring at the first Council meeting following each regular City election. Such election shall be by written ballot and by majority of the members of the Council in office at the time. 
(b)  In the event of absence or disability of both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem, the Council may designate another of its members to serve as Acting Mayor during such absence or disability. (Amended 11-2-93) 
Section 4.5. - Duties of Mayor. 
(a)  Insofar as required by statute, and for all ceremonial purposes, the Mayor shall be the executive head of the City. He shall have a voice and vote in all proceedings of the Council equal with that of other members of the Council but shall have no veto power. He shall be the presiding officer of the Council. 
(b)  The Mayor shall be a conservator of the peace, and in emergencies may exercise within the City the powers conferred by the Governor of the State of Colorado for purposes of military law, and shall have authority to command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances of the city and to suppress riot and disorder. 
(c)  The Mayor shall execute and authenticate by his signature such instruments as the Council, this Charter or any statutes of the State of Colorado or laws of the United States shall require. 
(d)  Except as may be required by statute, the Mayor shall exercise only such power as this Charter or the Council shall specifically confer upon him. 
Section 4.6. - Administrative service. 
The administrative officers of the City shall be the City Manager, Attorney, Clerk and Director of Finance, and such additional administrative officers as may be created by ordinance. The Council may by ordinance create additional administrative offices and may by ordinance combine any administrative offices in any manner it deems necessary or advisable for the proper and efficient operation of the City, but the Council may not diminish the duties and responsibilities of the office of City Manager. 
The City Manager and Attorney shall be appointed by the Council for an indefinite period, shall be responsible to and serve at the pleasure of the Council and shall have their compensation fixed by the Council. 
All administrative officers of the City, except the City Manager and Attorney, shall be appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite period. The appointment of Clerk and Director of Finance shall be subject to confirmation by the Council. All administrative officers except the Attorney shall be responsible to the City Manager and shall have their compensation fixed by the Council. All administrative officers, except the Attorney, Clerk and Director of Finance, may be discharged by the City Manager without confirmation by the Council. 
The Council shall establish by ordinance such departments of the city as it deems necessary or advisable and shall prescribe therein the functions, duties, and authorities of each department. Notwithstanding any provision elsewhere in this Charter, Council may add, combine, or eliminate departments and positions as it deems necessary or advisable. In the event of conflict between this section and provisions elsewhere in this Charter, this section shall prevail. 
The City Manager may prescribe such duties and responsibilities of the department heads of those departments responsible to him which are not inconsistent with this Charter or with any ordinance or resolution. 
All personnel employed by the City who are not elected officers of the City or administrative officers by, or under the authority of, this Charter shall be deemed to be employees of the City. The head of each department shall have the power to hire, suspend or discharge the employees of his department with confirmation by the City Manager. 
The Council may require any administrative officer or employee, if he is not resident at the time of his appointment or employment, to become a resident of the City within the time set by the Council and so remain throughout his tenure of office or employment. 
(Amended 11-5-91) 
Section 4.7. - City Manager: Appointment and Qualifications. 
The Council shall appoint a City Manager within ninety (90) days after any vacancy exists in such position. The City Manager shall hold office at the pleasure of a majority of the Council. He shall be selected solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in and his knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office as hereafter set forth. At the time of his appointment, he need not be a resident of the City or State; but during tenure of office he shall reside within the City. 
Section 4.8. - City Manager: Functions and Duties. 
The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city government. His functions and duties shall be: 
(a)  To be responsible to the Council for the efficient administration of all administrative departments of the City government except the department under the direction of the Attorney, and excepting that the City Manager shall be responsible for the operation and staff of the Municipal Court but shall not supervise or direct the Presiding Judge or the Assistant Judges, and; 
(Amended 11-5-91) 
(b)  To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(c)  To appoint the heads of the several city departments whose appointment is not otherwise specified in this Charter, and to direct and supervise such department heads; 
(d)  To give to the proper department or officials ample notice of the expiration or termination of any franchises, contracts or agreements; 
(e)  To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise, or in any contract, are faithfully kept and performed; 
(f)  To recommend an annual budget to the Council and to administer the budget as finally adopted under policies formulated by the Council, and to keep the Council fully advised at all times as to the financial conditions and needs of the City; 
(g)  To recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; and to attend Council meetings with the right to take part in discussions but not to vote; 
(h)  To exercise and perform all administrative functions of the City that are not imposed by this Charter or ordinance upon some other official; 
(i)  To be responsible for the maintenance of a system of accounts of the City which shall conform to any uniform system required by the Council and to generally accepted principles and procedures of governmental accounting; he shall submit financial statements to the Council quarterly, or more often as the Council directs; 
(j)  To act as Purchasing Agent for the City and in such capacity to purchase all supplies and equipment and dispose of the same in accordance with procedures established by the Council; 
(k)  To establish administrative policies and appropriate personnel rules and regulations governing officers and employees of the City within the parameters set by the City Charter and appropriate City ordinances adopted by City Council. 
(Amended 11-3-98) 
(l)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him by ordinance or by direction of the Council. 
Section 4.9. - Acting City Manager. 
The Council may appoint or designate an Acting City Manager during the period of vacancy in the office or the City Manager may designate an Acting City Manager during the temporary absence of the City Manager from the City. Such appointment shall not exceed thirty (30) consecutive days without the consent of City Council. Such Acting City Manager shall, while he is in such office, have all the responsibilities, duties, functions and authority of the City Manager. 
Section 4.10. - Relationship of Council to Administrative Service. 
Neither the Council nor any of its members shall dictate the appointment of any person to office by the City Manager or in any way interfere with the City Manager or other City officer to prevent him from exercising his judgment in the appointment or employment of officers and employees in the administrative service. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager; and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the City Manager. 
Section 4.11. - Clerk: Functions and Duties. 
(a)  The City Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Council and shall attend all meetings of the Council and shall keep a permanent journal of its proceedings in the English language. 
(b)  The Clerk shall be custodian of the City seal and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same. He shall also be custodian of all papers, documents, and records pertaining to the City the custody of which is not otherwise provided for. 
(c)  The Clerk shall certify by his signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by Council. 
(d)  The Clerk shall provide and maintain in his office a supply of forms for all petitions required to be filed for any purpose by the provisions of this Charter. 
(e)  The Clerk shall have power to administer oaths of office. 
(f)  The Clerk shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter, by the Council or by the City Manager. 
Section 4.12. - Treasurer: Functions and Duties. 
(a)  The Treasurer shall have the custody of all monies of the City, any bond pertaining solely to the Clerk and all evidences of indebtedness belonging to the City or held in trust by the City. 
(b)  The Treasurer shall collect all monies of the City, the collection of which is not provided for elsewhere by Charter or ordinance. He shall receive from other officers and employees of the City all money belonging to and receivable by the City that may be collected by such officers and employees, including fines, license fees, taxes, assessments and all other charges. All money shall be turned over to the Treasurer after collection or receipt. 
(c)  The Treasurer shall keep and deposit all monies or funds in such manner and only in such places as the Council may determine and shall report the same in detail to the City Manager. 
(d)  The Treasurer shall disburse all City funds in accordance with the provisions of statute, this Charter and procedures to be established by Council. 
(e)  The Treasurer shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter, by the Council or by the City Manager. 
Section 4.13. - Attorney: Functions and Duties. 
(a)  The Attorney shall act as legal advisor to, and be attorney and counsel for, the Council and shall be responsible solely to the Council. He shall advise any officer or department head of the City in matters relating to his official duties when so requested and shall maintain a copy of all written opinions given by him. 
(Amended 11-7-89) 
(b)  The Attorney shall prosecute ordinance violations, and he shall conduct for the city cases in court and before other legally constituted tribunals. He shall file with the Clerk copies of such records and files relating thereto as the Council may direct. 
(c)  The Attorney shall prepare or review all ordinances, contracts, bonds and other written instruments which are submitted to him by the Council and City Manager and shall promptly give his opinion as to the legal consequences thereof. 
(d)  The Attorney shall call to the attention of the Council all matters of law, and changes or developments therein, affecting the City. 
(e)  The Attorney shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter or by the Council. 
(f)  Upon the recommendation of the Attorney, City Manager, or upon its own initiative, the Council may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the City has an interest, or to assist and counsel with the Attorney therein. 
(Amended 11-5-85) 
Section 4.14. - Compensation of Attorney and Special Counsel. 
The compensation of the Attorney shall be set by the Council. No compensation to special legal counsel shall be paid except in accordance with an agreement between the Council and the Attorney or Special Counsel made before the service for which such compensation is to be paid has been rendered. 
Section 4.15. - Fire Department. 
There is hereby created a Fire Department, the head of which shall be a full-time, paid Fire Chief appointed by the City Manager. 
The Fire Chief shall supervise all appointed and volunteer employees and members of the Fire Department subject to direction and supervision of the City Manager. The Department shall also consist of other employees of such ranks and grades prescribed by ordinance or administrative directive. 
(Amended 11-1-83) 
Section 4.16. - Planning and Zoning. 
The Council shall provide for a City Planning and Zoning Commission having all the powers and duties granted by the provisions of statutes, this Charter, or as may be provided by ordinance, relating to commissions and boards. By ordinance, the Council may establish procedures and requirements for the use, division and development of land; and use, construction, alteration and removal of structures; and the pattern location and rate of growth of the community; all for the general purpose of protecting the public health, safety and welfare. Such ordinances may authorize the Council to act by resolution, motion or order as the Council deems appropriate. As used in this section, "public health, safety and welfare" shall mean, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The preservation of sound fiscal balance for the City in providing municipal services within the City limits; 
(2)  The maintenance of a sound balance between available public resources, facilities and services and the demands for such services; 
(3)  The preservation of a safe, healthy, and sound natural environment within the City. 
The Council may amend, repeal or revoke any ordinances or other action taken by it under this section, by following the same procedures used for the adoption of the ordinance or approval of any other section. 
(Amended 7-29-80, 11-3-87, 11-5-91) 
Cross reference- Land development and public improvements, Ch. XI.V. 
Section 4.17. - Independent Boards and Commissions. 
The Council may not create any board or commission, other than those provided for in this Charter, to administer any activity, department or agency of the City government except any activity which by statute is required to be so administered. The Council may, however, establish by ordinance (a) quasi-judicial licensing, permitting, and appeal boards and (b) other boards or commissions to serve solely in an advisory capacity. The Council shall define by ordinance the extent of the jurisdiction and authority of a board or commission created pursuant to this section. Members of the several boards and commissions shall be appointed for two (2) year terms. All persons serving a term in excess of two (2) years on the effective date of this provision establishing two-year terms shall continue to serve until the expiration of the term for which they were appointed, after which new appointments or reappointments shall be for two (2) years. 
(Amended 11-5-91) 
CHAPTER V - GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL OF THE CITY 

Section 5.1. - Eligibility for Office and Employment in City. 
(a)  No person shall hold any elective office of the City unless he or she has been a resident of the City for at least one (1) year immediately prior to the last day for filing original petitions for such office or prior to the time of appointment to fill a vacancy. No person shall hold any elective office unless he or she is a qualified and registered elector of the city on such last day for filing or at such time of appointment and throughout tenure of office. 
(Amended 11-05-96) 
(b)  No person shall be eligible for any elective or appointive City office who is in default to the City or to any other governmental unit of the State. The holding of office by any person who is in such default shall create a vacancy unless such default shall be eliminated within thirty (30) days after written notice thereof by the Council or unless such person shall in good faith be contesting the liability for such default. 
(c)  Each candidate for elective office shall file with his or her petition his or her affidavit that the candidate possesses the qualifications for such office provided in this section. Failure to file such affidavit shall invalidate the petition. 
(Amended 11-05-96) 
(d)  At the time a candidate submits a petition for elected office, or an applicant submits an application for appointment to a Board or Commission, such person shall also submit an affidavit indicating whether he or she has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the State of Colorado or in another jurisdiction. The report of the felony shall include the type of offense, the date of the offense, and may include the circumstances and any evidence of rehabilitation. Each candidate or applicant shall also give written permission for a criminal background investigation by the Westminster Police Department. The Police Department shall report to the City Clerk any felony convictions of a candidate or applicant found in its investigation. The City Clerk shall maintain the report in a file available to the public. 
(Added 11-05-96) 
(e)  Each member of a City board or commission created by, or pursuant to, this Charter shall have been a resident of the City for at least one (1) year immediately prior to the day of appointment and shall be a qualified and registered elector of the City on such day and throughout tenure of office. 
(Amended 11-05-96) 
(f)  All officers of the City shall be United States citizens. 
(g)  No elective officer, under this Charter, may be appointed to any City office or be employed by the City during the term of office for which he or she was elected or for two (2) years thereafter, provided that after the expiration of the term of office the person may be appointed as a member of an independent board or commission or fill a vacancy in the position of Councilman. 
(Amended 11-05-96) 
(h)  The Council may by ordinance require residence in the City of Westminster as a condition of employment of full-time appointive officers. 
Section 5.2. - Vacancies in Elective Office. 
Any elective City office shall be declared vacant by the Council upon occurrence of any of the following events before the expiration of the term of such office: 
(a)  For any reason specified by statute or by this Charter as creating a vacancy in office; 
(b)  If no person is elected to, or qualifies for, the office at the election at which such office is to be filled; 
(c)  If the officer shall be found guilty by a competent court of the State of Colorado or any act constituting misconduct in office under the provisions of this Charter; 
(d)  If the officer shall be convicted of crime involving moral turpitude; 
(e)  If the officer shall absent himself continuously from the city for more than thirty (30) consecutive days in any one (1) year without permission of the Council; 
(f)  In the case of any members of the Council, if such officer shall miss four (4) consecutive regular meetings of the Council or twenty-five (25) percent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the City, unless such absences shall be excused by the Council and the reason therefor entered in the proceedings of the Council at the time of such absence; 
(g)  If the officer is removed from office by the Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.4. 
Section 5.3. - Vacancies in Boards and Commissions. 
The office of any member of any board or commission created by, or pursuant to, this Charter shall be declared vacant by the Council: 
(a)  For any reason specified by statute or by this Charter as creating a vacancy in office; 
(b)  If the officer shall be found guilty by a competent tribunal of any act constituting misconduct in office under the provisions of this Charter; 
(c)  If such officer shall miss four (4) consecutive regular meetings of such board or commission, or twenty-five (25) percent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the City, unless such absences shall be excused by such board or commission at the time of each absence; 
(d)  If the officer is removed from office by the Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.4. 
Section 5.4. - Removals From Office. 
Removals by the Council of elective officers or of members of boards or commissions shall be made for either of the following reasons: (a) for any reason specified by statute for removal of city officers, (b) for any act declared by this Charter to constitute misconduct in office. Such removals by the Council shall be made only after hearing, of which such officer has been given notice in writing by the Clerk at least ten (10) days in advance, either personally or by delivering the same at his last-known place of residence. Such notice shall include a copy of the charges against such officer. The hearing shall afford an opportunity to the officer, in person or by attorney, to be heard in his defense, to cross-examine witnesses and to present testimony. If such officer shall neglect to appear at such hearing and answer such charges, his failure to do so may be deemed cause for his removal. A majority vote of the members of the Council in office at the time, exclusive of any member whose removal is being considered, shall be required for any such removal. 
Section 5.5. - Resignations. 
Resignations of elective officers and members of boards and commissions shall be made in writing and filed with the Clerk and shall be acted upon by the Council at its next regular meeting following receipt thereof by the Clerk. Resignations of appointive officers shall be made in writing to the appointing officer or body and shall be acted upon immediately. 
Section 5.6. - Filling Vacancies in Appointive Offices. 
Vacancies in appointive offices shall be filled in the manner provided for making the original appointment. In the case of members of boards and commissions appointed for a definite term, such appointments shall be for the unexpired term. 
Section 5.7. - Filling Vacancies in Elective Offices. 
(a)  Any vacancy which occurs in the Council shall be filled within thirty (30) days by a majority vote of the remaining members of the Council, said appointee to hold office for any balance of the unexpired term. 
(Amended 11-7-02) 
(b)  If any vacancy in the office of Councilman which the Council is authorized to fill is not so filled within thirty (30) days after such vacancy occurs, or if three (3) or more vacancies exist simultaneously in the office of Councilman, such vacancies shall be filled for the respective unexpired terms at a special election. 
Section 5.8. - Change in Term of Office or Compensation. 
Except by procedures provided in this Charter, the terms of office of the elective officers and of members of boards and commissions appointed for definite terms shall not be shortened. The terms of elective officers of the City shall not be extended beyond the period for which any such officer was elected except that an elective officer shall, after his term has expired, continue to hold office until his successor is elected and has qualified. The Council shall not grant or authorize extra compensation to any officer or employee after the service has been rendered except under terms agreed to prior to the rendering of the service. 
Section 5.9. - Oath of Office and Bond. 
Every officer, elected or appointed, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath of office prescribed by Section 7, of Article XII of the Constitution of the State and shall file the same with the Clerk, together with any bond required by this Charter, or by the Council. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this section within ten (10) days from the date of his election or appointment, such officer shall be deemed to have declined the office and such office shall thereupon become vacant unless the Council shall, by resolution, extend the time in which such officer may qualify as above set forth. 
Section 5.10. - Surety Bonds. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all officers of the City whose duties involve the custody of public property or the handling of public funds, either by way of receipt or disbursement or both, and all other officers and employees so required by the Council shall, before they enter upon the duties of their respective offices, file with the City an official bond, in such form and amount as the Council shall direct and approve. Such official bond of every officer and employee shall be conditioned that the officer or employee will faithfully perform the duties of the office, and will on demand deliver over to the successor in office, or other proper officer or an agent of the City, all books, papers, monies, effects and property belonging thereto, or appertaining to the office, which may be in the custody of the officer or employee; and such bonds may be further conditioned as the Council shall prescribe. The official bond of every officer whose duty it may be to receive or pay out money, besides being conditioned as above required, shall be further conditioned that the officer will, on demand, pay over or account for to the City, or any proper officer or agent thereof, all monies received by the officer or employee. The requirements of this paragraph may be met by the purchase of one (1) or more appropriate blanket surety bonds covering all, or a group of, City employees and officers, or by comparable coverage under the City insurance program. 
(Amended 11-7-95) 
All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds, and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the City. The Clerk shall be custodian of all bonds of all officers or employees, except that the Finance Director shall be custodian of any bonds pertaining solely to the Clerk. ;hn0;(Amended 11-7-95) 
Section 5.11. - Delivery of Office. 
Whenever any officer or employee shall cease to hold such office or employment for any reason whatsoever, he shall, within five (5) days, or sooner on demand, deliver to his successor in office or to his superior all books, papers, monies and effects in his custody as such officer or employee. Any officer violating this provision may be proceeded against in the same manner as public officers generally for a like offense under the statute. Any employee found guilty by a competent tribunal of violating this provision may be punished by fine or imprisonment, or both, as determined by the court. 
Section 5.12. - Pecuniary Interest Prohibited. 
(a)  Except as permitted by this section, no contract or purchase involving an amount in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be made by the City in which any elective or appointive officer or any member of his family has any pecuniary interest, direct or indirect. A "contract" shall for the purposes of this section include any arrangement or agreement pursuant to which any material, service or other thing of value is to be furnished to the City for a valuable consideration to be paid by the City or sold or transferred by the City, except the furnishings of personal services as an officer or employee of the City; and the term "member of his family" shall include spouse, children, and the spouse of any of them. 
(b)  Without limiting the generality of paragraph (a) of this section, an officer shall be deemed to have a pecuniary interest in a contract if he or any member of his family is an employee, partner, officer, director or sales representative of the person, firm or corporation with which such contract is made or of a sales representative of such person, firm or corporation. Ownership, individually or in a fiduciary capacity, by an officer or member of his family, of securities, or of any beneficial interest in securities, of any corporation with which a contract is made, shall not be deemed to create a pecuniary interest in such contract unless the aggregate amount of such securities, or interest in such securities, so owned by such officer and the members of his family, shall amount to ten (10) percent of any class of securities of such corporation then outstanding. 
(c)  A contract in which an officer or member of his family has a pecuniary interest may be made by the City if the members of the Council in office at the time having no such interest shall unanimously determine that the best interests of the City shall be served by the making of such contract and if either such contract is made after comparative prices are obtained or if the members of the Council having no interest shall unanimously determine that the obtaining of comparative prices is not feasible in such particular case. Any Council member may evidence his participation in either determination required by this paragraph by vote at a Council meeting or by written instrument filed with the Clerk. 
(d)  Any officer who knowingly permits the City to enter into any contract in which he has a pecuniary interest without disclosing such interest to the Council prior to the action of the Council in authorizing such contract shall be guilty of misconduct in office. Except in the instances specified in paragraph (c) of this section, the unanimous determination (by vote or written instrument) of all members of the Council that in a particular case an officer or member of his family will not have a pecuniary interest in any contract or purchase to be entered into by the City shall be final and conclusive in the absence of fraud or misrepresentation. 
Section 5.12.1. - Conflicts Based on Prior Pecuniary Benefits. 
(Entire section added 11-05-96) 
(a)  The acceptance or receipt by any Councillor or member of that Councillor's immediate family, or an organization formed to support the candidacy of that Councillor, of any thing of value in excess of one hundred dollars ($100) from any person, organization, or agent of such person or organization, shall create a conflict of interest with regard to that Councillor's vote on any issue or matter coming before the Council involving a benefit to the contributing person, organization, or agent, unless such interests are merely incidental to an issue or question involving the common public good. 
(i)  Should a conflict of interest arise for any Councillor under this subsection (a), the Councillor shall state the grounds for the conflict of interest on the record immediately prior to Council's vote, withdraw from debate on the issue, and abstain from voting on the matter, notwithstanding any duty to vote provided for elsewhere in this Charter. 
(ii)  In the event a quorum cannot be obtained because of any issue or matter to be acted on by Council because of abstentions pursuant to subsection (i) above, any abstaining Councillor or Councillors may vote as long as the abstaining Councillor or Councillors has disclosed the nature of the conflicting interest, including the amount of financial interest, the purpose and duration of any employment provided or services rendered and compensation therefore, and such other information as may be necessary to describe the interest. 
(iii)  Any Councillor may challenge the existence of a conflict of interest pursuant to this subsection (a) prior to Council's vote, but not thereafter. In the event such challenge is raised, the challenge shall be decided by a majority vote of the remaining members of Council with no alleged conflict, and such determination shall be deemed to be final and conclusive. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall be defined as: 
(i)  "Thing of value" means money, employment, goods, services, or objects with any intrinsic value, including but not limited to, campaign contributions, loans, offsets to expenditures, contributions in kind, and independent expenditures by any person or organization on behalf of the candidacy of a Councillor, provided that such thing of value was received during the Councillor's current term of office or anytime within six (6) months prior to the commencement of the Councillor's current term of office. 
(ii)  "Immediate family" means the spouse, children, and the spouse of any child of any Councillor or candidate for Councillor. 
(iii)  "Councillor" includes the Mayor. 
(c)  A knowing violation of this Section shall be deemed to be misconduct in office. 
Section 5.13. - Compensation of Employees and Officers. 
(a)  The compensation of all employees and officers of the City whose compensation is not provided for herein shall be fixed by the appointing officer or body within the limits of budget appropriations and in accordance with any pay plan adopted by the Council. 
(b)  The respective salaries and compensation of officers and employees, as fixed by, or pursuant to, this Charter shall be in full for all official services of such officers or employees and shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions and other compensation receivable by such officers or employees for their services. Such fees, commissions and compensations shall belong to the City and shall be collected and accounted for by such officers or employees, and be paid into the City Treasury and a statement thereof filed periodically with the City Manager. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the payment of necessary bona fide expenses incurred in service in behalf of the City. 
Section 5.14. - Anti-Nepotism. 
The following relatives and their spouses (a) of any elective official or of his spouse, or (b) of the City Manager or of his spouse, are disqualified from holding any appointive office or employment during the term for which said elective official was elected or during the tenure of office of the City Manager, respectively: child, grandchild, parent, grandparent, brother, sister, half brother and half sister. All relationships shall include those arising from adoption. This section shall in no way disqualify such relatives or their spouses who are bona fide appointive officers or employees of the City at the time of the election of said elective official or the appointment of said City Manager. 
CHAPTER VI - CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM 

Section 6.1. - Personnel Board. 
The Council shall provide by ordinance for a civil service system under the merit principle of personnel management. Said ordinance may be supplemented by rules and regulations based on said ordinance. The civil service system shall provide at least the following: 
(a)  For a professional and impartial approach to all municipal personnel problems based solely on the fitness, training and experience of the individual. 
(b)  For a nonsalaried Personnel Board, hereinafter referred to as "Board" in this chapter, consisting of five (5) citizens who shall be appointed by the Council. The Board members shall hold no other municipal office or position and shall be known to be in sympathy with the intent and purpose of Chapter VI of this Charter. The Board shall develop its own rules of procedure. 
(Amended 7-29-80, 11-5-91) 
(c)  The City Manager shall designate an administrative officer or employee to serve as secretary to the Board. 
(d)  The City Manager shall develop a classification and pay plan based on the most modern and accepted principles of such plan. 
(e)  The City Manager may consult with the Board on all major policy and procedural questions relating to personnel management. The powers of the Board shall be advisory and not controlling as to the personnel operations of the City. 
(f)  For a system of grievances and appeals to the Board, of employees who have been suspended, demoted or discharged and who believe that their cases have not been given proper treatment by the appointing authority. The Board shall review each such appeal after receiving from an employee a statement in writing, setting forth the nature of the appeal and the reasons therefor, provided that the Board must receive the appeal within thirty (30) days following the appointing authority's action. After a full and proper hearing of the appeal, at which the employee shall have the right to be represented by counsel, the Board shall have power to decide any of the following: 
(1)  To uphold the City Manager's or the appointing authority's action; 
(2)  To require by a majority vote reconsideration of the suspensions, demotions or discharges and a new decision of reinstatement or a lesser penalty or confirmation of the original demotion or discharge to be made by the City Manager or the appointing authority. 
(g)  The secretary to the Board shall be required to fully advise the Board of any disciplinary action taken as soon thereafter as is practicable. 
(h)  Any employee or official who has held a position or office included in the civil service system for a period of at least one (1) year prior to the date of adoption of the said civil service ordinance shall be retained without preliminary or performance tests and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter, the civil service system ordinance or personnel rules and regulations. 
(i)  For the restriction of active participation in the municipal politics of the City of Westminster, it being the stated policy, however, not to deny to employees and officials covered by the civil service system the rights of such persons to engage in their normal rights and responsibilities as citizens. 
(j)  The right to appeal to the personnel board as set forth in the provisions of this Charter, the civil service system ordinance and the personnel rules and regulations shall apply to all regular, full-time and all classified, benefited part-time employees of the City and not to officials holding elective offices, the administrative officers, technical consultants employed under contract by the City, members of boards and commissions of the City, and members of boards and commissions of the City. 
(Amended 11-8-89 and 11-3-98) 
Section 6.2. - Intent of Merit System. 
It is the intent of this chapter to secure the establishment of a program of a civil service system under the merit principle as an integral part of the administrative service, to the end that the administration of the City's personnel program will be done in a manner equitable to the employees without handicapping or curtailing responsible administrative officers, and by increased efficiency and improved administration will be economical to the citizens. 
CHAPTER VII - THE COUNCIL: PROCEDURE AND MISCELLANEOUS POWERS AND DUTIES 

Section 7.1. - Regular Meetings. 
The Council shall provide by resolution for the time and place of its regular meetings and shall hold at least two (2) regular meetings each month. An organizational meeting shall be held on Monday following each regular city election. 
Section 7.2. - Special Meetings. 
Special meetings shall be called by the Clerk on the written request of the Mayor, or any two (2) members of the Council on at least twenty-four (24) hours' written notice to each member of the Council, served personally or left at his usual place of residence; but a special meeting may be held on shorter notice if all members of the Council are present or have waived notice thereof in writing. 
Section 7.3. - Business at Special Meetings. 
No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the Council unless the same has been stated in the notice of such meeting. However, any business which may lawfully come before a regular meeting may be transacted at a special meeting if all the members of the Council present consent thereto and all the members absent file their written consent. 
Section 7.4. - Meetings To Be Public. 
All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public, and citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard under such rules and regulations as the Council may prescribe. 
Section 7.5. - Quorum: Adjournment of Meeting. 
A majority of the members of the Council in office at the time shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all Council meetings, but in the absence of a quorum a lesser number may adjourn any meeting to a later time or date, and in the absence of all members the Clerk may adjourn any meeting for not longer than one (1) week. 
Section 7.6. - Compulsory Attendance and Conduct at Meetings. 
Any two (2) or more members of the Council may by vote either request or compel the attendance of its members and other officers of the City at any meeting of the Council. Any member of the Council or other officer who, when notified of such request for his attendance, fails to attend such meeting for reasons other than confining illness or absence from the City shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office unless excused by the Council. The presiding officer shall enforce orderly conduct at meetings, and any member of the Council or other officer who shall fail to conduct himself in an orderly manner at any meeting shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. 
Any police officer designated by the presiding officer of the meeting shall serve as the Sergeant at Arms of the Council in the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
Section 7.7. - Organization and Rules of the Council. 
The Council shall determine its own organization, rules and order of business subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  A journal of the proceedings of each meeting shall be kept in the English language by the Clerk and shall be signed by the presiding officer and clerk of the meeting. 
(b)  A vote upon all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by "Yes" or "No" vote and entered upon the records, except that where the vote is unanimous it shall only be necessary to so state. 
(c)  No member of the Council shall vote on any question in which he has a financial interest, other than the common public interest, or on any question concerning his own conduct, but on all other questions each member who is present shall vote when his name is called unless excused by the unanimous consent of the remaining members present. Any member refusing to vote except when not so required by this paragraph shall be guilty of misconduct in office. 
(d)  In all roll call votes the names of the members of the Council shall be called in alphabetical order and the name to be called first shall be advanced one (1) position alphabetically in each successive roll call vote. 
(e)  The proceedings of the Council, or a brief summary thereof, shall be published within ten (10) days following each meeting. Any such summary shall be prepared by the Clerk and approved by the Mayor and shall show the substance of each separate proceeding of the Council. 
(f)  There shall be no standing committees of the Council. 
Section 7.8. - Investigations. 
The Council, or any person or committee authorized by it for the purpose, shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office or officer and to make investigations as to matters in which the municipality has an interest. The Council, for the purpose stated herein, may summon witnesses, administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and the productions of books, papers and other evidence. 
Failure on the part of any officer to obey such summons or to produce books, papers and other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. Failure on the part of any employee or other person to obey such summons or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this Chapter; and such person when found guilty of such violation by a competent tribunal may be punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred ($300.00) or imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
Section 7.9. - Providing for Public Health and Safety. 
The Council shall see that provision is made for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property. The Council shall constitute the Board of Health of the City, and it and its officers shall possess all powers, privileges and immunities granted to boards of health by statute. The Council is authorized to delegate to or to contract with qualified persons or public entities to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the Board of Health of the City. 
(Amended 11-5-85) 
CHAPTER VIII - LEGISLATION 

Section 8.1. - Prior City Legislation. 
All valid bylaws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City which are not inconsistent with this Charter and which are in force and effect at the time of the effective date of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended. If any such ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation provides for the appointment of any officers or any members of any board or commission by the Mayor, such officers or members of any board or commission shall, after the effective date of this Charter, be appointed by the Council. 
Those provisions of any effective valid bylaw, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation which are inconsistent with this Charter are hereby repealed. 
Section 8.2. - Ordinances and Resolutions. 
All official action of the Council shall be by ordinance, resolution, motion or order; except that, actions expressly required by any applicable law to be done by ordinance shall be done by ordinance. Actions regarding the internal affairs or concerns of the City government may be done by resolution or motion. All other actions required or permitted to be done by this Charter, City ordinances, or State or Federal law may be done by resolution, motion or order. The violation of any ordinance or order shall be punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both, as may be established by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be identified by a short title and by number and by a code sections number when a codification of ordinances is completed. 
Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The style of all ordinances shall be: "The City of Westminster ordains:". 
(Amended 11-3-87) 
Section 8.3. - Enactment, Amendment, Repeal and Effective Date of Ordinances. 
Subject to the statutes and to the exceptions which follow hereafter: 
(a)  Ordinances may be enacted by the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the members elect of the Council; 
(b)  No ordinance shall be amended or repealed except by an ordinance adopted as aforesaid; 
(c)  No ordinance shall be enacted at the meeting at which it is introduced nor until after publication of the proceedings or summary thereof of such meeting (which proceedings or summary shall include a statement of its title and purpose); and 
(d)  The effective date of all ordinances shall be the date of enactment after passage on second reading or as prescribed therein. 
It is provided, however, that an ordinance which is declared therein to be an emergency ordinance which is immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health or safety may be enacted at the meeting at which it is introduced or before publication of the proceedings of the meeting at which it is introduced, by six (6) affirmative votes if six (6) or seven (7) members of the Council are present at the meeting at which it is enacted or by four (4) affirmative votes if four (4) or five (5) members of the Council are present at the meeting at which it is enacted. 
In case an ordinance is given effect earlier than its enactment after passage on second reading, the requirements for publication may be met by posting copies thereof in conspicuous locations in a public place in the City, other provisions of this Charter notwithstanding; and the Clerk shall, within three (3) days after such posting, enter in the Ordinance Book under the record of the ordinance a certificate under his or her hand stating the time and place of such publication by posting of the ordinance; but the failure to so record and authenticate such ordinance shall not invalidate it or suspend its operation. Such ordinance shall also be published in accordance with section 8.4 but not as a requirement for the effectiveness thereof. 
(Amended 11-3-98) 
No ordinance granting any public utility franchise shall be enacted except in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.2. 
No ordinance shall be amended by reference to its title only, but the revised sections of the ordinance, as amended, shall be reenacted and published in full. However, an ordinance or section thereof may be repealed by reference to its title and ordinance or code number only. 
(Amended 11-3-87) 
Section 8.4. - Publication and Recording of Ordinances. 
Each ordinance shall be published within ten (10) days after its enactment by publishing the full text thereof in a newspaper as defined in Section 17.5 either separately or as part of the published Council proceedings. 
All ordinances shall be recorded by the Clerk in a book called "The Ordinance Book," and it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Clerk to authenticate such records by their official signatures thereon; but the failure to so record and authenticate such ordinance shall not invalidate it or suspend its operation. 
Section 8.5. - Penalties for Violation of Ordinances. 
Any ordinance may provide for the punishment of those who violate its provisions. The maximum punishment for the violation of any ordinance shall be established by the City Council by ordinance. 
(Amended 11-5-85) 
Section 8.6. - Enactment of Codes by Reference. 
In accordance with statutes now or hereafter in effect, the Council may enact technical codes, any appropriate Colorado statute or any detailed technical regulations promulgated or enacted by any municipality, state or federal agency, by reference thereto in an enacting ordinance, and without publishing such codes in full. 
Section 8.7. - Severability of Ordinances. 
Unless an ordinance shall expressly provide to the contrary, if any portion of an ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable; and to this end ordinances are declared to be severable. 
Section 8.8. - Codification of Ordinances. 
As soon as feasible after the effective date of this Charter, the Council may direct and complete the codification of all ordinances of the City and shall provide for the publication of subsequent amendments thereto so that such amendments may readily be made a part of such published code and maintained thereafter in current form. Any such codification may originally include provisions not previously contained in ordinances of the City. 
The Council shall provide for making copies of the codification available for public inspection and for distribution to the public at a reasonable charge therefor and shall publish notice of the printing and availability of such codification before the effective date thereof. Such printing and making available of the codification and notice thereof shall constitute publication of any such codification, other provisions of the Charter for publication notwithstanding. 
The copies of the ordinances and of the codification thereof, and of provisions adopted by reference in accordance with Section 8.7, may be certified by the Clerk and, when so certified, shall be competent evidence in all courts and other legally established tribunals as to the matter contained therein. 
Section 8.9. - Initiative and Referendum. 
An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or a referendum on an enacted ordinance may be had by petition, as hereafter provided. 
Section 8.10. - Initiatory and Referendary Petition. 
An initiatory or referendary petition on a legislative ordinance may be filed and shall be signed by not less than ten (10) percent of the number of persons who were registered electors of the City, as of the date of the last regular City election. Not more than five (5) percent of the registered electors shall be required to order a referendum on a public utility franchise. Such petitions shall meet the requirements of this Charter and the duly adopted Code of the City. 
A referendary petition shall be filed with the City Clerk not more than thirty (30) days after the effective date of said legislative ordinance or franchise ordinance. All signatures on said petition shall be obtained after the effective date of said ordinance and before the date of filing the petition with the Clerk. Any such petition shall be addressed to the Council and may be the aggregate of two (2) or more petition sections identical as to content and simultaneously filed. Such petition shall contain the endorsement of the names of three (3) persons designated as filing the same. An initiatory petition shall set forth in summary and in full the ordinance it proposes to initiate, and no petition shall propose to initiate more than one (1) ordinance. A referendary petition shall identify, meaningfully summarize, and set forth the ordinance or part thereof, or Code section it proposes to have repealed. 
Each signer of a petition shall sign and print his name, and shall place thereon, after his name, the date and his place of residence by street and number, and County designation. To each petition section there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the number of signers thereof and that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that each signature was made in the presence of the affiant. 
Such petition shall be filed with the Clerk who shall, within fifteen (15) days, canvass the signatures thereof. If the petition, on its face, contains a sufficient number of signatures, but does not contain a sufficient number of signatures of registered electors of the City, the Clerk shall notify forthwith by first class and electronic mail, if available, the person filing such petition and fifteen (15) days from such notification shall be allowed for filing supplemental petition papers; provided, however, that if the petition as initially filed shows on its face that it does not contain the required number of signatures, whether of registered electors or not, the Clerk shall not be required to canvass the signatures and the petition shall be null and void and shall not be circulated further. When a petition with sufficient signatures is filed within the time allowed by this section, the Clerk shall present the petition to the Council at its next regular meeting. (Amended 11-1-83, 11-5-85, 11-3-87; 11-7-06) 
Section 8.11. - Council Procedure on Initiatory and Referendary Petitions. 
Upon the presentation to the Council of an initiatory or referendary petition by the Clerk, the Council shall, within thirty (30) days, unless otherwise provided by statute, either: 
(a)  Adopt the ordinance as submitted by an initiatory petition; 
(b)  Repeal the ordinance, or part thereof, referred to by a referendary petition; or 
(c)  Determine to submit the proposal provided for in the petition to the electors. 
Section 8.12. - Submission of Initiatory and Referendary Ordinances to Electors. 
Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election, occurring not less than sixty (60) days after said decision, held in the City for any other purpose, or, in the discretion of the Council, at a special election called for that specific purpose. The result of all elections held under the provisions of this section shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon. 
(Amended 11-7-06) 
Section 8.13. - Ordinance Suspended; Miscellaneous Provisions on Initiatory and Referendary Petitions. 
The presentation to the Council by the Clerk of valid and sufficient referendary petition containing a number of signatures equal to ten (10) percent of the number of persons who were registered electors of the City as of the date of the last regular City election shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question pending repeal by the Council or final determination by the electors. 
An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed for a period of six (6) months after the date of the election at which it was adopted, and an ordinance repealed by the electorate may not be reenacted for a period of six (6) months after the date of the election at which it was repealed; provided however, that any ordinance may be adopted, amended or repealed at any time by appropriate referendum or initiatory procedure in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this chapter or if submitted to the electorate by the Council on its own motion. 
If two (2) or more ordinances adopted at the same election shall have conflicting provisions, the provisions in the ordinance receiving the highest number of affirmative votes shall govern. 
(Amended 11-7-06) 
Section 8.14. - Ordinances Exempt From Referendum. 
In any issue of bonds by [the] City Council, pursuant to its power to do so as set forth in this Charter including Section 11 [Chapter XI] and as [the] Council may otherwise be authorized by law, if [the] City Council finds and recites that facts exist which constitute an emergency which requires the immediate passage of a bond ordinance by emergency ordinance, [the] Council is authorized to exempt said emergency ordinance from referendum. Nothing in this amendment [section] shall be interpreted to permit the Council to incur general obligation indebtedness of the City of Westminster without the vote of the citizens of the City. 
(Added 11-5-85) 
CHAPTER IX - GENERAL FINANCE-BUDGET, AUDIT 

Section 9.1. - Fiscal Year. 
The fiscal year of the City and of all its agencies shall begin on the first day of January of each year and end on the thirty-first day of December of the same year. 
Section 9.2. - Budget Procedures. 
The City Manager shall prepare and submit to the Council on or before the fifteenth of September of each year a recommended budget covering the next fiscal year, and shall include therein at least the following information: 
(a)  Detailed estimates with his supporting explanations of all proposed expenditures for each department, office and agency of the City, and for the court, showing the expenditures for corresponding items for the last preceding fiscal year in full, and for the current fiscal year to September 1 and estimated expenditures for the balance of the current fiscal year; 
(b)  Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the City, showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any; 
(c)  Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues of the City from sources other than taxes with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the City from each of the same similar sources for the last preceding fiscal year in full, and for the current fiscal year to September 1, and estimated revenues for the balance of the current fiscal year; 
(d)  A statement of the estimated balance or deficit for the end of the current fiscal year; 
(e)  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with any available unappropriated surplus and any revenues from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures; 
(f)  Such other supporting information as the Council may request. 
Section 9.3. - Schedule of Capital Outlay. 
If required by the Council, by resolution or ordinance, the City Manager shall submit to the Council, simultaneously with his recommended budget, a schedule showing all recommended capital outlay expenditures during the following five (5) fiscal years. The City Manager shall prepare this schedule after consultation with the City Planning Commission. This schedule shall list separately each proposed acquisition of capital equipment or facility and each proposed capital expenditure program in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with estimates of cost as accurate as may be made without detailed plans and specifications. It shall also include proposed capital expenditures by the public schools, library or any other organization financed in whole or in part by City property taxes. This schedule shall be for the guidance of the Council in adoption of the regular annual budget, and the Council may delete items or make such revisions as it deemed appropriate and may arrange items in the order of priority for acquisition or construction. After making any desired corrections or additions, the Council shall adopt the capital outlay program at the same meeting as it adopts the regular annual budget, but such adoption shall be only for the purpose of setting up a guide for future capital expenditures and in no way shall obligate the City to carry out the programs listed nor to include any of the items in future budgets nor to appropriate funds for any of the items or programs. In the preparation of the annual budget, neither the City Manager nor the Council shall include or appropriate funds for any capital expenditure unless the item was included in the capital outlay program submitted with the budget, or the capital expenditure is deemed by the Council to be of an emergency nature. 
Section 9.4. - Budget Hearing. 
A public hearing on the proposed budget shall be held before its final adoption at such time and place as the Council shall direct. Notice of such public hearing, a summary of the proposed budget and notice that the proposed budget is on file in the office of the Clerk shall be published at least one (1) week in advance of the hearing. The complete proposed budget shall be on file for public inspection during office hours at such office for a period of not less than one (1) week prior to such hearing. 
Section 9.5. - Adoption of Budget. 
(A)  Not later than the second Monday of October in each year, the Council shall meet to consider the adoption of a budget for the next fiscal year. Council may, by resolution, adopt the budget on this date, or may continue the matter to a date no later than the fourth Monday in October. In any event, Council shall by resolution, adopt the budget no later than the fourth Monday in October. When Council adopts the budget, Council shall provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for municipal purposes. 
(B)  The Council shall thereupon cause the total levy to be certified to the County Assessor, who shall extend the same upon the tax list of the current year in a separate column entitled "City of Westminster Taxes" and shall include said City taxes in the Assessor's general warrant to the County Treasurer for collection. On or before the last day of the current fiscal year the Council shall appropriate, by ordinance, the money needed for municipal purposes during the next fiscal year of the City. The annual appropriation ordinance shall be based upon the budget as adopted. 
(Amended 11-7-95) 
(C)  Nothing in this section 9.5 shall be construed to preclude the Council from adopting a budget for two (2) fiscal years instead of one (1) fiscal year, according to such procedures as Council shall prescribe by ordinance. 
(Added 11-7-2000) 
Section 9.6. - Budget Control. 
Except for purposes which are to be financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessment, or for other purposes not chargeable to a budget appropriation, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the City except in accordance with an appropriation thereof for such specific purpose, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under such obligation in the current fiscal year, except that: 
(1)  Money from the contingency fund may be transferred by resolution at any time during the year. 
(2)  The City Manager may order the transfer of funds within a departmental budget at any time during the year. 
(3)  [The] Council may order the transfer of any unencumbered appropriation balance, or any portion thereof, from one account, department, fund or agency to another at any time during the year. 
The Council may make additional appropriations by ordinance during the fiscal year for unanticipated expenditures required of the City, but such additional appropriations shall not exceed the amount by which actual and anticipated revenues of the year are exceeding the revenues as estimated in the budget, unless the appropriations are necessary to relieve an emergency endangering the public health, peace or safety. 
Except in those cases where there is no logical account to which an expenditure can be charged, expenditures shall not be charged directly to the contingency fund (or other similar fund). Instead, the necessary part of the appropriation for the contingency fund (or other similar fund) shall be transferred to the logical account and the expenditure then charged to such account. 
At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the Council, the City Manager shall submit to the Council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual revenue expenditures to date; and if it shall appear that the revenues are less than anticipated, the Council may reduce appropriations, except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the revenues. 
The balance of any budget appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year shall revert to the fund from which the appropriation was made. 
(Amended 11-4-75, 11-5-91) 
Section 9.7. - Sinking Funds. 
The Council may by ordinance provide for sinking or special funds, to provide for monies held in trust; for depreciation and obsolescence of structures, machinery and equipments; for debt service; and for local improvements. 
(Amended 11-4-75) 
Section 9.8. - Depository. 
The Council shall designate depositories for City funds and shall provide for the regular deposit of all City monies. The Council shall provide for such security for City deposits as is authorized or permitted by statute, except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security. 
Section 9.9. - Investments. 
Monies remaining in any fund, in the discretion of the City Administration, may be invested until needed for disbursement, in one (1) or more of the investments permitted by the laws of Colorado governing investments of the State of Colorado public funds. 
Interest on such investments shall be credited to the fund to which the invested money belongs, if such can be determined, otherwise to the General Fund of the City. 
(Amended 11-1-83) 
Section 9.10. - Independent Audit; Annual Report. 
An independent audit shall be made at least annually in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as they pertain to governments for all funds reported in the comprehensive annual financial report, and more frequently if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audit shall be made by certified or registered public accountants, experienced in municipal accounting, selected by the Council. 
The City Manager shall prepare an annual report of the affairs of the City, including a financial report. Copies of such audit and annual report shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the City Manager. 
(Amended 11-3-87) 
Section 9.11. - Retirement Plan; Police Eligible. 
The City shall establish Pension Plans for all eligible employees of the City upon such terms and conditions as may be enacted by the Council. There may be separate plans for the firefighters, the police and such other classes of employees as Council may determine. 
The Council shall provide by ordinance for the appointment of a board of trustees for each plan and for the control, management, administration and application of said funds. (Amended 7-24-73, 11-7-89) 
CHAPTER X - TAXATION 

Section 10.1. - Collection of Taxes. 
Until the Council shall otherwise provide by ordinance, the County Treasurer shall collect City taxes in the same manner and at the same time as State taxes are collected. In like manner the Council may provide for collection of special improvement assessments by said Treasurer. The assessment of property and the levy and collection of general taxes, sale of property for taxes, and the redemption of the same, shall be effected pursuant to ordinance, or, if no ordinances apply, pursuant to the laws of this State, as modified by this Charter. The County Treasurer shall report and pay to the City the amount of tax collections of the City for the preceding month. The estimated costs of tax collections and losses shall be included in the budget. 
(Amended 11-3-87) 
Section 10.2. - Limitation on Tax Powers of City. 
No income tax, sales tax or cigarette tax shall be adopted until it shall have been approved by a majority of the electorate at a regular or special election. 
Section 10.3. - Authority to Acquire Property. 
In addition to all other power which it has to acquire property, the City of Westminster is hereby authorized to purchase or otherwise acquire property on which there are delinquent taxes and or special assessments. The City may also dispose of any property acquired under this authority. 
CHAPTER XI - BORROWING POWER 

Section 11.1. - Limits of Borrowing Power. 
General obligation indebtedness of the City shall be incurred and limited as provided in Article XI of the Constitution of the State of Colorado; provided that in determining the limitation of the City's power to incur indebtedness there shall not be included indebtedness for the acquisition or extension of a water system and supply, public utilities, projects, enterprises, works or ways from which the City will derive revenue; and provided further, that no general obligation indebtedness shall be incurred without the vote of the qualified electors except for water purposes and except such indebtedness as may be incurred pursuant to Section 11.3 of this Charter. Revenue bonds may be issued by the Council without the vote of the qualified electors. 
In addition, without the vote of the qualified electors, 
(a)  The Council shall have the power and it shall be its duty to refund all bonds and issues whenever the same is advantageous to the City. 
(b)  The Council shall have the power to issue special improvement district bonds. 
(c)  The Council shall have the power to issue bonds to finance the improvement or extension of a municipally owned and operated utility, or any other project, enterprise, works or ways, if said bonds shall be payable solely out of revenue to be derived from the operation of such utility, project, enterprise, works or ways. The Council shall also be empowered to combine municipally owned and operated utilities, providing for their joint operation, and having so provided, may issue revenue bonds of such jointly operated utilities, pleading for the payment thereof the joint revenue of the utilities. Such joint utilities revenue bonds may be issued to acquire, extend or improve one (1), or more, or all of the jointly operated utilities. 
(d)  The Council shall have the power to issue revenue bonds for any public purpose payable in whole or in part from the revenue to be derived from the operation of facilities to be acquired, constructed or improved with the proceeds of the bonds, or payable in whole or in part from the available proceeds of sales and use taxes which may be imposed pursuant to Chapter X of this Charter or which may be imposed by the State of Colorado, or any agency thereof, and made available to the City. Such bonds shall not be considered indebtedness or general obligations of the City. 
(e)  The City may borrow funds for a period not to exceed (6) months, for the payment of current debts, operating expenses and progress payments under public contracts provided that the expenditure shall have been properly budgeted and funds appropriated therefor and provided further that the source of repayment of the funds so borrowed shall be previously invested City funds awaiting the maturity of such investments. 
(Amended 11-4-75) 
Section 11.2. - Bonds-Interest, Prepayment. 
(a)  The terms and maximum interest rate of general obligation or revenue bonds or other like securities shall be fixed by the authorizing ordinance, and such securities shall be sold to the best advantage of the City. 
(b)  Any bonds may contain provisions for calling the same at designated periods prior to the final due date, with or without the payment of a prior redemption premium. 
(Amended 9-24-74) 
Section 11.3. - [Installment, Lease Option Contracts.] 
The Council may enter into installment or lease option contracts for the purchase of property or capital equipment. No such contract shall extend over a period greater than the estimated useful life of such property or capital equipment as determined by the Council, nor shall the total amounts of principal payable under all such contracts together with the total of all outstanding principal of general obligations indebtedness of the City exceed the amount limitations of this Charter applicable to general obligation indebtedness. 
All such deferred payments shall be included in the budget for the year in which the installment is payable. 
(Amended 11-4-69, 9-24-74) 
CHAPTER XI.V - LAND DEVELOPMENT AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 11.5.1. - Generally. 
Land Development within the City may occur as provided by [the] City Council by ordinance. Provision for land use and development within the City may include use, design, location, construction and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, utilities, private and public streets and avenues, parking facilities, drainageways, pedestrian areas, parks and common open space, ownership organizations, educational facilities, recreational facilities and other public improvements and facilities. The authority of [the] City Council under this section is in addition to City Council authority under Section 4.16 of the Charter, and this section shall not be construed to restrict City Council authority under Section 4.16. 
The City may require agreements concerning land use and development and public improvements and facilities as a condition of approval of development. The City may require providing public improvements and facilities its deems reasonably necessary as a condition of approval of land use and development. The City also may provide for City construction of public improvements and facilities reasonably necessary to serve future land use and development which is determined to be in the City's interest. 
The City may establish and collect, in advance or otherwise, from land use and development payments for public improvements and facilities in the forms of development and impact fees and charges, dedications of property and fees in lieu thereof, and requirements of recovery of costs for public facilities provided to serve future land development. The City may establish conditions upon and require agreements to provide public improvements and facilities to land use and development. The City may provide for combinations of the foregoing and establish methods which effectuate the recovery of costs of public facilities and improvements it deems reasonably necessitated by and of benefit to land use and development within the City. 
The City shall have additional authority concerning land use and development and public improvements as is provided by Section 4.16 of the Charter and the Colorado Constitution and statutes. 
This section shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose of requiring new development, not current citizens, to bear the proportionate share of costs of benefits of public improvements and facilities reasonably necessitated by growth, mitigating the adverse effects of land development and promoting coordinated, innovative, high-quality planning to produce a well-balanced, technologically advanced City. (Added 11-1-83) 
CHAPTER XII - IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS 

Section 12.1. - Power To Construct Improvements and Create Improvement Districts. 
The City shall have the power to contract for, construct, or install special or local improvements of every character within designated districts of said City, and to assess the cost thereof wholly or in part upon the property especially benefited. The City Council shall by ordinance prescribe the method and manner of making such improvements, of letting contracts therefor, assessing the cost thereof; and issuing and paying bonds for costs and expenses of the organization of said districts and of construction or installation of said improvements. The creation of any local improvement district shall be subject, however, to protest by the majority of the owners of the property to be assessed, except in case the City shall pay one-half or more of the total cost of the improvements made. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to limit the power of the City Council to otherwise act in accordance with the Constitution and statutes of Colorado in carrying out such purposes. 
Section 12.2. - Surplus and Deficiency Fund. 
All special or local improvements, except as the City may contribute to the cost thereof, shall be paid for in public improvement bonds, and all monies collected on account of the assessments for any improvements shall be applied to the payment of the bonds (and interest) issued therefor, until the payment of all the said bonds. Where all outstanding bonds of a special or local improvement district have been paid and any monies remain to the credit of the district, they shall be transferred to a special surplus and deficiency fund; and whenever there is a deficiency in any special or local improvement district fund to meet the payments of outstanding bonds and interest due thereon, the deficiency shall be paid out of said surplus and deficiency fund. Whenever a special or local improvement district has paid and canceled three-fourths of its bonds issued, and for any reason the remaining assessments are not paid in time to take up the remaining bonds of the district and the interest due thereon, and there is not sufficient money in the special surplus and deficiency fund, the City shall pay said bonds when due and the interest due thereon, and reimburse itself by collecting the unpaid assessments due said district. 
Section 12.3. - Improvement District Bonds-General Benefit. 
In consideration of the general benefits conferred on the City at large from the construction or installation of improvements in special or local improvement districts, the City Council may levy annual taxes on all taxable property within the City at a rate not exceeding two (2) mills in any one (1) year, to be disbursed as determined by the City Council for the purpose of advancing money to maintain current payments of interest and equal annual payments of the principal amount of bonds issued for any special or local improvement district thereinafter created. The proceeds of such taxes shall be placed in a special fund and shall be disbursed only for the purposes specified herein; provided however that in lieu of such tax levies, the City Council may annually transfer to such special fund any available money of the City, but in no event shall the amount transferred in any one (1) year exceed the amount which would result from a tax levied in such year as herein limited. In addition to the above, the Council may finance the City's share of the cost of any special improvement project, whether or not such cost is assessed against City-owned property, by the issuance of special improvement district bonds, and shall appropriate annually an amount sufficient for the payment of that portion of the share of such costs then due. Such bonds shall not be subject to any election requirement or debt limitation which might otherwise exist pursuant to this Charter or other applicable law. 
(Amended 11-4-75) 
Section 12.4. - Review of Improvement District Proceedings. 
No action or proceeding, at law or in equity, to review any acts or proceedings, or to question the validity or enjoin the performance of any act, or the issue or collection of any bonds, or the levy or collection of any assessments, authorized by this Chapter, or for any other relief against any acts or proceedings done or had under this Chapter, or of the City, with reference thereto, whether based upon irregularities or jurisdictional defects, shall be maintained, unless commenced within thirty (30) days after the performance of the act or the passage of the resolution or ordinance complained of, or else be thereafter perpetually barred. 
(Amended 9-24-74) 
CHAPTER XIII - PURCHASES-CONTRACTS-LEASES 

Section 13.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 13.1, which pertained to the purchase and sale of property and was amended by election on September 24, 1974, July 29, 1980, and November 5, 1985, of this Charter was repealed by an election on November 7, 1989. 
Section 13.2. - Emergency Purchases. 
In case of emergency affecting the public peace, health or safety, the Council may waive all provisions for competitive bidding and direct the Purchasing Agent to purchase necessary supplies in the open market at not more than commercial prices. 
Section 13.3. - Contracts. 
(a)  All contracts or leases to which the City was a party when this Charter became effective shall remain in full force and effect for the complete term of such contract or lease. 
(b)  The authority to contract on behalf of the City is vested in the Council and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. Contracts may be made on behalf of the City by the City Manager in such amounts and for such purposes as City Council may, from time to time, prescribe by ordinance. No contract shall be binding upon the City unless the contract is in writing and duly signed by the Mayor or other authorized City Officer. 
(Amended 11-7-95) 
(c)  Any contract or agreement in an amount exceeding a maximum amount as may be set from time to time by the Council by ordinance, and which is made in a form or with terms other than the standard City purchase order form, shall before execution be submitted to the City Attorney, who shall review the contract to determine its adequacy as to form and legality. 
(d)  No contract or purchase order shall be subdivided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar value limitations contained in this section or in any ordinance enacted pursuant to this section. 
(e)  No contract shall be amended after the same has been made except upon the authority of the Council, provided that the City Manager may amend contracts to the extent such authority has been delegated to him by City Council by ordinance. 
(f)  No compensation shall be paid to any contractor except in accordance with the terms of the contract. 
(g)  No contract shall be made with any person, firm or corporation in default to the City. 
(h)  Before any contract, agreement or purchase order obligating the City to pay an amount exceeding a maximum amount as may be set from time to time by the Council by ordinance is executed, the Finance Director or the City Manager first shall have certified that an appropriation has been made for the payment thereof, or that sufficient funds will be available if it be for a purpose being financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessments or for some other purpose not chargeable to a budget appropriation. In the case of a contract or agreement obligating the City for periodic payments in future fiscal years for the furnishing of a continuing service or the leasing of property, such certification need not cover those payments which will be due in future fiscal years; but this exception shall not apply to a contract for the purchase or construction of a public improvement unless such purchase or construction is being financed by an installment contract. Certification by the Finance Director of the City or the City Manager shall be endorsed on each contract, agreement or purchase order requiring same or shall be filed as an attachment thereto. 
(i)  An individual agreement of employment shall not be deemed a contract requiring opinion by the Attorney or certification by the Finance Director of the City. 
(j)  In all purchases or contracts in excess of such maximum amount as may be set from time to time by Council by ordinance, (1) the purchase or contract shall be approved or ratified by the Council, (2) sealed bids shall be obtained, either by public notice or selective invitation to bidders as directed by the Council, except (a) where the council shall determine by unanimous resolution of those present at the meeting that the public interest will be best served by joint purchase or contract with, or purchase or contract from another unit of government, or (b) upon recommendation of the City Manager when the Council shall determine that the public interest will be best served by negotiated contract with a single bidder, and (3) no purchase or contract shall be divided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar value limitation contained in this section. 
(k)  Whenever comparative prices have been obtained by public bidding, purchases shall be awarded to the lowest competent bidder meeting specifications, unless City Council after reviewing the bids received determines that the public interest will be better served by accepting a higher bid. Council shall have the right to reject all bids. Sales of City Property shall be made to the bidder whose bid is most advantageous to the City. 
(l)  All purchases by the City shall be evidenced by written contract, invoice or purchase order. Detailed procedures concerning the making of contracts, the purchase of real and personal property, bidding requirements and the lease, sale or disposal of City Property shall be established by City Council by ordinance. 
(m)  The purchase and sale of all City Property shall be subject to the provisions of Section 5.12. 
(Amended 11-1-83, 11-7-89) 
Section 13.4. - Powers to Lease Property. 
The Council may lease any real estate, together with all facilities thereon, or any other property owned by the City when deemed by [the] Council to be in the best interest of the City. Any such lease shall be in writing and shall be approved and ratified by ordinance. No such ordinance shall be enacted unless the party leasing the property has filed with the Clerk an unconditional acceptance of all terms of such lease agreement. 
(Amended 9-24-74, 11-1-83) 
CHAPTER XIV - MUNICIPAL UTILITIES 

Section 14.1. - Management of Municipal Utilities. 
All municipally owned or operated utilities shall be administered as a regular department of the City government under the management and supervision of the City Manager. 
Section 14.2. - Sale of Utility Property. 
The City may sell, exchange, or otherwise dispose of, at any time, any property, fixtures, or equipment constituting part of the City's utility plants or systems if, in the judgment of [the] Council, the sale, exchange, or other disposition will result in improvement in the capacity, efficiency, or service of the utility plants or systems. 
(Amended 11-3-87) 
Section 14.3. - Use of Water Outside of City. 
The City Council is authorized to lease water and water rights, including treated, potable water, for use outside the City limits, provided the following two (2) conditions are met in any such leases: 
(a)  The City shall retain the power to limit deliveries of water in order to prevent a shortage of water to the users of domestic water within the City limits. 
(b)  Lease payments shall be sufficient to: 
(1)  Reimburse the water fund for all operation and maintenance expenses attributable to the water leased; 
(2)  Provide an additional amount to be determined by the City Council for payment of water debt outstanding; and 
(3)  Provide a return to the water fund of the City for the total investment of the City in its water properties and facilities. Such payments may include charges in the nature of initial tap-on fees. 
In addition to the foregoing leasing power, the City Council is authorized to enter into short-term contracts to provide water outside the City; provided, the term of any such contract shall not extend for more than one (1) year and the City Council shall determine that an emergency exists, or that such contract may reasonably be expected to lead to a long-term water lease, or annexation of the property being served under such contract. 
The City Council may require as a condition to any water lease of service outside the City limits that the owners of the property being served shall petition for annexation if property becomes eligible therefor. 
(Amended 11-2-65) 
Section 14.4. - Rates. 
The Council shall have the power to fix from time to time such just and reasonable rates and other charges as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of the City and others with such public utility services as the City may provide. There shall be no discrimination in such rates within any classification of users thereof, nor shall free service be permitted. Higher rates may be charged for service outside the corporate limits of the City. 
Section 14.5. - Utility Rates and Charges-Collection. 
The Council shall provide by ordinance for the collection of all public utility rates and charges of the City. Such ordinances shall provide at least: 
(a)  That the City shall have as security for the collection of such utility rates and charges a lien upon the real property supplied by such utility, which lien shall become effective immediately upon the supplying of such utility service and shall be enforced in the manner provided in such ordinance. 
(b)  The terms and conditions under which utility services may be discontinued in case of delinquency in paying such rates or charges. 
(c)  That suit may be instituted by the City before a competent tribunal for the collection of such rates or charges. 
Section 14.6. - Utility Finances. 
The rates and charges for any municipal public utility for the furnishing of water, light, heat, power, gas or sewage treatment and rubbish and garbage disposal shall be so fixed as to at least meet all the operating costs of such utility. 
Transactions pertaining to the ownership and operation by the City of each public utility shall be recorded in a separate group of accounts under an appropriate fund caption, which accounts shall be classified in accordance with generally accepted utility accounting practice. Charges for all service furnished to, or rendered by, other City departments or agencies shall be recorded. An annual report shall be prepared to show fairly the financial position of each utility and the results of its operation, which report shall be available for inspection at the office of the Clerk. 
CHAPTER XV - PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES 

Section 15.1. - Franchises Remain in Effect. 
All franchises to which the City is a party when this Charter becomes effective shall remain in full force and effect in accordance with their respective terms and conditions. 
Section 15.2. - Granting of Public Utility Franchises. 
Public utility franchises and all renewals, and extensions thereof and amendments thereto shall be granted only by ordinance. Public utility franchises shall be subject to the initiative and referendum powers of the people. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. No franchise shall be granted for a longer period than twenty (20) years. If a referendum is ordered to be submitted to the registered electors or if the City Council votes to refer the franchise ordinance to the electorate, no election shall be held until the applicant deposits the cost thereof with the City Manager in an amount determined by said City Manager. If the City Council votes to refer this franchise ordinance to the electorate, no franchise ordinance shall be approved by the Council for referral to the electorate before thirty (30) days after application therefor has been filed with the Council nor until a public hearing has been held thereon, nor until the grantee named therein has filed with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise. 
(Amended 11-3-87) 
Section 15.3. - Compensation. 
Every grant of a franchise shall fix the amount and manner of payment of the compensation to be paid by the grantee for the use of the same, and no other compensation of any kind shall be exacted for such use during the life of the franchise. This provision shall not exempt the grantee from any lawful taxation upon his or its property, nor from any license, charges or other impositions levied by the Council, not levied on account of the use granted by the franchise. 
Section 15.4. - Conditions of Public Utility Franchises. 
All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this Charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the following rights of the City, but this enumeration shall not be exclusive or impair the right of the Council to insert in such franchise any provision within the power of the City to impose or require: 
(a)  To repeal the same for misuse, non-use or failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(b)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency; 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(d)  To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(e)  To use, control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges and other public places and the space above and beneath them; 
(f)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. 
All franchises or privileges hereafter granted to railroads or other transportation systems shall plainly specify the particular streets, alleys, avenues, and other public property, or parts thereof, to which they shall apply. All other franchises may be in general terms and may apply to the City generally. 
Section 15.5. - Use of Public Places by Utilities. 
Every public utility, whether it has a franchise or not, shall pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges and other public places as shall arise from its use thereof and shall protect and save the City harmless from all damages arising from said use. Every such public utility may be required by the City to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys or other public places of the City by the City and by other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor. In the absence of agreement and upon application by any public utility, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor, and the arbitration award shall be final. 
Section 15.6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 15.6, which pertained to railroads and derived from the 1958 Charter, was repealed by an election on November 7, 1989. 
Section 15.7. - Reports by Utilities. 
Every person or corporation operating under a franchise or grant from the City shall annually submit to the Council a report verified by oath of the president, the treasurer, or the general manager thereof. Such reports shall be in the form, contain such detailed information, and cover the period prescribed by the Council. The Council shall have the power, either through its members or by authorized experts or employees, to examine the books and affairs of any such person, persons, or corporations, and to compel the production of books and other records pertaining to such reports or other matters. 
Section 15.8. - Books of Record. 
The Council shall provide and cause to be kept in the office of the City Clerk an indexed franchise record in which shall be transcribed copies of all franchises granted by the City. Said record shall be a complete history of all franchises granted by the City and shall include a comprehensive and convenient reference to actions, contests or proceedings at law affecting the same, and copies of all annual and inspection reports and such other information as the Council may require. 
Section 15.9. - Revocable Permits. 
The Council may grant a permit at any time for the temporary use or occupation of any street, alley or public place, provided such permit shall be revocable by the Council at its pleasure whether such right to revoke be expressly reserved in such permit or not. 
Section 15.10. - Leasing of Franchises. 
No franchise granted by the City shall ever be leased, assigned or otherwise alienated without the express consent of the City; and no dealing with the lessee or assignee on the part of the City to require the performance of any act or the payment of any compensation by the lessee or assignee shall be deemed to operate as such consent. Any assignment or sale of such franchise without the consent of the City shall at the option of the Council operate as a forfeiture to the City of such franchise. 
Section 15.11. - City May Acquire Utilities. 
The Council upon vote of the taxpaying electors shall have the power within or without the territorial limits of the City to construct, condemn and purchase, acquire and lease waterworks, gas works, light plants, power plants, transportation systems, telephone systems, heating plants, and other public utilities local in use and extent, in whole or in part, and everything required therefor, for the use of the City and its inhabitants; and any such systems, plants, works, or ways, or any contracts in relation or in connection therewith which may exist and which the City may desire to acquire or purchase, in whole or in part, the same or any part thereof may be purchased by the City. Such public utilities acquired by the City, except waterworks, shall not be paid for out of general taxes or general obligation bonds, but shall be paid for from the revenue derived from the public utility. 
Every grant, extension or renewal of a franchise or right shall provide that the City may, upon the payment therefor of its fair valuation, purchase and take over the property and plant of the grantee in whole or in part. Such valuation shall be made as provided in the grant but shall not include any value of the franchise or right-of-way through the streets or any earning power of such property. 
CHAPTER XVI - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Section 16.1. - Municipal Court. 
There shall be a Municipal Court which shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases arising under this Charter or the ordinances of the City. The Municipal Court shall be a court of record, and its judgments shall be subject to appeal in the method established by Colorado statutes for courts of record. The Court may punish contempt of court by fine, or by imprisonment, or both, within the limits set by the City Council by ordinance; may enforce its orders and judgments in like manner as a court of record may do, and as provided by general law; and may render final judgment on any forfeited bonds or recognizance returnable to such court subject to appeal as in other cases. Cash bonds may be provided for or taken in lieu of property, individual or corporate surety bonds. 
(Amended 11-5-85) 
Section 16.2. - Presiding Officer: Qualifications and Compensation. 
The Municipal Court shall be presided over, and its functions exercised by a judge, who shall be a licensed member of the Bar of this State in good standing, appointed by the City Council, for a term to be at the pleasure of the Council. He shall receive a fixed salary or compensation, not dependent upon the outcome of the matters to be decided by him, and to be fixed by ordinance from time to time. If absent, disqualified or unable to act in any matter or case, the Municipal Judge may call any eligible person to act and serve temporarily; and if he fails to or cannot call in a substitute, the Council shall appoint a substitute. 
The Council shall provide a suitable place and all supplies and things necessary for the proper functioning of the court. 
The forms of complaints and all other rules, procedure, proceedings, costs and fees in the Municipal Court shall be prescribed by ordinance, upon the recommendation of the Municipal Judge. 
Section 16.3. - Penalty for Violations. 
The Council may provide for the enforcement of its ordinances by fine or imprisonment or both; the maximum penalty for violation of City ordinances shall be set by the Council by ordinance. 
(Amended 11-5-85) 
Section 16.4. - Violations Bureau. 
The Council shall have power and authority to establish by ordinance a Violations Bureau within the Court for the handling of such violations of ordinances and regulations of the City, or parts thereof, as prescribed in the ordinance establishing such bureau. Any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a charge of violating any of such ordinances may within the time specified in the notice of such charge answer at the Violations Bureau to the charges set forth in such notice by paying a fine, pleading guilty, in writing, to the charge, waiving a hearing in Court and giving power of attorney to make such a pleas and pay such fine in Court. Acceptance of the prescribed fine and the power of attorney by the Bureau shall be deemed to be complete satisfaction for the violation, and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states. The creation of such a bureau shall not operate so as to deprive any person of a full and impartial hearing in Court should such person so choose. 
CHAPTER XVII - MISCELLANEOUS 

Section 17.1. - Vested Rights Continued. 
After the effective date of this Charter, the City shall be vested with all property, monies, contracts, rights, credits, effects and the records, files, books and papers belonging to it under and by virtue of operation under statutes governing second class cities. 
No right or liability, either in favor of or against the City, existing at the time this Charter becomes effective and no suit or prosecution of any character shall in any manner be affected by any change, resulting from the adoption of this Charter, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change had been made. All debts and liabilities of the City shall continue to be the debts and liabilities of the City and all fines and penalties imposed at the time of such change shall be collected. 
Section 17.2. - Records To Be Public. 
All records of the City shall be public, in accordance with the Colorado Public Records Law, shall be kept in City offices except when required for official reasons or for purpose of safekeeping to be elsewhere, and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
(Amended 11-3-87) 
Section 17.3. - Interpretations. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context: 
(1)  All words used in this Charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this Charter but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made herein. 
(2)  The singular number shall include the plural, the plural number shall include the singular, and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter. 
(3)  The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate and to partnerships as well as to individuals. 
(4)  The words "printed" and "printing" shall include reproductions by printing, engraving, stencil duplicating, lithographing or any similar method. 
(5)  Except in reference to signatures, the words "written" and "in writing" shall include printing and typewriting. 
(6)  The word "officer" shall include the Mayor and other members of the Council, the administrative officers, members of City boards and commissions created by or pursuant to this Charter. 
(7)  The word "statute" shall denote the laws of the State of Colorado in effect at the time the provision of the Charter containing the word "statute" is to be applied. 
(8)  All references to section numbers shall refer to section numbers of this Charter. 
(9)  The word "appropriation" shall mean the authorized amount of funds set aside for expenditure during a specified time for a specific purpose. 
(10)  The word "City" shall mean the City of Westminster, Colorado, a municipal corporation. 
(11)  The term "elector" or "qualified elector" shall mean a person who is legally qualified to register to vote in the City. The term "registered elector" shall mean an elector who has registered to vote in compliance with the provisions of this Charter. 
(Amended 11-5-85) 
(12)  The word "emergency" shall mean an existing condition actually rising from unforeseen contingencies which immediately endangers public property, health, peace, or safety. 
(13)  The word "misdemeanor" shall mean a violation of this Charter or of any City ordinance, and it shall not have the meaning attached to it in the criminal statutes of the State of Colorado. 
(14)  The words "qualified taxpaying elector" shall mean an elector and/or spouse thereof, who, in the calendar year last preceding the time, election, or other date, shall have paid a tax upon real or personal property situated within the City and owned by and assessed to him on the assessment rolls, and includes the term "taxpaying elector." 
(15)  The words "vote of the electors" and "vote of the qualified electors" shall mean a favorable vote by a majority of the electors voting in an election. 
(16)  The words "vote of the taxpaying electors" and "vote of the qualified taxpaying electors" shall mean a favorable vote by a majority of the taxpaying electors voting in an election. 
(17)  The Words "untreated surplus water" shall mean water that does not enter the municipal water system. 
(18)  The names of offices, officers, employees, board [boards] and commissions used in this Charter or any amendments thereto may be changed from time to time by [the] Council by ordinance setting forth the change of designation or title which is intended. Such change shall not change the duties of the office, officer, employee, board or commission as set forth in the Charter. 
(Added 7-29-80) 
Section 17.4. - Sundays and Holidays. 
Whenever the date fixed by this Charter or by ordinance for the doing or completion of any act falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or legal holiday. 
Section 17.5. - Definition of Publication, Mailing of Notices. 
The requirement contained in this Charter for the publishing or publication of notices or ordinances shall be met by publishing an appropriate insertion in a newspaper published in the English language for the dissemination of news of a general character, which newspaper shall have had a general circulation at regular intervals in the city for at least two (2) years immediately preceding the time that it is used for such publication purposes. The affidavit of the printer or publisher of such newspaper, or of his foreman or principal clerk, annexed to a printed copy of such notice, ordinance or proceeding taken from the paper in which it was published and specifying the times of publication shall be prima facie evidence of such publication. 
In any case in which this Charter requires the mailing of notices, the affidavit of the officer or employee responsible for such mailing that such notice was mailed shall be prima facie evidence of such mailing. 
Section 17.6. - City Liability. 
The City shall not be liable for damages sustained by any person either to his person or property by reason of negligence of the City, its officers or employees, except as may be provided by the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act. 
(Amended 11-1-83, 11-7-89) 
Section 17.7. - Penalties for Violation of Charter. 
Any violation of a provision of this Charter shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and shall be tried in the Municipal Court. Any person convicted of such violation may be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any officer or employee of the City so convicted may be deprived of his office or employment and may be ineligible to any City office or employment for two (2) years thereafter. The power to suspend or remove an elected official, City Manager, City Attorney, board or commission member or any other official appointed by the Council, convicted under [this] section, shall be vested in the Council. The power to suspend or remove a City employee so convicted under this section shall be vested in the City Manager. 
Section 17.8. - Eminent Domain. 
In carrying out the powers and duties imposed upon it by this Charter or by the general statutes, the City shall have power to acquire within or without its corporate limits, lands, building, water, water rights and water storage rights, and other properties, and any interest in land and air rights over land, and may take the same upon paying just compensation to the owner as provided by law. 
Section 17.9. - City Not To Pledge Credit. 
The City shall not lend or pledge its credit or faith, directly or indirectly, or in any manner to or in aid of any person, corporation or other organization, public or private, for any amount or any purpose whatsoever, or become responsible for any debt, contract or liability thereof. 
Section 17.10. - Chapter and Section Headings. 
The chapter, section and subsection headings used in this Charter are for convenience only and shall not be considered as part of the Charter. 
Section 17.11. - Amendment of Charter. 
This Charter may be amended in the manner and following the procedures set forth in Article XX, Section 9 of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, the Municipal Home-Rule Act of 1971, as that act now exists or may be amended from time to time hereafter, and all other present or future State statutes and Constitutional provisions concerning the amendment of Home-Rule Charters by initiative or otherwise. 
(Amended 11-1-83, 11-2-93) 
Section 17.12. - Processes Against City. 
All process against the City shall run against the City in the corporate name thereof and may be served by leaving a true copy with the Mayor, City Clerk or City Attorney. 
Section 17.13. - Severability of Charter Provisions. 
If any provision, section, article or clause of this Charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or application of the Charter which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable; and to this end this charter is declared to be severable. 
CHAPTER XVIII - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

Section 18.1. - Status of Transitional Provisions. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for an orderly transition from the old government of Westminster to a new Council-Manager government under provisions of this Charter. Such chapter shall constitute a part of this Charter only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish that end. 
Section 18.2. - Continuation of Appointed Officers and Employees. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, after the effective date of this Charter all appointive officers and all employees of the City shall continue in that City office or employment which corresponds to the City office or employment which they held prior to the effective date of the Charter as though they had been appointed or employed in the manner provided in this Charter, and they shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this Charter; except that any officer or employee who holds a position which this Charter provides be held at the pleasure of the appointing officer or body shall hold such position only at such pleasure regardless of the term for which originally appointed. 
Section 18.3. - First Election Under Charter. 
The first Council to take office under provisions of this Charter shall be elected at a special municipal election to be held on March 11, 1958. At this election the voters shall be entitled to vote for not more than seven (7) candidates for Council. The three (3) candidates who receive the three (3) highest numbers of votes shall be declared elected for a term beginning on March 17, 1958, and ending on Monday next following the date of the regular City election in 1961. The four (4) candidates for Council who receive the fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh highest numbers of votes shall be declared elected for a term beginning on March 17, 1958, and ending on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election of 1959. After this initial special election the provisions contained in this Charter relative to elections and terms of elective officers shall govern. 
Section 18.4. - Transitional and Reorganization Period. 
The period from the effective date of this Charter to March 18, 1958, shall be known as the transitional period. During the transitional period the statutes governing second class cities shall continue to remain in effect, except that for the purpose of nominating and electing members of the Council, or filling vacancies thereon, Chapter III of the Charter shall be immediately operative. 
The period from March 18, 1958, to July 1958, shall be known as the reorganizational period. Following the election and qualification of the first Council under this Charter, the Council shall proceed with the recruitment and selection of a City Manager, who upon assumption of the duties of such office shall proceed with the reorganization of the administrative service of the City hereunder, and all other offices and employees shall proceed to effectuate the other provisions of this Charter so that it shall be fully operative on July 18, 1958, except as otherwise provided in the Charter. 
Section 18.5. - Retirement Plans. 
This Charter shall not affect any contractual relationships existing on the effective date of this Charter between the City of Westminster and any officers or employees by reason of any retirement plans in effect. 
Section 18.6. - Local Improvements. 
This Charter shall not affect local improvements not completed on the effective date of this Charter. Neither shall the provisions of this Charter affect municipal bonds outstanding on said effective date. 
Section 18.7. - Municipal Court. 
Until such time as the City Council shall provide by ordinance for the rules, procedure, proceedings, costs and fees in the Municipal Court as required in Section 16.2, the rules, procedure, proceedings, costs and fees, as provided by the statutes governing second class cities, shall remain in effect. 
Section 18.8. - Saving Clause. 
This Charter shall not affect any suit pending in any Court or any document heretofore executed in connection therewith. Nothing in this Charter shall invalidate any existing contracts between the City of Westminster and individuals, corporations, or public agencies. 
CERTIFICATE OF FINAL ADOPTION 
We, the undersigned, present members of the Westminster Charter Convention, duly elected by the people of Westminster, Colorado, at a special election held on September 12, 1957, or duly appointed according to law, under authorization of Article XX, Constitution of the State of Colorado, to frame a Home Rule Charter for the City of Westminster, do hereby certify that the foregoing is the Proposed Charter as finally approved and adopted by the members of the Convention on the eighth day of November, 1957, for submission to the people of Westminster at a special election to be held on January 7, 1958. 
Done in triplicate at Westminster, Colorado, this 8 th day of November, 1957. 
/s/Carl Jacobsen 
President and Chairman /s/Allene L. Mendenhall 
Secretary /s/Rolland W. Jones 
Vice-Chairman /s/Leo E. Bryant /s/Ivyl Robert McDormick /s/Francis M. Day /s/Wm. L. McGuire /s/George W. Duncan /s/Howard E. Reed /s/Ralph E. Grimm /s/Oren W. Ricker /s/Wilbur L. Haggstrom /s/William A. Schaefer /s/James C. Hague, Jr. /s/Howard M. Sears /s/Donald J. Hereford /s/Walter Tindall /s/Charles Hunter /s/Elmer G. VanScoy /s/William J. Keough /s/Iva L. Wilson  
State of Colorado 
County of Adams 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this eighth day of November, 1957. My Commission expires October 24, 1960. 
/s/ Larry D. Lamar 
      Notary Public   I hereby certify that the above and foregoing document is the Charter adopted at the Special Election for the City of Westminster, Colorado, held Tuesday, November 7, 1958, and duly filed by me with the Secretary of State of the State of Colorado. 
/s/ Katheryn Herman 
      City Clerk   (SEAL) 
Published in the Westminster Journal. 
First publication, November 21, 1957. 
Second publication, November 28, 1957. 
Third publication, December 5, 1957. 
Fourth publication, January 16, 1958. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table gives the date and disposition of the amendments to this Charter. 
Election Date Section This Charter 11- 2-65 2.3, 14.3 11- 4-69 11.3 11- 2-71 3.17  7-24-73 9.11  9-24-74 11.2, 11.3, 12.4, 13.1, 13.4 11- 4-75 9.6, 9.7, 11.1, 12.3  7-29-80 1.1, 3.10 (1 st paragraph), 4.16, 6.1(b), 9.5, 13.1, 17.3(18) 11- 1-83 3.17, 4.15, 8.10, 9.9, Ch. XI.V, 13.3, 17.6, 17.11 11- 5-85 3.8, 3.18, 4.13(f), 7.9, 8.5, 8.10, 8.14, 13.1, 16.1, 16.3, 17.3(11) 11- 3-87 4.16, 8.2, 8.3, 8.10, 9.10, 10.1, 14.2, 15.2, 17.2 11- 7-89 4.9, 4.13(a), 6.1, 9.11, 13.3, 17.6 Repealed 13.1, 15.6 11- 8-89 6.1 11- 5-91 4.6, 4.8(a), 4.16, 4.17, 6.1(b), 9.6 11- 2-93 3.2(a), 3.2(c), 3.2(d), 3.6, 3.9, 3.11, 4.1, 4.4, 17.11 Added 3.2(b), 3.2(e) 11- 7-95 3.1, 5.10, 9.5, 13.3(b), 17.11 Repealed 3.6-3.9, 3.11-3.15 11- 7-00 Added 9.5 11- 5-02 3.2(c), 5.7 11- 7-06 3.18, 8.10, 8.12, 8.13  
WESTMINSTER MUNICIPAL CODE CITY OF WESTMINSTER, COLORADO 
____________ 
2016 Edition 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS AT REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Herb Atchinson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Alberto Garcia 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Bruce Baker 
Shannon Bird 
Maria De Cambra 
Emma Pinter 
Anita Seitz 
City Council 
____________ 
Don Tripp 
City Manager 
____________ 
David Frankel 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Michelle Parker 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Herb Atchinson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Anita Seitz 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
David DeMott 
Michele Haney 
Sheela Mahnke 
Kathryn Skulley 
Jon Voelz 
City Council 
____________ 
Don Tripp 
City Manager 
____________ 
David Frankel 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Michelle Parker 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Westminster, Colorado. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2015 Code, as supplemented through January 1, 2016, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Board of Trustees. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2015 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a decimal. The figure before the decimal refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the decimal refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of chapter 10 in title I is numbered 1-10-1, and the first section of chapter 12 is 1-12-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 1-12-1 and 1-12-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 1-12-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CH1:1 CODE APPENDIX CHA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Dennis Sinnett, Vice President, and Rachael Calloway, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Michelle Parker, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Westminster, Colorado. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Westminster, Colorado. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Westminster, Colorado. 2014. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 3838  9-12-2016 Included 1 3848  9-26-2016 Included 1 3849  9-26-2016 Included 1 3850  9-26-2016 Included 1 3851  9-26-2016 Included 1 3855 10-10-2016 Included 1 3858 10-24-2016 Included 1 3867  1- 9-2017 Included 1 3869  5- 8-2017 Included 2 3873  4-10-2017 Included 2 3882  5-30-2017 Included 2 3883  5-22-2017 Included 2 3887  6-26-2017 Included 2 3888  6-26-2017 Included 2 3889  6-26-2017 Included 2 3891  6-26-2017 Included 2 3896  8-14-2017 Included 3 3897  8-14-2017 Included 3 3904 10-23-2017 Included 3 3908 11-27-2017 Included 3 3919  2-26-2018 Included 4 3922  2-26-2018 Included 4 3923  2-26-2018 Included 4 3924  3-12-2018 Included 4 3926  3-26-2018 Included 4 3927  4- 9-2018 Included 4 3930  4-23-2018 Included 4 3945  8-27-2018 Included 5 3950 10-10-2018 Included 5 3951 10- 8-2018 Included 5 3954 10-22-2018 Included 5 3970  2-25-2019 Included 6 3975  3-25-2019 Included 6 3976  3-25-2019 Included 6 3977  3-25-2019 Included 6 3978  3-25-2019 Included 6 Code Pages 
of 
Home Rule Charter 11- 7-1958 Included 6 3981  4- 8-2019 Included 6 3982  4- 8-2019 Included 6 3983  4- 8-2019 Included 6 3980  4-22-2019 Included 7 3987  5-13-2019 Included 7 3992  6-24-2019 Included 7  
Title I. - ADMINISTRATIVE 
CHAPTER 1. - OFFICIAL CODE 

1-1-1. - Municipal Code of the City of Westminster. 
    This compilation, revision and codification of the general ordinances of the City of Westminster is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official Code of general ordinances of the City of Westminster. 
    Said code shall be known and may be cited as the "Westminster Municipal Code" or "W.M.C.," and a copy or copies of such code in printed form shall be received without further proof as the ordinances of permanent and general effect of the City of Westminster in all courts and administrative tribunals of this state. 
    Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth in full no less than the sub-subsection (i.e., (1), (2), etc.) of the code being amended. 
(1699 3633) 
1-1-2. - Rules for Construction. 
    In the construction of the code, and all ordinances amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the legislative body or repugnant to the context. 
(A)  Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly. 
(B)  The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
(C)  Every word importing the masculine gender only may extend to and be applied to females and things as well as males; every word importing the feminine gender only may extend to and be applied to males and things as well as females; and every word importing the neuter gender only may extend to and be applied to natural persons as well as things. 
(D)  Words in the present tense include the future tense. 
(E)  (1)  In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. 
(2)  If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
(3)  If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends on the last day of that month. 
(F)  A grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body confers the authority upon a majority of the number of members fixed by ordinance. 
(G)  Unless specifically stated otherwise, a quorum of a public body is a majority of the number of members fixed by statute. 
(H)  If there is a conflict between figures and words in expressing number, the words govern. 
(I)  The portion of any section, subsection, paragraph, or subparagraph that precedes a list of examples, requirements, conditions, or other items may be referred to and cited as the "introductory portion" to the section, subsection, paragraph, or subparagraph. 
(J)  In enacting an ordinance it is presumed that: 
(1)  Compliance with the charter of the City of Westminster and constitutions of the State of Colorado and the United States is intended; 
(2)  The entire ordinance is intended to be effective; 
(3)  A just and reasonable result is intended; 
(4)  A result feasible of execution is intended; 
(5)  Public interest is favored over any private interest. 
(K)  An ordinance is presumed to be prospective in its operation. 
(L)  If an ordinance is ambiguous, the court, in determining the intention of the City Council, may consider among other matters: 
(1)  The object sought to be attained; 
(2)  The circumstances under which the ordinance was enacted; 
(3)  The legislative history, if any; 
(4)  The common law or former ordinance provisions, including laws upon the same or similar subject; 
(5)  The consequences of a particular construction; 
(6)  The administrative construction of the ordinance; 
(7)  The legislative declaration or purpose. 
(M)  If any provision of an ordinance is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, the remaining provisions of the ordinance are valid, unless it appears to the court that the valid provisions of the ordinance are so essentially and inseparably connected with, and so dependent upon, the void provisions that it cannot be presumed the City Council would have enacted the valid provisions without the void one; or unless the court determines that the valid provisions, standing alone, are incomplete and are incapable of being executed in accordance with the legislative intent. 
(N)  If a general provision conflicts with a special provision, it shall be construed, if possible, so that effect is given to both. If the conflict between the provisions is irreconcilable, the special provision prevails as an exception to the general provision, unless the general provision is the later adoption and the manifest intent is that the general provision prevails. 
(O)  A reference to any portion of an ordinance applies to all reenactments, revisions, or amendments thereof. 
(P)  All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions used in any ordinance shall be liberally construed, in order that the true intent and meaning of the City Council may be fully carried out. 
(Q)  The repeal, revision, amendment, or consolidation of any ordinance or part of an ordinance or section or part of a section of any ordinance shall not have the effect to release, extinguish, alter, modify or change in whole or in part any penalty, forfeiture, or liability, either civil or criminal, that shall have been incurred under such ordinance, unless the repealing, revision, amending or consolidating act so expressly provides, and such ordinance or part of an ordinance or section or part of a section of an ordinance so repealed, amended or revised shall be treated and held as still remaining in force for the purpose of sustaining any and all proper actions, suits, proceedings, and prosecutions, criminal as well as civil, for the enforcement of such penalty, forfeiture, or liability, as well as for the purpose of sustaining any judgment, decree, or order that can or may be rendered, entered, or made in such actions, suits, proceedings, or prosecutions imposing, inflicting, or declaring such penalty, forfeiture, or liability. 
(R)  The title of any section or subsection of this Code shall not be construed in any way to restrict, qualify, or limit the effect of the provisions contained in such section or subsection. 
(S)  The word "oath" includes "affirmation" and the word "swear" includes the word "affirm." Every mode of oral statement under oath or affirmation is embraced in the term "testify" and every written one in the term "depose." 
(T)  The word "official time" whenever used shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use within the City. 
(U)  The word "day" shall be any 24-hour period from midnight to midnight, and the word "month" shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise expressed; the word "quarter" shall mean any three-month period, ending with the last day of March, June, September or December; and the word "year" shall mean any one calendar year unless otherwise expressed. 
(V)  The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is discretionary. 
(W)  The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
(X)  The word "tenant" or "occupant" when applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others. 
(1699) 
1-1-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this code, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    City shall mean the City of Westminster, Colorado. 
    Person shall mean an individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, partnership, association, or any other legal entity. 
    Property shall mean property of any kind, real or personal, tangible or intangible. 
    Public Thoroughfare shall mean streets, alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public square, public sidewalks and all other ways for travel open to the public. 
    Signature shall mean any name, mark or sign written with the intent to authenticate any instrument of writing. 
    Writing shall mean printing, writing, and typewriting. 
(1699) 
1-1-4. - Adoption by Reference. 
(A)  Exemption: When, in its sole discretion, the City Council finds that it is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City, the City Council may exempt an ordinance from any or all of the procedural requirements specified in Part 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., "Ordinance Codes Adopted by Reference." When such a finding is made, it shall be included in the ordinance and shall contain a specific reference to the sections from which the ordinance is exempt. 
(B)  Availability of Codes Prior to Enactment: At least one copy of the material being considered for adoption shall be on file with the City Clerk and open for public inspection five days prior to first reading of the ordinance proposing adoption of the material by reference. 
(C)  Filing of Public Record; Sale of Copies: At least one copy of material adopted by reference shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be kept on file for public inspection while the ordinance is in force. Following the adoption of material by reference, the City may maintain copies available for purchase by the public or, in the alternative, shall provide information on where such material may be obtained. 
(1631 1699) 
1-1-5. - Preparation of Ordinances. 
    In preparing councillor's bills for first and second reading and in preparing ordinances to be included in the Westminster Municipal Code, the City Clerk may correct obvious errors and inconsistencies including, but not limited to, correction of errors of punctuation, capitalization, grammar and spelling; correction of typographical errors; and correction of internal references. The City Clerk shall make no change in the substance, effect, intent or meaning of any bill or ordinance. 
(1809) 
CHAPTER 2. - CITY LIMITS 

1-2-1. - City Limits. 
    The city limits of the City shall be as shown on the official map of the City, as the same may be amended from time to time, and is extended by the property described in any annexation ordinance adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent adoption by the City of the official map. 
(629 1699) 
CHAPTER 4. - CORPORATE SEAL 

1-4-1. - Corporate Seal; Design. 
    The corporate seal of the City of Westminster, Colorado, shall be circular in form. The circumference of the seal, which shall be one and thirteen-sixteenths inches (1 13/16 ?) is formed by the words "City of Westminster, Colorado" in the upper part of the circle, and the words "Official Seal-Incorporated 1911" in the lower part of the circle. Within the circle formed by these words is a description of the urban landscape of the city and its mountain background, with the setting sun over the mountains. Superimposed upon the landscape and band of wording is a large letter "W." A facsimile of the above described seal is as follows: [per sections 1-4-2, 1-4-3.] 
(417) 
1-4-2. - City Logo. 
    The City logo shall be two isosceles triangles that share a common, vertical side. The point at the top is 72 degrees, the two side points are 72 degrees, and the bottom point is 144 degrees. The logo has five stripes in descending gradations from bottom to top. The stripes on the left isosceles triangle are parallel to the base, and the stripes on the right isosceles triangle are parallel to the far right side of the logo. A facsimile of the City logo is as follows: 

(1481 1699 1790) 
1-4-3. - Use of Corporate Seal and Logo. 
    The corporate seal and City logo, including any facsimile thereof, are intended for use by authorized agents or officers of the City in conducting the official business of the City. No other person shall use the City seal or City logo for any other purpose. 
(1790) 
CHAPTER 5. - DEPOSITS AND INVESTMENTS OF CITY FUNDS 

1-5-1. - Deposits. 
    The City Council shall designate depositories for City funds and shall provide for the regular deposit of all City monies. Said depositories and deposits shall be as permitted and authorized by state statute. Personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security for City deposits. 
(1699) 
1-5-2. - Investments. 
    Monies remaining in any fund, may, in the discretion of the Finance Director, be invested in one or more of the securities permitted by the statutes of Colorado governing investment of State of Colorado public funds. Interest on such investments shall be credited to the fund to which the invested money belongs, if such can be determined, otherwise to the general fund of the City. City monies may be invested with institutions that do not qualify as public depositories for an amount no greater than the amount that is guaranteed by either the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
(Charter 1699) 
CHAPTER 6. - OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER 

1-6-1. - Official Newspaper. 
    The City Council shall by resolution from time to time designate the official newspaper for the City of Westminster. 
(1171 1699) 
CHAPTER 7. - SALARIES 

1-7-1. - Elective Officers. 
    The salaries of the City's elective officers shall be as follows: 
Mayor $1,400.00 per month Mayor pro tem, elected by council $1,200.00 per month Councillors, other than Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem $1,000.00 per month  
    Commencing the first full pay period of 2016, city elective officer salaries shall be adjusted by the percentage of the 2015 non-exempt general employee pay plan adjustment rounded to the nearest whole dollar. Biennially thereafter in the first full pay period of the year, city elective officer salaries shall be adjusted by the cumulative percentage of the two previous years' non-exempt general employee pay plan adjustments rounded to the nearest whole dollar. 
    The City's elective officers shall receive an additional monthly allowance for expenses related to the performance of their respective duties. Commencing January 1, 2011, the below-stated allowance shall be adjusted, and biennially thereafter in the first full pay period in January, by the then current Denver/Boulder Consumer Price Index, rounded to the nearest whole dollar. This allowance shall be in lieu of any reimbursement to which the Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem or councillor may otherwise be entitled to for internet service, fax communications, cell phone usage, and local commuting costs within the City limits. All mileage for trips outside of the City limits shall be a reimbursable expense. 
    The allowances shall be as follows: 
Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem and councillors $300.00 per month  
    In addition, the City shall contribute to the City deferred compensation accounts of each such officer an amount equal to the officer's city deferred compensation contributions. The combined contributions from the City and the elective officer shall be subject to all applicable I.R.S. regulations, but in no event shall such combined contributions from the city and the elective officer exceed 25 percent of the officer's total city salary. 
(1357 1899 2170 2465 3204 3246 3433 3744) 
1-7-2. - Municipal Judge. 
    The salary of the Municipal Judge shall be as follows: 
$166,615.00 base pay per annum, effective January 1, 2019, payable bi-weekly. 
(1357 1447 1699 1746 1916 1982 2035 2172 2302 2360 2389 2474 2549 2619 2724 2825 2920 2980 3068 3168 3249 3318 3389 3435 3487 3600 3656 3738; Ord. No. 3805, § 1, 10-26-2015 ; Ord. No. 3855, § 1, 10-10-2016 ; Ord. No. 3887, § 1, 6-26-2017 ; Ord. No. 3904, § 1, 10-23-2017 ; Ord. No. 3954 , § 1, 10-22-2018) 
CHAPTER 8. - PENALTIES AND INTEREST 

1-8-1. - Penalties. 
(A)  All violations of any provision of this Code are hereinafter deemed noncriminal offenses and are civil matters, except those violations that are expressly designated as criminal offenses or which are punishable by imprisonment under this Code or under any counterpart state statute. Trial of noncriminal offenses shall be to the court. No defendant found civilly liable for a noncriminal offense shall be punished by imprisonment for said offense. Any person convicted of a noncriminal violation of any section of this Code shall be fined an amount not to exceed $2,500.00. Any person convicted of a criminal violation of any section of this Code shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 364 days or fined an amount not to exceed $2,500.00 or both; provided, however, that a person under the age of 18 years as of the date of the offense for which he is convicted shall not be subject to the imposition of a jail sentence unless that sentence is imposed as a penalty for a conviction for contempt of court pursuant to Section 1-22-1, W.M.C., or originates from a violation of the terms or conditions of probation. The term of confinement for a person under the age of 18 years shall not exceed 48 hours. 
(B)  The penalties provided in subsection (A) of this section shall be applicable to every section of this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section. 
(C)  A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code. 
(D)  Any person found to have committed a violation of a noncriminal traffic infraction, as designated in Section 10-1-3 of this Code, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(1256 1563 1595 1699 1803 1869 2000 2086 2239 3564 3705; Ord. No. 3923 , § 1, 2-26-2018) 
1-8-2. - Interest. 
(A)  Any amount due to the City that is not paid within 60 days shall be assessed an interest charge of one-half percent per month for each month past due in excess of 60 days unless otherwise provided for by charter, code, statute, or contract. 
(B)  Interest shall be compounded by adding the prior month's interest charge to the amount due and calculating the current month's interest based on the total original amount due plus prior accumulated interest. 
(C)  When amounts due are paid, the payment will first be applied against interest due, then against penalties and other service charges, and finally against the original amount due, unless otherwise provided for by Charter, Code, statute, or contract. 
(D)  The provisions of this section shall become effective for all amounts becoming due on or after June 1, 1987. 
(1699) 
1-8-3. - Dishonored Check; Penalties. 
(A)  Any payment received by the City that is subsequently returned from the bank will be subject to a service fee and any other applicable collection charge or fee as may, from time to time, be imposed by the City. 
(B)  Any amount due to the City that is paid by any payment type and is subsequently dishonored by the bank will not be considered paid until the funds are collected. Such liabilities will be subject to any late charges and fines or other enforcement procedures of the ordinance or contract controlling the original liability in addition to the service fee provided in subsection (A) of this section. 
(C)  Subject to the payment discretion of a manager or supervisor, a person may resubmit a dishonored payment by cash, certified check, and when permissible, credit card. However, if a second payment is dishonored by the bank, an additional penalty of $30.00 will be assessed in addition to any other charges incurred by the city for the returned payment. Only cash or a certified check will be accepted for the redemption of a second dishonored check for the same liability. 
(D)  Payments made to redeem a dishonored payment will be applied first to the service charge. Any remaining amount will then be applied to the original liability and/or any penalties or fines as may be specified in the ordinance or contract controlling the original liability or as otherwise specified in this Code. 
(E)  The City Manager is allowed to administratively set the returned payment fee, but at a minimum, fees will reflect actual charges incurred by the City for any returned payment. 
(1354 1699 2422 3521) 
CHAPTER 9. - WARD-PRECINCTS 

1-9-1. - Ward. 
    The City shall consist of one ward. 
1-9-2. - Precincts. 
    The election precincts of the City shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
(Charter) 
CHAPTER 10. - MAYOR 

1-10-1. - Election and Term Limitation of Mayor. 
(A)  The Mayor shall be elected for a four-year term by a vote of the electorate at a regular city election. To be elected, a candidate must receive at least 40 percent of the votes cast for the office of Mayor. If no candidate receives at least 40 percent, the two candidates with the highest number of votes for Mayor shall participate in a run-off election, which shall be held at the earliest possible date after the regular city election, and subject to the rules and procedures for municipal elections adopted by the City, as applicable. The successful candidate in the run-off election shall take office at the first regular council meeting following the run-off election. Until the newly elected mayor takes office, the previous Mayor shall continue in office. 
(B)  No person shall be elected for more than two consecutive terms as mayor. Terms are considered consecutive unless they are at least four years apart. A term as councillor shall not be considered a consecutive term to that of a term as Mayor, nor shall a term as Mayor be considered a consecutive term to that of councillor. This term limitation shall apply beginning with the regular election in 1995. The term of any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall not be considered to be part of a consecutive term for purposes of this section. 
(C)  Any councillor may be a candidate for the office of Mayor, but no person may run for the office of Mayor and councillor at the same election. If a councillor with an unexpired term is elected Mayor, the unexpired term shall be filled in the manner prescribed by section 1-11-4, W.M.C. 
(D)  If the Mayor resigns or if the office otherwise becomes vacant, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall assume the office of Mayor and shall hold office until the next regular city election. At said election, a Mayor shall be elected for a four-year term. The position of the councillor/Mayor Pro Tempore shall then be filled according to the provisions of section 1-11-4, W.M.C. This Section shall not apply to a vacancy that is the result of a recall petition or recall election, in which case City Charter procedures applicable to recall shall apply. 
(2308 3064 3129 3665) 
1-10-2. - Mayor Pro Tempore. 
(A)  The City Council shall, at its first meeting following each regular city election, or at the first regular meeting following a run-off election if applicable, and after the newly elected Mayor and councillors take office, elect one councillor to serve as Mayor Pro Tempore for a term of two years expiring at the first City Council meeting following the next regular city election. 
(B)  Such election shall be by written ballot and by majority of the members of the City Council in office at the time. 
(C)  The Mayor Pro Tempore, when acting in the absence or disability of the Mayor, shall have all the authority of the Mayor granted by City Charter, ordinance, rules or regulations. 
(D)  In the event of absence, disability, or vacancy in the office of both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore, the City Council may designate another of its members to serve as acting Mayor during such absence, disability, or vacancy. Such person, when acting in the absence, disability, or vacancy in office of the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tempore, shall have all the authority of the Mayor granted by City Charter, ordinance, rules or regulations. 
(1699 2308) 
1-10-3. - Duties of Mayor. 
(A)  The Mayor shall have voice and vote in all proceedings of the City Council equal with that of other members of the City Council but shall have no veto power. The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the City Council. Unless otherwise stated, the Mayor shall be considered a member of City Council for all purposes, including recall. 
(B)  The Mayor shall be a conservator of the peace, and in emergencies may exercise within the City the powers conferred by the governor of the State of Colorado for purposes of military law, and shall have authority to command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the laws of the City and to suppress riot and disorder. 
(C)  The Mayor shall execute and authenticate by signature such instruments as the City Council, the Charter, or any statutes of the State of Colorado or laws of the United States shall require. 
(D)  Except as may be required by statute, the mayor shall exercise only such power as the Charter or the City Council shall specifically confer. 
(1699 2308 Charter) 
CHAPTER 11. - CITY COUNCIL 

1-11-1. - Members. 
    The City Council shall consist of seven members, one of whom shall serve as Mayor. The City Council shall constitute the legislative and governing body of the City and shall, consistent with the Charter and the constitution of the State of Colorado, have power and authority to exercise all powers conferred upon or possessed by the City, including the power and authority to adopt such laws, ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise thereof. 
(355 1699) 
1-11-2. - Qualifications. 
(A)  No person shall be eligible for election to the City Council who is in default to the City or to any other governmental unit of the State of Colorado. The seat of any member of City Council who is in such default shall become vacant unless such default shall be eliminated within 30 days after written notice thereof by the City Council or unless such person shall in good faith be contesting the liability of such default. Every candidate for elective office shall file with his petition his affidavit that he possesses the qualifications for such office as provided herein. Failure to file such affidavit shall invalidate his petition. 
(B)  Any candidate for elective office of the City must be a United States citizen. 
(C)  Any candidate for elective office of the City must have been a resident of the City for at least one year immediately prior to the last day for filing original petitions for such office or prior to the time of his appointment to fill a vacancy, and must be a qualified and registered elector of the City on the last day for filing or prior to the time of his appointment and throughout his tenure in office. 
(D)  No member of City Council may be appointed to any city office or be employed by the City during the term of office for which he was elected or for two years thereafter; provided, however, that after the expiration of his term of office, any member of City Council may be appointed as a member of an independent board or commission or fill a vacancy on the City Council. 
(E)  Any personally identifying information, other than name and address, provided by a candidate for City Council, pursuant to Charter Section 5.1(d) or in connection with a candidate petition or application for office, will be deemed as having been received in confidence and not subject to disclosure under the Colorado Open Records Act, except as may be required by an order of district court. Any such personally identifying information contained in a report, required to be maintained pursuant to Charter Section 5.1(d), shall be redacted by the City Clerk prior to disclosure of the remainder of the report. 
(355 1699 3372) 
1-11-3. - Meetings. 
(A)  The City Council shall hold regular sessions at a time and place to be authorized by resolution of the City Council duly passed and published as a part of the council's summary of proceedings. 
(B)  The City Council may hold study sessions on days and at times mutually agreed to by the councilmembers. These sessions shall be for the purpose of discussing matters of city business with members of city staff, hearing presentations from non-staff individuals, scheduling attendance of councilmembers at formal and informal functions, and any other lawful purpose. City Council shall take no official action at a study session. The City Clerk shall provide interested parties with the date, time, place and agenda for study session, and shall post such information in a prominent location at the City Hall. Study sessions shall be open to the public, except as set forth in this section. 
(C)  The City Council may hold a closed executive session in conjunction with a regular or special meeting or a study session for the purpose of: 
(1)  Discussing personnel matters, except where the employee who is the subject of the session has requested an open meeting, or if the personnel matter involves more than one employee, all of the employees have requested an open meeting. 
(2)  Discussing strategy and progress on the sale, acquisition, trade or exchange of property or property rights; 
(3)  Consulting with an attorney representing the City Council on pending or ongoing litigation; 
(4)  Discussing strategy and progress on economic development matters in which the disclosure of information such as financial data or proposed incentives would, if made public, seriously jeopardize the City's ability to secure the development; 
(5)  Discussing matters required by law, signed agreement or court order to be kept confidential, such as personnel files, medical and psychological data on individual persons, confidential commercial and financial information, privileged information and the terms and amounts of settlement agreements; 
(6)  Discussing matters which may, by law, be kept confidential on the grounds that disclosure would be contrary to the public interest, such as information that would compromise measures necessary to prevent violation of a law; 
(7)  Discussing the City's position on issues subject to formal negotiation or arbitration, and the progress and status of such negotiation or arbitration; 
(8)  Discussing communications made to the City Attorney by the City Council and the advice given thereon by the City Attorney in the course of his professional employment; and 
(9)  Discussing the appointment, renewal or dismissal of board and commission members. 
(D)  City Council shall not take any final action in a closed executive session. 
(E)  If an executive session has been previously scheduled during or immediately before or after a regular or special City Council meeting or study session, the executive session shall be shown on the agenda for the meeting, along with the category of its purpose, as listed in subsection (C) of this section. If an executive session has not been previously scheduled, it shall be announced at the meeting or study session, along with the category of its purpose. 
(F)  The Mayor, any member of council, the City Manager or the City Attorney may request an executive session to be held or scheduled pursuant to this section. Any such request shall include the category of its purpose. However, no executive session may be held by council except upon the approval of a majority of the members of council present at the time the executive session is requested. 
(355 1926 2006 2820) 
1-11-4. - Filling Vacancies. 
(A)  Any vacancy that occurs in the council shall be filled within 30 days by a majority vote of the remaining members of the City Council, said appointee to hold office for the balance of the unexpired term. 
(B)  If any vacancy on city council that the City Council is authorized to fill is not so filled within 30 days after such vacancy occurs, or if three or more vacancies exist simultaneously, such vacancies shall be filled for the respective unexpired terms at a special election. 
(355 1699 3129) 
1-11-5. - Resignation. 
    Resignation of elective officers shall be made in writing and filed with the City Clerk and shall be acted upon by the City Council at its next regular meeting following receipt thereof by the City Clerk. 
(355) 
1-11-6. - Rules. 
    The City Council shall determine its own organization, rules and order of business subject to the following provisions: 
(A)  A journal of the proceedings of each meeting shall be kept in the English language by the City Clerk and shall be signed by the presiding officer and clerk of the meeting. 
(B)  A vote upon all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by "Yes" or "No" vote and entered upon the records, except that where the vote is unanimous, it shall only be necessary to so state. 
(C)  No member of the City Council shall vote on any question in which he has a financial interest, other than the common public interest, or on any question concerning his own conduct, but on all other questions, each member who is present shall vote when his name is called unless excused by the unanimous consent of the remaining members present. Any member refusing to vote, except when not so required by this paragraph, shall be guilty of misconduct in office. 
(D)  In all roll call votes, the names of the members of the City Council shall be called in alphabetical order and the name to be called first shall be advanced one position alphabetically in each successive roll call vote. 
(E)  The proceedings of the City Council, or a brief summary thereof, shall be published within ten days following each meeting. Any such summary shall be prepared by the City Clerk and approved by the Mayor and shall show the substance of each separate proceeding of the City Council. 
(F)  There shall be no standing committees of the City Council. 
(355) 
1-11-7. - Investigations. 
(A)  The City Council, or any person or committee authorized by it for the purpose, shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office or officer and to make investigations as to the matters in which the City has an interest. The City Council, for the purpose stated herein, may by subpoena compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and other evidence. The City Council may require testimony and other evidence be given under oath. 
(B)  Failure on the part of any officer to obey any subpoena issued under the provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. Failure on the part of any employee or other person to obey any subpoena issued under the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this Chapter and such person shall be punished as provided by this Code. 
(C)  In addition to the provisions of subsection (B), the City Council, or any person or committee authorized by it for the purpose, shall have power to apply to the municipal court for an order enforcing the subpoena. If the person fails to appear, municipal court may issue a bench warrant to compel the person to appear before the court to show cause why he should not be fined for contempt pursuant to Section 1-22-5, W.M.C., or order that a summons be issued under Section 1-22-4, W.M.C. 
(355 1699) 
1-11-8. - Regional Modifier. 
    The City Council shall be empowered to determine a regional modifier for building valuation, which the chief building official shall use in determining value or valuation in the issuance of permits and collection of fees for all permits based on the building valuation date in "Building Standards" published bimonthly by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, 90601. 
(1741) 
1-11-9. - Oaths; Subpoenas. 
    The Mayor may administer oaths and sign and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, and other evidence when City Council is conducting any public hearing. Subpoenas shall be enforced as provided in Section 1-22-5, W.M.C. 
(2275) 
CHAPTER 12. - CITY MANAGER 

1-12-1. - Appointment. 
    The City Council shall appoint a City Manager within 90 days after any vacancy exists in such position. The City Manager shall hold office at the pleasure of a majority of the City Council. He shall be selected solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in and his knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of this office as hereafter set forth. At the time of his appointment, he need not be a resident of the City or state, but during tenure of office he shall reside within the City. 
1-12-2. - Duties. 
    The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city government. His functions and duties shall be: 
(A)  To be responsible to the City Council for the efficient administration of all departments of the city government, except the departments under the direction of the City Attorney, and the municipal court; 
(B)  To see that all laws are enforced; 
(C)  To appoint the heads of the several city departments whose appointment is not otherwise specified, and to direct and supervise such department heads; 
(D)  To give to the proper departments or officials ample notice of the expiration or termination of any franchises, contracts or agreements; 
(E)  To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise, or in any contract, are faithfully kept and performed; 
(F)  To recommend an annual budget to the City Council and to administer the budget as finally adopted under policies formulated by the City Council, and to keep the City Council fully advised at all times as to the financial conditions and needs of the City; 
(G)  To recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient, and to attend council meetings with the right to take part in discussions but not to vote; 
(H)  To exercise and perform all administrative functions of the City that are not imposed by the charter or ordinance upon some other official; 
(I)  To be responsible for the maintenance of a system of accounts of the City that shall conform to any uniform system required by the City Council and to generally accepted principles and procedures of governmental accounting. He shall submit financial statements to the City Council quarterly, or more often as the City Council directs; 
(J)  To act as purchasing agent for the City, and, in such capacity, to purchase all supplies and equipment and dispose of the same in accordance with procedures established by the City Council; 
(K)  To establish, subject to approval by the City Council, appropriate personnel rules and regulations governing officers and employees of the City; 
(L)  To establish, by regulation, fees up to and including $100.00 to be charged for City services unless such fees are otherwise set by ordinance or resolution adopted by the City Council; 
(M)  To dispose of city property without City Council approval, pursuant to Section 15-2-1, W.M.C.; and 
(N)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or required of him by ordinance or by direction of the City Council. 
(O)  Notwithstanding any limitation in Subsection 15-2-1(B), W.M.C., the City Manager is hereby authorized to grant easements over, under and across city-owned real property by signing easement agreements and other written instruments necessary and customary to accomplish such grants. This authority is limited to easements where such easement is for utility, drainage or similar limited purposes, and the easement consists of no more than two acres. Nothing herein shall be deemed to require the City to grant any easement nor to limit or impede the City's ability to set terms and conditions for the granting of an easement and to fix the value thereof. 
(1564 1699 2029 2531 3421) 
1-12-3. - City Council Relationship to Administrative Service. 
    Neither the City Council nor any of its members shall dictate the appointment of any person to office by the City Manager or in any way interfere with the City Manager or other city officer to prevent him from exercising his judgment in the appointment or employment of officers and employees in the administrative service. 
    Except for the purpose of inquiry, the City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager and neither the City Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the City Manager. 
(Charter) 
CHAPTER 13. - APPOINTIVE OFFICERS 

1-13-1. - Administrative Officers. 
    The administrative officers of the city shall be the City Manager, City Attorney, City Clerk and finance director, and such additional administrative officers as may be created by City Council. The additional administrative officers shall be those employees serving in classifications listed as "administrative officers" in the pay and classification plan approved by City Council resolution. 
(1282 1413 1699 1747 1889 2603 2922) 
1-13-2. - Manager and Attorney. 
    The City Manager and City Attorney shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite period, shall be responsible to and serve at the pleasure of the City Council and shall have their compensation fixed by the City Council. 
(Charter) 
1-13-3. - Appointments. 
    All administrative officers of the City, except the City Manager and City Attorney, shall be appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite period, except that administrative officers employed in the office of the City Attorney shall be appointed by the City Attorney. The appointment of City Clerk and Finance Director shall be subject to confirmation by the City Council. Except as provided by Section 1-16-3(b), W.M.C., all persons designated as administrative officers under Section 1-13-1, W.M.C., hereof shall be responsible to the City Manager. Except for the City Attorney, all administrative officers shall have their compensation fixed by the City Manager within the salary ranges approved by the City Council. 
(1282 1413 1592) 
1-13-4. - Residence Requirements. 
    The City Council may require an administrative officer, if he is not a resident at the time of his appointment, to become a resident of the City within the time set by the City Council and so remain throughout his tenure of office or employment. 
1-13-5. - Oath of Office. 
    Every officer before entering upon the duties of his office shall take the oath of office prescribed by Section 8, Article XII of the Constitution of the State and shall file the same with the City Clerk, together with any bond required by this Chapter. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this section within ten days from the date of his appointment, such officer shall be deemed to have declined the office and such office shall thereupon become vacant, unless the City Council shall, by resolution, extend the time in which such officer may qualify as above set forth. 
1-13-6. - Surety Bonds. 
    All officers of the City whose duties involve the custody of public property or the handling of public funds, either by way of receipt or disbursement or both, and all other officers and employees so required by the City Council shall, before they enter upon the duties of their respective offices, file with the City an official bond, in such form and amount as the City Council shall direct and approve. Such official bond of every officer and employee shall be conditioned that the officer or employee will faithfully perform the duties of the office, and will, on demand, deliver over to the successor in office, or other proper officer or employee, or an agent of the City, all books, papers, monies, effects and property belonging to the City, or appertaining to the office, which may be in the custody of the officer or employee; and such bonds may be further conditioned as the City Council shall prescribe. The official bond of every officer whose duty it may be to receive or pay out money, besides being conditioned as above required, shall be further conditioned that the officer will, on demand, pay over or account for to the City, or any proper officer or agent thereof, all monies received by the officer or employee. 
    The requirements of this section may be met by the purchase of one or more appropriate blanket surety bonds covering all, or a group of, City employees and officers, or by comparable coverage under the City insurance program. 
    All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the City. The City Clerk shall be custodian of all bonds of all officers or employees, except that the Finance Director shall be custodian of any bonds pertaining solely to the City Clerk. 
(1959 Code 1282 1699 2603 Charter) 
1-13-7. - Delivery of Office. 
    Whenever any officer or employee shall cease to hold such office or employment for any reason whatsoever, he shall within five days, or sooner on demand, deliver to his successor in office or to his superior all books, papers, monies and effects in his custody as such officer or employee. Any officer or employee found guilty of violating this provision by the municipal court may be punished by fine or imprisonment, or both. Any officer violating this provision may be sued or prosecuted in the same manner as public officers generally for a like offense under state statutes. 
(Charter 1699) 
1-13-8. - Removal from Office. 
    Any appointed officer may be removed from office by the same authority and in the same manner as he was originally appointed. 
(Charter) 
CHAPTER 14. - CITY CLERK 

1-14-1. - Appointment. 
    The City Clerk shall be appointed and may be discharged by the City Manager, subject to the confirmation of the City Council. 
(1699) 
1-14-2. - Duties. 
(A)  The City Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Council, and shall attend all meetings of the City Council, and shall keep a permanent journal of its proceedings in the English language. 
(B)  The City Clerk shall be custodian of the City seal and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same. The Clerk shall also be custodian of all papers, documents and records pertaining to the City for which custody is not otherwise provided. 
(C)  The City Clerk shall certify by signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the council. 
(D)  The City Clerk shall provide and maintain a supply of forms for all petitions required to be filed for any purpose by the provisions of the Charter. 
(E)  The City Clerk shall have power to administer oaths of office. 
(F)  The City Clerk shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law, by the council or by the City Manager. 
(G)  The City Clerk shall be custodian of all bonds of all officers or employees, except any bond pertaining solely to the City Clerk. 
(1699 Charter) 
CHAPTER 16. - CITY ATTORNEY 

1-16-1. - Appointment. 
    The City Council shall appoint a City Attorney for an indefinite period. The City Attorney shall be responsible to and serve at the pleasure of the council. 
1-16-2. - Duties. 
(A)  The City Attorney shall act as legal advisor to, and be attorney and counsel for, the council and shall be responsible solely to the City Council. He shall advise any officer or department head of the City in matters relating to his official duties when so requested and shall maintain a copy of all written opinions given by him. 
(B)  The City Attorney shall prosecute ordinance violations and he shall conduct for the City cases in court and before other legally constituted tribunals. He shall file with the City Clerk copies of such records and files relating thereto as the City Council may direct. 
(C)  The City Attorney shall prepare or review all ordinances, contracts, bonds and other written instruments that are submitted to him by the City Council and City Manager and shall promptly give his opinion as to the legal consequences thereof. 
(D)  The City Attorney shall call to the attention of the council all matters of law, and changes or developments therein, affecting the City. 
(E)  The City Attorney shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by the Charter or by the council. 
(F)  Upon the recommendation of the City Attorney, or upon its own initiative, the City Council may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the City has an interest, or to assist and counsel with the attorney. 
(G)  When consistent with the provisions of the Charter and the direction of the City Council, the City Attorney shall cooperate with the City Manager, effectuate the policies and objectives established by the City Manager, and give priority to requests made by the City Manager. 
(1592 Charter 3633) 
1-16-3. - Employees in the Office of the City Attorney. 
(A)  Except for the City Attorney, employees in the office of the City Attorney shall be either nonexempt or exempt employees and shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 24 of this Title I. Recruitment and selection of employees in the office of the City Attorney shall be conducted through the department of general services pursuant to Chapter 24 of this Title I. 
(B)  All employees in the office of the City Attorney shall be responsible to the City Attorney. 
(1592 1747 2922 3633) 
CHAPTER 17. - PRIVATE ACTIVITY OR INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT REVENUE BONDS 

1-17-1. - Private Activity or Industrial Development Revenue Bond Fees. 
(A)  Fees: The following fees shall be paid to the City by applicants for the issue, reissue, refunding or remarketing of private activity or industrial development revenue bonds: 
(1)  A $500.00 original application fee shall be paid to the City by every applicant for industrial development revenue bonds. This original application fee shall be payable one time only and shall be non-refundable. 
(2)  No issue, reissue, refunding, or remarketing of any private activity or industrial development revenue bonds of the City shall occur or be valid, except upon the payment to the City of a document review fee in the amount of one-quarter of one percent of the principal amount of the bond issue or $2,000.00, whichever amount is greater. 
(3)  Upon request of the City Attorney, the City Council may retain special legal counsel to represent the City in connection with the issue, reissue, refunding, or remarketing of any private activity or industrial development revenue bonds, and may require the applicant for such bonds to pay the fees of such special legal counsel. 
(4)  At the request of the applicant, the City Council may, in its sole discretion, permit any fee required by this section to be paid at the closing for the bonds or at such other time as the City may deem appropriate. 
(B)  Rating Requirement: No issue, reissue, refunding or remarketing of any private activity or industrial development revenue bonds of the City shall be approved unless such bonds shall be rated "AA" or higher by Standard and Poor's, Moody's, or Finch, or such other nationally recognized rating agency as may be acceptable to the City. 
(2534) 
CHAPTER 22. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

1-22-1. - Municipal Court; Jurisdiction. 
    There is hereby created a municipal court of the City of Westminster that shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases arising under the laws of the City, subject to appeal to the district court in the manner provided by law for appeals from municipal court, with full power to carry into effect and punish as in said laws provided. 
    The municipal court shall have the power to compel attendance of witnesses and to punish for contempt of said court by fine not to exceed $300.00 or jail sentence not to exceed 90 days or both; enforce its orders and judgment in like manner as a court of record may do and as provided by general law; and render final judgment on any forfeited bond or recognizance returnable to such court, subject to appeals in other cases. Cash bonds may be provided for or taken in lieu of property or individual or corporate surety bonds. 
(1023 1699) 
1-22-2. - Municipal Judges; Appointment. 
(A)  Appointment and Removal: The City Council shall appoint a municipal judge, who shall serve for a term to be at the pleasure of the council. The municipal judge may be removed by the City Council at the sole discretion of the City Council. 
(B)  Vacancies: Any vacancy in the office of municipal judge shall be filled by appointment by the City Council. 
(C)  Associate Judges: The City Council may appoint one or more associate municipal judges who shall serve in accordance with the provisions covering the municipal judge, and who shall perform such duties as directed by the presiding municipal judge. The presiding judge will recommend appointment of associate municipal judges to City Council. 
(D)  Powers: The presiding municipal judge shall have full power and authority to make and adopt local rules of procedure, in writing, for the municipal court, provided the rules are not inconsistent with those rules promulgated by the Colorado Supreme Court for municipal courts. All municipal judges shall have all judicial powers relating to the operation of the court, subject to any rules of procedure governing the operation and conduct of municipal courts promulgated by the Colorado Supreme Court. 
(E)  Oath and Bond: Before entering office, the presiding municipal judge and associate judges shall each take and subscribe, before a judge of a court of record, and file with the City Council, an oath of affirmation that he will support the Constitution of the United States, and the State of Colorado and the Charter and the laws of the City, and will faithfully perform the duties of his office. The presiding municipal judge, associate judges, the Court Clerk and assistant clerks shall give a bond to the City, which bond shall be approved by the City Council of the City, and be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties of the office and for the faithful accounting for and payment of all monies coming into the hands of the judges and clerks by virtue of their offices. 
(F)  Qualifications: The judge of the municipal court shall be licensed to practice law in the State of Colorado as provided in Section 16.2 of the City Charter. 
(674 1116 1699) 
1-22-3. - Procedure of the Court. 
    All proceedings of the municipal court shall be governed by the rules for municipal courts as issued by the Colorado Supreme Court and any rules of procedure issued by the municipal judge. Copies of any local rules of procedure shall be available for inspection at the office of the Court Clerk. 
(674 1699) 
1-22-4. - Failure to Appear; Penalty. 
(A)  Any person 18 years of age or older who fails to appear in response to any municipal court order, summons or subpoena served upon him shall be guilty of a violation of this Chapter, and upon conviction shall be fined or imprisoned or sentenced to both such fine and imprisonment pursuant to the limits set forth in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. When any defendant, duly summoned or admitted to bail, fails to appear at the time that his case is made returnable or set for trial, the municipal judge may, upon motion by the City, issue an order for the arrest of the defendant. 
(B)  Any person under 18 years of age who shall fail to appear in response to any municipal court order, summons or subpoena served upon him shall be guilty of a violation of this Chapter, and upon conviction shall be fined not more than the amount specified in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C., or committed to a juvenile detention facility operated or contracted by the department of institutions. Confinement shall not exceed 48 hours. Appeal from any such order shall be to the juvenile court for the county in which the municipal court is located in accordance with the provisions of Title 13, Article 10, C.R.S. 
(1257 1563 1699) 
1-22-5. - Failure to Attend; Bench Warrant. 
    In all cases where a witness has been duly served with a subpoena and fails to attend pursuant to the terms of the subpoena, and in all cases where a person has been summoned as a juror in the municipal court and fails to attend pursuant to the terms of the summons, the judge of the municipal court shall have the power to issue a bench warrant directed to any person authorized to make service of process in the City, commanding him to bring before the judge of the municipal court the juror or witness so failing to attend to show cause why he should not be fined for contempt. Upon the appearance of such juror or witness, it shall be lawful for the judge of the municipal court to fine him in any sum up to the limit specified in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C., or wholly discharge him if satisfactory excuse be made. Upon application, the judge of the municipal court may issue an order enforcing subpoenas duly issued by officers or employees of the City or members of boards or commissions of the City. These orders shall be enforceable as subpoenas issued by the court. 
(1023 1563 1699) 
1-22-6. - Sessions. 
    There will be regular sessions of the court for the trial of cases, and the presiding municipal judge or associate judges shall hear and try all complaints of alleged violations of any provision of this Code or City Charter provision where there is probable cause to believe that an offense has been committed; provided, however, it shall be lawful for any special session of the municipal court to be held any time, including holidays and night court, if, in the discretion of the presiding municipal judge, he shall deem such special session advisable or necessary. 
(674 1699) 
1-22-7. - Open to Public; Exceptions. 
    All cases in the municipal court shall be open to the public; provided, however, that the municipal judge may order that the court be cleared of all persons not directly connected with the case, consistent with applicable law, and constitutional provisions. 
(674 1699) 
1-22-8. - Appointment of Court Administrator. 
    The City Manager shall appoint a court administrator, who shall serve as Ex-Officio Clerk of the municipal court and such assistants as may be necessary to carry out efficiently the business of said court. 
(1117 1699) 
1-22-9. - Duties of Clerk of the Municipal Court. 
    The Clerk shall have such duties as are delegated by law, court rule or the presiding municipal judge, and shall keep a register of the actions in said court, including all fees and money collected, and an index thereof, to pay to the finance director all fees, fines and penalties, all fines and fees to be credited to the general fund, and to prepare and keep a docket for said court in which the judgment in each case shall be noted by a judge thereof. The Clerk shall be the supervisor of the traffic violations bureau. The Clerk and assistants shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations in all municipal matters in said court, and issue writs and notices, including subpoenas, summonses, and copies thereof in all cases coming within the jurisdiction of the municipal court. The Clerk shall be responsible for preparing all writs and other papers pertaining to the business of said court. The Clerk shall also be the Jury Commissioner and responsible for summoning jurors for said court. 
(674 1699) 
1-22-10. - Jury Demand. 
    Any defendant charged with a criminal violation of a code or ordinance provision shall have the right to a trial by jury if, within the time required by Rule 223 of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, as may be amended from time to time, such defendant files with the court a written jury demand and tenders to the court a jury fee of $25.00, unless the fee is waived by the court because of the indigence of a defendant. 
(1449 2000 3220 3622) 
1-22-11. - Jury provisions. 
    The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall serve as Jury Commissioner. A jury list shall be drawn from a list made from the voter registration list provided to courts of record in Adams County and Jefferson County, city directories, if any are available, motor vehicle license lists, and from any other source in order to insure a composite cross-section of the population of the City. Jury questionnaires shall be sent to each prospective juror, asking relevant questions as to his service as a juror. The Jury Commissioner shall then draw at random those selected for jury service and issue subpoenas as appropriate. 
(1257) 
1-22-12. - Juror and Witness Fees. 
(A)  Juror Fees: Persons summoned to jury duty pursuant to this Chapter shall be entitled to a juror's fee of $3.00 per day, provided, however, those jurors selected to serve on the jury shall be entitled to a total juror's fee of $6.00 per day or part of a day for which they serve on a jury. Such juror's fee shall be assessed as costs as provided by law. 
(B)  Witness Fees: Persons subpoenaed as witnesses pursuant to this Chapter shall be entitled to a witness fee of $5.00 per day. 
(1079) 
1-22-13. - Costs. 
    In cases arising out of the charter or this Code wherein the defendant shall plead or be found guilty, there may be assessed against said defendant the costs in the action, not to exceed $15.00 for trial to the court, $50.00 for trial by jury, or $10.00 for disposition of the case without trial, in addition to any other jury fee required by law, or costs imposed pursuant to court rule. Whenever any complaining witness, other than a police officer or other employee of the City, fails or refuses to testify at the time of trial, or whenever it shall appear to the court that there were no reasonable grounds for the complaint, or that it was maliciously filed, such complaining witness may, in the discretion of the court, be assessed costs in an amount not to exceed $100.00, together with additional costs provided herein. 
(1023 1699 1818) 
1-22-14. - Failure to Pay Fines. 
(A)  Every person 18 years of age or older against whom any criminal fine, penalty, costs or restitution shall be assessed under the laws of the City who shall refuse or neglect to pay the same when demanded upon execution may be committed in default thereof to the city or county jail, or such other suitable place as shall be provided by the City under the direction of the proper officer, until the fine, penalty, costs or restitution is fully paid and satisfied. Satisfaction shall be allowed at the rate of $4.00 per 24-hour day. 
    Any such person may be required to do any reasonable work; provided, however, that in the discretion of the Municipal Judge, a stay of execution may be granted to enable the defendant to pay the fine, penalty, costs or restitution at a later date or in installments. In case the defendant shall not have met the terms of the stay of execution, then execution may issue and the defendant may be placed in jail until such judgment is satisfied. 
(B)  Every person under 18 years of age against whom any fine, penalty, costs or restitution shall be assessed under the laws of the City who shall refuse or neglect to pay the same when demanded upon execution may be committed to a juvenile detention facility operated or contracted by the department of institutions. If a juvenile facility is not available, the child may be confined in an adult facility so long as he is separated from adult offenders; provided, however, no child under 14 years of age shall be confined in an adult facility. Confinement shall not exceed 48 hours. Appeal from any such order shall be to the juvenile court for the county in which the municipal court is located in accordance with the provisions of Title 13, Article 10, C.R.S. Any confinement pursuant to this section shall be consistent with Section 19-2-103, C.R.S. 
(C)  Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of a person to pay a fine, penalty, costs or restitution as directed by the municipal court, the court shall inquire as to the grounds for said person's failure, neglect, or refusal to pay. Should the court be satisfied that the reason for said person's failure to pay the fine, penalty, costs or restitution is solely indigency, the court shall not incarcerate said person; provided, however, that the person who owes the fine, penalty, costs or restitution shall have the burden of going forward and the burden of persuasion on the issue of indigency. 
(D)  To collect past due orders of fines, penalties, costs, fees, or restitution, the court may assign such accounts to a private collection agency. Any fines, penalties, costs, fees or restitution of the collection agency shall be added to the amount due, but not to exceed 25 percent of the amount collected. 
(1257 1657 1699 3143) 
1-22-15. - Deferred Prosecution. 
(A)  Deferred Prosecution: 
(1)  In any case, the court may, prior to trial or entry of a plea of guilty and with the consent of the defendant and the prosecution, order the prosecution of the offense to be deferred for a period not to exceed one year. During such time, the court shall place the defendant under probationary supervision. 
(2)  Upon the defendant's satisfactory completion of and discharge from supervision, the charge against the defendant shall be dismissed with prejudice. If the conditions of supervision are violated, the defendant shall be tried for the offense for which he is charged. 
(3)  Upon consenting to a deferred prosecution as provided in this section, the defendant shall execute a written waiver of his right to a speedy trial. Consent to a deferred prosecution under this section shall not be construed as an admission of guilt, nor shall such consent be admitted into evidence in a trial for the offense of which he is charged. 
(B)  Deferred Judgment and Sentencing: 
(1)  In any case in which the defendant has entered a plea of guilty, the court, accepting the plea, has the power, with the written consent of the defendant, to continue the case for a period not to exceed 12 months from the date of the entry of such plea for the purpose of entering judgment and sentence upon such plea of guilty. During such time, the court may place the defendant under the supervision of the probation division. 
(2)  Prior to entry of the plea of guilty to be followed by deferred judgment and sentence, the City Prosecuting Attorney, in the course of plea discussion, is authorized to enter into a written stipulation, to be signed by the defendant and the City Prosecuting Attorney, under which the defendant obligates himself to adhere to such stipulation. The conditions imposed in the stipulation shall be similar in all respects to conditions permitted as part of probation. In addition, the stipulation may require the defendant to perform community work service projects. Upon full compliance with such conditions by the defendant, the plea of guilty previously entered shall be withdrawn and the action against the defendant dismissed with prejudice. Such stipulation shall specifically provide that, upon a breach by the defendant of any condition regulating the conduct of the defendant, the court shall enter judgment and impose sentence upon such guilty plea. When, as a condition of deferred judgment and sentence, the court orders the defendant to make restitution and finds that he has the ability to pay, evidence of failure to pay the said restitution shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation. Whether a breach of condition has occurred shall be determined by the court without a jury upon application of the City prosecuting attorney and upon notice of hearing thereon of not less than five days to the defendant or his attorney of record. Application for entry of judgment and imposition of sentence may be made by the city prosecuting attorney at any time within the term of the deferred judgment, or within 30 days thereafter. The burden of proof in such hearing shall be as required in a proceeding for revocation of probation, as specified in the Colorado Revised Statutes, applicable case law, and the Colorado Rules of Criminal Procedure, and the procedural safeguards required in a proceeding for revocation of probation shall apply. 
(1626 2232) 
1-22-16. - Probation. 
    A defendant found guilty of a violation of any provision of City Charter or this Code may be placed upon probation for a period not exceeding one year. Said probation shall be supervised by the Municipal Court, and the probation system may be instituted and established by the presiding judge of the Municipal Court. The presiding judge shall also have power to obtain a pre-sentence report from any appropriate authority in establishing a fine or term of imprisonment. 
(1699) 
1-22-17. - Forfeiture of Bond. 
    Whenever any defendant before the Municipal Court fails to appear according to the terms, requirements and conditions of his bond for appearance, or after appearing departs the court without leave, his bond shall be forfeited. 
(674 1699) 
1-22-18. - Contents of Municipal Court Process: By Whom Issued. 
(A)  Every complaint and summons shall state the name of the defendant, the Code section number or charter section number alleged to have been violated, the type of offense to which each of said sections relates; the date and place of each alleged violation; that the defendant is known or believed to have committed such offense or offenses; and that the defendant is required to appear to answer the charges on a date and at the time and place designated in the complaint or summons. The complaint or summons, except as provided herein, shall be signed by the person alleging the violation, and the complaint shall be verified by the complainant, unless he is a peace officer or employee of the court acting in their official capacity. 
(B)  For purposes of this section only, noncommissioned paraprofessional personnel employed by the police department for investigation of traffic offenses and enforcement of traffic ordinances shall be deemed to be peace officers. 
(C)  Each warrant shall state the name of the defendant, the code or charter provision alleged to have been violated, the date and place of the alleged violation, and that the defendant is alleged to have committed the offense. 
(D)  Each subpoena shall state the name of the case, the name of the witness to whom the subpoena is directed, and that the witness is required to appear and give testimony on the date and at the time and place stated in the subpoena. 
(E)  It shall be sufficient to charge a violation of the laws of the City in any summons or complaint by reference to the section providing for such violation without specifically referring to the applicable subsection thereof. 
(1028 1699) 
1-22-19. - Facilities and Funds. 
    The City Council shall furnish the Municipal Court with suitable courtroom facilities and sufficient funds for the acquisition of all necessary books, supplies and furniture for the proper conduct of the business of the court. 
(674) 
1-22-20. - Application of State Statutes. 
    The provisions of Title 13, Article 10, C.R.S., relating to Municipal Courts shall be applicable to all matters upon which this Chapter is silent and other matters where there is no conflict between the terms of the aforesaid statute and this Chapter. To the extent that said statute and this Chapter may differ, this Chapter shall prevail. 
(1699) 
1-22-21. - Proceedings Recorded. 
    The proceedings of the Municipal Court shall be recorded electronically to provide a verbatim record of proceedings and evidence at trial, and such electronic recordings shall be preserved as required by law to serve as a basis for any necessary transcription of any cases appealed from the Municipal Court to the District Court. 
(1028) 
1-22-22. - Administrative Search Warrant. 
    The Municipal Judge or an associate judge shall have the power to issue a search warrant upon the request of a Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to Section 3-1-12 of the Code. 
(1586) 
1-22-23. - Home Detention. 
(A)  The court may, upon petition by a person sentenced to a participating jail for conviction of a crime, nonpayment of any fine or forfeiture, or contempt of court, grant the prisoner the privilege of leaving the jail for home detention. 
(B)  For purposes of this section, "home detention" means a system wherein a prisoner is confined to his home and monitored by wearing an electronic transmitting device that sends a radio signal to a receiver attached to the prisoner's home telephone, which telephone can be continuously monitored by a computer such that the computer can immediately and automatically alert the appropriate criminal justice agency of any and all violations of conditions of confinement. 
(C)  The prisoner may petition the court for such privilege at the time and in the manner established by the court. The court may withdraw the privilege at any time by order entered with or without notice. 
(D)  Every prisoner authorized to leave the jail for home detention shall be liable for the cost of the supervision and administrative services provided to the prisoner during his home detention. 
(1774) 
1-22-24. - Violations Bureau; Pleas and Payment by Mail; Fine Schedules; Default Judgment. 
(A)  There is hereby created a violations bureau within the court. The court is authorized to establish by order the procedures by which a person may answer a charge of violation of a city ordinance by paying a fine, pleading guilty in writing, and waiving a hearing. The court is authorized to establish by order such violations as are appropriate to be handled by the violations bureau. 
(B)  The court is authorized to establish by order a system for the compromise and settlement of traffic infractions by mail. The court shall identify those traffic infractions for which a mail-in compromise and settlement is appropriate, and shall establish the terms upon which said compromise and settlement shall be accomplished, including, but not limited to, reductions in assessed points upon a written plea of guilty to an amended charge. Such program shall not disqualify any person from appearing on the scheduled court date nor in any way limit a person's right to a hearing. 
(C)  The court is authorized to establish by order a schedule of fines for violations of city ordinances that are eligible for payment at the violations bureau or by use of the mail-in system. 
(d)  (1)  The court shall enter judgment by default against a person charged with a traffic infraction who fails to answer the charge by appearing at the violations bureau and paying the fine or by compromising and settling the charges by mail, and who fails to appear in the municipal court to answer such charges on the date and time listed on the summons. The record of such judgment, including points assessed, shall be forwarded to the Colorado Division of Motor Vehicles. 
(2)  The amount of the judgment shall be the fine, outstanding judgment fee, and costs assessable for such charges upon conviction or plea of guilty. 
(3)  The court may set aside a judgment entered under this section on a showing of good cause or excusable neglect by the defendant, or a showing that the court did not have jurisdiction over the subject matter of the alleged infraction or over the person of the alleged violator. The court shall have no jurisdiction to set aside a judgment unless a motion has been filed within seven calendar days after entry of judgment. 
(1995 3592) 
CHAPTER 23. - ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY CITATIONS FOR CODE VIOLATIONS 

1-23-1. - General Intent. 
(A)  The City Council finds that the enforcement of the Westminster Municipal Code is an important public service, and that code enforcement is vital to the protection of the public's health, safety, and quality of life. The City Council further finds that a comprehensive code enforcement system that uses a combination of judicial and administrative remedies is critical to gain compliance with these ordinances. 
(B)  This Chapter provides for administrative penalties that may be imposed for violation of certain sections of the Westminster Municipal Code. The section of the Westminster Municipal Code specifically affected is: 
(1)  Title VIII, Chapter 1-Property Standards. 
(C)  The purpose of this Chapter is to encourage prompt compliance with the code and prompt payment of any penalties. 
(3338) 
1-23-2. - Definitions. 
(A)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Administrative Hearing Officer shall mean a person appointed by the City Manager to hear and determine administrative citation appeals. The manager may appoint an employee of the city or another person possessing qualifications acceptable to the manager as a hearing officer to hear and receive evidence and render a decision on the law and the facts. The hearing officer may not have personally determined, in the first instance, the factual issues in controversy and may have no personal or financial interest in the outcome of the hearing. 
    City shall mean the City of Westminster. 
    Code shall mean those provisions of the Westminster Municipal Code enumerated in Subsection 1-23-1(b). 
    Enforcement Official shall mean an employee or agent of the City authorized to enforce the ordinances of the City. 
    Manager shall mean the City Manager or the manager's designee. 
    Responsible party shall mean a person or entity who has violated the Code or, in the case of property violations, the responsible party may also be the property owner, the occupant, or an individual or an entity who, acting as an agent for or in any other legal capacity on behalf of the owner, has authority over property subject to an administrative citation under this Chapter. 
(3338 3495) 
1-23-3. - Authority. 
(A)  Any responsible party violating provisions of the code may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement official as provided in this Chapter. 
(B)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the Westminster Municipal Code, responsible parties cited under the provisions of this Chapter shall have only the appeal rights granted herein. 
(C)  Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation for which a separate administrative citation may be issued. However, once an administrative citation has been issued for a violation of the code, no additional administrative citation shall be issued for the same violation for ten days or, if the responsible party appeals, until after the appeal has been heard and the responsible party has not complied with an administrative enforcement order of the Administrative Hearing Officer within ten days of its issuance or such other time as the Administrative Hearing Officer has specified. 
(D)  A civil penalty assessed by means of an administrative citation may be collected by any means allowed by law. 
(E)  Enforcement actions are intended to be cumulative in nature. The City may pursue one or more civil, criminal, and administrative actions, fees, fines, sentences, penalties, judgments, and remedies and may do so simultaneously or in succession. The enactment of this administrative remedy shall in no way interfere with the City's right to prosecute violations as criminal offenses. 
(3338 3495) 
1-23-4. - Procedures for Issuance of an Administrative Citation. 
(A)  Whenever the enforcement official determines that a violation of the code exists, the enforcement official shall give a notice of violation and order to correct ("notice of violation") to the responsible party. The notice of violation shall be in writing and shall describe with reasonable detail the violation so that the responsible party may properly correct it. The notice of violation shall provide a reasonable time for correction given the circumstances of the violation, but in no case more than 30 days. 
(B)  The notice of violation shall be served as follows: 
(1)  The enforcement official shall attempt to issue the notice of violation to the responsible party at the site of any violation. If the responsible party is not located, a copy of the notice of violation shall be left with any adult person residing or working at the site, or if no adult person is found at the site and the violation occurred on private property or on property for which the responsible party has responsibility, then a copy of the notice of violation shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property of the responsible party. 
(2)  If the enforcement official is unable to issue the notice of violation to the responsible party personally, then the notice of violation shall be sent via first class mail to the responsible party. In the case of violations occurring on private property where the owner of such property is a responsible party, the notice of violation shall be sent to the address shown in the County Assessor records for the county in which the property is located. In the case of violations occurring on property for which the responsible party is not the owner, the notice of violation shall be sent to the most recent mailing address available to the City for that responsible party. 
(3)  The notice of violation shall be deemed served on the date of receipt by the responsible party, if personally served, or upon the fifth (5th) day after mailing of the notice of violation. 
(C)  If after service of the notice of violation, the code violation is not timely corrected, an enforcement official may issue an administrative citation to a responsible party. 
(D)  Service of administrative citation on a responsible party shall be made in the same manner as the notice of violation as described in subparagraph (B) herein, except that the enforcement official shall attempt to obtain the signature of the person receiving the administrative citation on the administrative citation. If that person refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative and subsequent proceedings. 
(3338) 
1-23-5. - Contents of Administrative Citation. 
(A)  The administrative citation shall state the date and location of the violations, and the approximate time the violations were observed. Where applicable, the administrative citation shall identify the property in violation by address or legal description. 
(B)  The administrative citation shall state the Code sections violated and describe the violations. 
(C)  The administrative citation shall describe the action required to correct the violations. 
(D)  The administrative citation shall require the responsible party to correct the violations within a reasonable time given the circumstances, but in no case more than ten days, and shall explain the consequences of failure to correct said violations. 
(E)  The administrative citation shall state the amount of penalty imposed for the violations. 
(F)  The administrative citation shall explain how the penalty shall be paid, the time period by which it shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the penalty. 
(g)  The administrative citation shall identify the right and procedures for appealing the administrative citation. 
(H)  The administrative citation shall contain the signature of the enforcement official and the signature of the responsible party if it can be obtained. 
(3338) 
1-23-6. - Appeal of Administrative Citation. 
(A)  A person served with an administrative citation may file a notice of appeal in person or postmarked within ten calendar days from the service of the administrative citation. Compliance with this time limit shall be a jurisdictional prerequisite to any appeal brought under this Chapter. Failure to comply with such time limit shall be deemed to waive the right to a hearing and the adjudication of the issues related to the hearing, provided that proper notice of the administrative citation has been provided. 
(B)  The notice of appeal shall be made in writing, filed with the city department identified on the administrative citation, and contain the following information: 
(1)  The reasons the appellant believes the administrative citation is objectionable, incorrect or illegal; 
(2)  The amount and type of claim or dispute involved, and the time during which it accrued or occurred; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the appellant; 
(4)  If the appellant is to be represented by another person, the name, address and telephone number of the said representative; and 
(5)  The signature of the appellant, legal representative and/or corporate agent. 
(C)  A processing fee of $35.00 shall be paid by cash, check or certified funds simultaneously with the filing of the notice of appeal. The processing fee is not refundable, except as provided in Subsection 1-23-8(l). 
(D)  If, in the opinion of the manager, the appeal meets all of the requirements of subsections (A)-(C) of this section, the Manager shall appoint an administrative hearing officer and forward the notice of appeal to that person. 
(E)  If, in the opinion of the manager, the appeal does not meet all of the requirements of subsections (A)-(C) of this section, the Manager shall promptly return the appeal and notify the appellant of what requirements the appeal fails to meet. 
(F)  As soon as practicable after receiving the written notice of appeal, the administrative hearing officer appointed for that appeal shall schedule a date, time and location for the hearing, unless, if requested by the appellant and in the sole discretion of the administrative hearing officer, it is submitted on written brief and supporting material. 
(G)  Written notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be personally served upon or sent by first class mail to the responsible party at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(3338 3495) 
1-23-7. - Procedures and Standards at Administrative Citation Appeal Hearings. 
(A)  The procedure and format of the administrative citation appeal hearing shall follow procedures as set forth herein. 
(B)  Administrative citation appeal hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply; however, an informal exchange of discovery may be required by the Administrative Hearing Officer or requested by any party. The request must be in writing. Failure to request discovery shall not be a basis for a continuance. 
(C)  The parties to an administrative citation appeal hearing shall be the responsible party and the City. 
(D)  The Administrative Hearing Officer, at the request of any party to the hearing, may subpoena witnesses, documents and other evidence where the attendance of the witness or the admission of evidence is deemed necessary to decide the issues at the hearing. All costs related to the subpoena, including witness fees in the amount of $5.00 per witness, and mileage fees at the rate provided for witnesses by statute, shall be borne by the party requesting the subpoena. 
(E)  The City bears the burden of proof at an administrative citation appeal hearing to establish the existence of a violation of the Code. In the case of an abatement hearing, the City bears the burden of proof to establish the existence of a public nuisance. 
(F)  The standard of proof to be used by the Administrative Hearing Officer in deciding the issues at an administrative citation appeal hearing is by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(G)  The Administrative Hearing Officer shall cause to be made a record of the hearing, either stenographically or by sound recording, and shall make available a transcript of the hearing to any person upon request and payment in advance of the estimated cost of the production of the transcript. 
(H)  The Administrative Hearing Officer shall render written decisions, accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon. 
(I)  All witnesses shall be sworn or shall affirm their testimony in the manner required in courts of record. 
(3338 3495) 
1-23-8. - Duties and Powers of the Administrative Hearing Officer. 
(A)  The Administrative Hearing Officer shall determine whether appeals of administrative citations are valid. In doing so, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall determine whether the administrative citation under appeal was issued in compliance with the requirements of the city ordinances. In each case, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be charged with performing all functions relating to the final determination and order, and entertaining petitions or motions made in writing. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall perform those duties and functions necessary and incidental to determining the matter, issuing subpoenas, authorizing depositions, administering oaths, hearing all evidence, examining all documents, ruling on evidentiary questions, and generally conducting the hearing as a quasi-judicial proceeding. 
(B)  In the discretion of the Administrative Hearing Officer, parties to the hearing may be required to file a pre-hearing statement before the case is set for hearing. The pre-hearing statement may include: the issues raised by the appeal; agreed and disputed facts; copies of exhibits not previously included in the record; names of witnesses with a brief statement summarizing their testimony; an estimate of the time necessary to present a party's evidence and other matters as requested by the Administrative Hearing Officer. 
(C)  All hearings or, when an appeal is submitted for determination based on written argument and written facts and figures, all examination of such written petitions and papers shall be conducted by the Administrative Hearing Officer assigned to conduct the hearing or to examine the written material submitted. 
(D)  The admissibility of evidence shall be encouraged and the Administrative Hearing Officer shall consider all evidence of probative value. The Administrative Hearing Officer may utilize its experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge in the evaluation of evidence presented. 
(E)  Copies, photographs and photocopies may be admitted into evidence or substituted in evidence in place of original documents. 
(F)  Witnesses intended to give opinion testimony as experts must be qualified as such, and their qualifications should be submitted in advance to the Administrative Hearing Officer. 
(G)  Whenever it appears that an appeal is not properly before the Administrative Hearing Officer, or that the appellant for some other reason lacks jurisdiction or standing, the case may be dismissed on the motion of any party or the Administrative Hearing Officer. 
(H)  Mailings, notices, computations of time, time limitations, service and filings shall conform to the requirements of particular law or ordinance involved. 
(I)  The written decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be known as an administrative enforcement order. 
(J)  The parties may enter into a stipulated agreement, which must be signed by both parties. Upon approval and acceptance by the Administrative Hearing Officer, this agreement shall be entered as the administrative enforcement order. Entry of this agreement shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and the right to appeal. 
(K)  The Administrative Hearing Officer may uphold the administrative citation and all penalties, or dismiss the administrative citation and all penalties, or may waive or conditionally reduce the penalties assessed by the administrative citation. The Administrative Hearing Officer may also impose conditions and deadlines to correct the violation or require payment of any outstanding penalties. 
(L)  If the Administrative Hearing Officer dismisses the administrative citation and all penalties due to the City's failure to satisfy its obligations under this Chapter, the appellant's $35.00 processing fee shall be promptly refunded. 
(M)  The Administrative Hearing Officer has continuing jurisdiction over the subject matter of an administrative citation appeal hearing for the purposes of granting a continuance, ordering compliance by issuing an administrative enforcement order, ensuring compliance of that order, modifying an administrative enforcement order, or, where extraordinary circumstances exist, granting a new hearing. The Administrative Hearing Officer may schedule subsequent review hearings as may be necessary or as requested by a party to the hearing to ensure compliance with the administrative enforcement order. 
(3338 3495) 
1-23-9. - False Information or Refusal Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make a false statement or refuse to give his or her name or address with intent to deceive or interfere with the enforcement official when in the performance of official duties under the provisions of this Chapter. Any person who willfully makes a false statement or refuses to give his or her name or address with intent to deceive or interfere with the enforcement official shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine or by confinement in jail or by both such fine and imprisonment as specified in Section 1-8-1 of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(3338) 
1-23-10. - Failure to Obey Subpoena. 
    It is unlawful for any person to refuse to obey a subpoena issued by the Administrative Hearing Officer. Any person who fails to obey a subpoena shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine or by confinement in jail or by both such fine and imprisonment as specified in Section 1-8-1 of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(3338 3495) 
1-23-11. - Failure to Attend Administrative Citation Appeal Hearing. 
    Any responsible party who fails to appear at the hearing is deemed to waive the right to a hearing and the adjudication of the issues related to the hearing, provided that proper notice of the hearing has been provided. 
(3338) 
1-23-12. - Failure to Comply with Administrative Enforcement Order. 
    It is unlawful for a responsible party to an administrative enforcement hearing who has been served with a copy of the final administrative enforcement order to fail to comply with the order. Any person who fails to comply with a final administrative enforcement order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine or by confinement in jail or by both such fine and imprisonment as specified in Section 1-8-1 of the Westminster Municipal Code. Prosecution for failure to comply with a final administrative enforcement order shall not commence until the time to appeal such order has lapsed. 
(3338) 
1-23-13. - Penalties Assessed. 
(A)  If the responsible party fails to correct the violation, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for violations of the same code section. The penalties assessed for each administrative citation issued for violations of the same code section or sections shall be established by the Manager, but shall not exceed the following amounts, regardless of the number of violations per citation: 
(1)  First administrative citation: $150.00. 
(2)  Second administrative citation: $500.00. 
(3)  Third or subsequent administrative citation: $999.00. 
(B)  Payment of the penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the violations nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. 
(C)  All penalties assessed shall be payable to the City of Westminster. Payment of the full amount of the penalty must be received in person or postmarked within ten calendar days of the date of issuance of the administrative citation or administrative enforcement order, or within the time specified on the administrative enforcement order. 
(3338) 
1-23-14. - Failure to Pay Penalties. 
(A)  The failure of any responsible party to pay the civil penalties assessed by an administrative citation or administrative enforcement order within the time specified on the citation or order, respectively, may result in the imposition of a late fee of $25.00 and interest at a rate of ten percent per annum. 
(B)  In the event of failure to pay all penalties assessed, the manager may refer the matter for collection by whatever means are available to the City. 
(C)  In the case of violations associated with specific real property, the City shall have as security for the collection of such late fees, penalties, interest, and administrative costs a lien upon such real property. These amounts may be assessed and collected as specified in Title I, Chapter 31 of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(D)  Any action or other process provided by law may be maintained by the City to recover or collect any amounts, including late fees, penalties, interest, and administrative costs, owing under this Chapter. 
(3338) 
CHAPTER 24. - PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT 

1-24-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Administrative Officer shall mean the City Manager, City Attorney, City Clerk and Finance Director, and such additional administrative officers as may be created by City Council. The additional administrative officers shall be those employees serving in classifications listed as "administrative officers" in the pay and classification plan approved by City Council resolution. 
    Appeal shall mean the action taken by an employee in order to have the employee's suspension, demotion or dismissal reviewed by the personnel board and the City Manager. 
    Board shall mean the personnel board. 
    Class shall mean a position or group of positions that are sufficiently similar with respect to skill, effort and responsibility that they may be properly designated by the same title, and equitably compensated from the same range of pay under substantially the same employment conditions. 
    Department Head shall mean an individual who is regularly responsible for directing and managing the overall operations of a city department as authorized by the charter or Code, and who has been designated as a department head by the City Manager. The City Manager, Assistant City Manager, Deputy City Manager, and the City Attorney shall assume duties assigned to department heads in this Chapter for carrying out those actions involving positions that report directly to them. 
    Division Manager shall mean an individual appointed by the department head to manage a work group designated as a division within the department. For purposes of this Chapter, the City Manager, Assistant City Manager, Deputy City Manager, Department Head, or the City Attorney shall assume the responsibilities assigned to division manager when the employee in question reports to a Department Head, the City Attorney, Deputy City Manager, Assistant City Manager, or the City Manager. 
    Employee shall mean a person who receives monetary compensation from the City in return for present services or work performed on a non-contractual basis, or who is on a leave of absence without pay that has been approved by the Human Resources Manager. This definition shall include all full-time and part-time regular, administrative officers, temporary, provisional, seasonal, substitute, hourly, instructor, indexed, intern, special project, short-term disability and emergency employees. This definition shall exclude elected municipal officials, volunteer firefighters, all other volunteer personnel, and retirees from the City. 
    Employee-Exempt shall mean an employee who is exempt from the overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act. Reference to exempt employees refers to those employees whose positions are listed in the exempt employee pay schedule in the City pay plan. 
    Employee-Nonexempt shall mean an employee who is entitled to overtime pay or compensatory leave time under circumstances specified by the Fair Labor Standards Act. Reference to nonexempt employees refers to those employees whose positions are listed in the nonexempt employee pay schedule in the City pay plan. 
    Employee-Part-time regular shall mean an employee who has been appointed to a part-time authorized nonexempt or exempt position to work less than 40 hours during a seven-day period on a regular basis, and who has successfully completed the initial probationary period. 
    Employee-Regular shall mean an employee who has been appointed to a full-time authorized nonexempt or exempt position in the municipal service, and who has successfully completed the initial probationary period. 
    Grievance shall mean a disagreement regarding the meaning, interpretation, application, or alleged violation of these policies and rules adopted hereunder, departmental policies, rules or any other administrative policies of the city that has been formally presented for review pursuant to Section 1-24-3 of this Chapter. 
    Job description shall mean the written description of a class, including the title, a statement of the nature of the work, examples of duties and responsibilities, and the requirements that are essential and/or desirable for the satisfactory performance of the duties of the class. 
    Job title shall mean the title assigned to any particular class, and used for reference to that class. 
    Position shall mean a group of current duties and responsibilities requiring the full-time, temporary, or part-time services of one employee. 
    Supervisor shall mean any individual having authority, in the interest of the City, to hire, transfer, suspend, lay off, promote, discharge, assign, reward, or discipline other employees, or having responsibility to direct them, or to adjust their grievances, or effectively having the authority to recommend such action, if the exercise of such authority is not merely routine or clerical in nature, but requires the use of independent judgment. 
    Suspension shall mean the temporary separation of an employee from performing his or her regularly assigned duties with or without pay for disciplinary reasons, or pending the outcome of an investigation involving the employee. 
(2248 2603 2922 3317 3390) 
1-24-2. - General Principles and Implementation. 
(A)  Intent of Chapter: In enacting this Chapter, it is the intent of the City Council to provide for a professional and impartial personnel management system in accordance with the provisions of the City Charter. This Chapter supersedes any previously distributed ordinances, resolutions, rules, policies and employee handbooks. The language of this Chapter is not intended to create, nor is it to be construed to constitute, a contract between the City of Westminster and any one or all of its employees. 
(B)  Persons Covered by Chapter: This Chapter applies to all positions and employees in the City. In addition, unless specifically noted otherwise, it shall also apply to administrative officers and other categories of municipal employment where not inconsistent with provisions of the charter or other ordinances. 
(C)  Administrative Regulations: The City Manager shall have the authority to establish such policies and rules deemed necessary for the efficient and orderly administration of the personnel management system. Such authority may be delegated to department heads, division managers and supervisors as deemed appropriate by the City Manager. The City Manager shall have the authority to negotiate general leave accrual rates, balances and annual leave limits for current or prospective management staff in an effort to attract or retain employees. The City Manager will provide City Council with a quarterly report if any substantive changes are made to administrative personnel policies in the previous quarter. All such policies and rules must be in writing and be consistent and compatible with this Chapter and the charter, and, at a minimum, include the following: 
(1)  Classification Plan. A classification plan resulting from an analysis and evaluation of all positions in the municipal service shall be developed by the City Manager, or his/her designee, and maintained by the Human Resources Manager. It shall consist of a listing that groups all positions in classes, based on the skill, effort, responsibility, and qualifications that are necessary or desirable for the satisfactory performance of the duties of the class. The classification plan shall include titles and written job descriptions for all the various classes of positions. Each class shall include all positions in the municipal service that are sufficiently similar with respect to duties, responsibilities, and authority that the same descriptive title may be used to designate each position allocated to the class. Council approval of the job titles and pay ranges in the pay plan shall constitute approval of the classification plan. 
(2)  Preparation, Adoption and Amendment of Pay Plan. A City-wide compensation plan, which shall consist of minimum and maximum rates of pay for each class or position, shall be developed and maintained by the Human Resources Manager, as the representative of the City Manager. Salary ranges shall be related directly to the position classification plan, and shall be determined with due regard to range of pay for other classes, requisite qualifications, prevailing rate of pay for like work in other public and private organizations, recruiting experience, working conditions, suggestions of department heads, maintenance of other benefits received by employees, the financial policy of the City, and other economic considerations. In addition, the Human Resources Manager shall develop, maintain and update a set of salary complements, which shall be designed to assist in attracting and retaining qualified employees. The pay plan shall be submitted to council by the City Manager for adoption on an annual basis, in order to maintain the competitive nature of the City's personnel program. 
(3)  Employee Political Activity. Active participation by employees in the municipal politics of the City of Westminster shall be restricted. It shall be the policy of the City, however, not to deny to employees and officials the rights to engage in their normal rights and responsibilities as citizens. 
(4)  Nondiscrimination. No action affecting the employment status of any employee or applicant for a position in the municipal service, including examination, appointment, promotion, demotion, suspension, or removal shall be taken or withheld by reason of race, color, sex, national origin, political, or religious affiliation, age, disability or military veteran status. 
(2248 2922 3390 3784) 
1-24-3. - Grievances and Appeals. 
(A)  General: Supervisory and administrative personnel shall strive to anticipate, and thereby eliminate, the cause of most misunderstandings, problems, complaints, or grievances. To the extent that they occur, the employee is encouraged to promptly seek the employee's immediate supervisor's assistance. Supervisory personnel shall not interfere with or discriminate against or make reprisals against any employee who files a grievance. The City strongly encourages the use of non-adversarial dispute resolution techniques to resolve grievances in a manner that is satisfactory to all affected parties. Supervisory and administrative personnel are strongly advised to seek the advice and support of the human resources division and City Attorney's office at the earliest possible time after learning of a problem to develop a means to cooperatively resolve the issues. Developing the least adversarial path to resolution, before conflict escalates further, is the goal. While alternative means to resolve personnel issues may be developed, either prior to the filing of a formal grievance or during the investigation and formal processing of a grievance, the earlier the better. Employees, too, are encouraged to suggest alternative means of resolving disputes without compromising their rights to the formal process. 
(B)  Grievance: A grievance is a disagreement regarding the meaning, interpretation, application, or alleged violation of the personnel policies and rules, departmental policies and rules, or any other administrative policies of the City. When disputed, the Human Resources Manager will determine whether the action or alleged action is grievable. 
(C)  Filing a Grievance: Any employee with a grievance must file a written complaint with the employee's Division Manager (or the party who took the action being grieved if that party is of higher rank) with a copy to the Human Resources Manager within 14 calendar days following the grieved action. The Division Manager or department head shall try to resolve the matter within ten calendar days from the receipt of the written grievance. If the employee is not satisfied that the difference has been resolved after action by the Division Manager, the employee may, within ten calendar days of receipt of the grievance response, file the grievance with the department head (if not already reviewed by the department head). The department head shall try to resolve the matter within ten calendar days of receipt of the grievance. The deadlines in this subsection (C) may be extended with the mutual consent of the parties. If the employee is not satisfied that the difference has been resolved after action by the department head, the employee may pursue the following procedure: 
(1)  Actions Other Than Suspension, Demotion or Dismissal. Within ten calendar days after receipt of the Department Head's response, the employee may ask the Human Resources Manager in writing to investigate the grievance. If the department head has taken no action within ten calendar days after receipt of the written grievance, the employee may request in writing that the Human Resources Manager investigate the grieved action. The Human Resources Manager shall, within 21 calendar days, investigate the grievance and consult with the employee and then make recommendations to the City Manager or the City Manager's designee, who shall decide on the grievance within ten calendar days. The City Manager's or the City Manager's designee's decision shall be final in all instances. The deadlines in this sub-subsection (1) may be extended with the mutual consent of the parties or because of an inability to do a complete investigation in the time allowed. 
(2)  Suspension, Demotion or Dismissal. Within 14 calendar days after receipt of the Department Head's response, the employee may file an appeal to the personnel board or, if the Department Head has taken no action within ten calendar days of receipt of the written grievance, the employee may file a written appeal to the personnel board within 21 calendar days after the Department Head's receipt of the written grievance. 
(3)  Failure to File. An employee loses any right to file a grievance or appeal with the Human Resources Manager or to file an appeal to the board if the employee fails to file a written grievance within the time lines defined above. No organization or individual has the right to file a grievance on the employee's behalf, and legal representatives shall not be permitted to attend any meeting with the grieved employee held for the purpose of investigating the grievance prior to the time an appeal has been filed pursuant to subsection (D) of this section. 
(4)  Grievances Related to Disabilities: If an employee has, in the employee's view, suffered discrimination in violation of state or federal law based on a past or current disability, whether real or perceived, or association with an individual with a disability, the employee may file a grievance pursuant to this subsection (C). A record of the grievance and the action taken to resolve it shall be maintained. This procedure is not a prerequisite to the pursuit of other legal remedies authorized by federal law. A disability-related grievance alleging a violation of federal laws protecting individuals with disabilities may be filed at any time. 
(D)  Appeal: Only suspensions, demotions, or dismissals for disciplinary reasons can be appealed to the personnel board and only after all administrative remedies through the grievance procedure have been exhausted. Only regular full-time employees and regular part-time benefited employees in authorized positions are eligible to appeal to the board. Administrative officers have no appeal rights beyond the grievance process to the City Manager. 
(E)  Filing an Appeal: The employee must file an appeal and request a hearing, in writing, setting forth the reasons for appeal in detail with the Human Resources Manager as set forth in subsection (C) of this section. The appeal must specify the grounds for appeal and shall contain a detailed statement of facts in support of the appeal. Anyone considering filing an appeal may contact human resources for a complete copy of the personnel board rules. 
(F)  Forwarding an Appeal: The human resources manager shall immediately forward copies of the written appeal to each member of the board. The Human Resources Manager has the authority to return to the employee for correction any appeal that fails to conform to this provision regarding specifying grounds for appeal and containing a detailed statement of facts in support of the appeal. 
(G)  Appeal Procedure: Upon receipt of the appeal from the Human Resources Manager, the board shall schedule a hearing on the appeal. Once the board meets to hear the appeal, it may take the time necessary to obtain all the information deemed appropriate and, in so doing, the board is not restricted to any particular time frame to conclude the hearing. 
(H)  Subpoenas: The chairperson of the board may issue a subpoena stating the title of the proceeding before the board and commanding each person to whom it is directed to attend and give testimony at a hearing on an appeal before the board at the time and place specified therein. 
(I)  Findings and decision: It is the interpretation of the city council that the charter of the City of Westminster establishes a personnel grievance process in which the personnel board has the responsibility of determining the facts of an appeal and determining when disciplinary action should be reconsidered and, in such cases, the City Manager has the responsibility of reconsidering the disciplinary action and making the final disciplinary decision based on the facts determined by the board. At the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall send a written decision to the City Manager that concludes that: 
(1)  The action appealed was without justification and should be reconsidered. The board may recommend that the appellant be restored to previous status and receive compensation for the period of the suspension, termination, or reduction in grade; 
(2)  The action appealed was justified and should be confirmed; or 
(3)  The action appealed was partially justified and should be reconsidered. The board may recommend that the discipline be reduced under the conditions the board deems proper. 
The board's decision shall contain findings of evidentiary fact on all material issues of fact and conclusions regarding the issues of law or discretion presented by the appeal. 
(J)  Notice of Findings and Decision; Transcript: The board shall report its findings and decision to the City Manager, the parties and their attorneys within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing. Notice shall be sent in the manner specified in subsection (I) of this section. The City shall make a record of the testimony and proceedings at an appeal hearing. Either the City or the employee may request a transcription of the testimony and proceedings at an appeal hearing. If the employee requests a hearing transcription, it shall be prepared at the employee's expense. 
(K)  Decision of the City Manager: 
(1)  When the board has concluded that the discipline was justified, the City Manager shall confirm the decision of the board; 
(2)  When the board has concluded that the action appealed was without justification or was partially justified, the City Manager shall reconsider the suspension, demotion or discharge and either reinstate the employee, impose a lesser penalty, or confirm the original suspension, demotion or discharge; or 
(3)  When reconsidering a suspension, demotion or discharge, the City Manager shall be bound by the board's findings of evidentiary fact. The City Manager may accept or reject the board's findings of ultimate fact or conclusions and may accept or reject the board's recommendation regarding discipline. 
(L)  Administrative Procedure Jurisdictional: No employee may bring an appeal before the board until the employee has received the written notice of the final action taken or contemplated by the department head. The filing of an appeal under any of the procedures described in this section shall not constitute grounds for delaying the administrative action against which the appeal is made. 
(M)  Appeal from Decision of City Manager: The employee may appeal any action of the City Manager resulting in suspension, demotion or dismissal to the district court. 
(N)  Right to Legal Counsel: The employee may only be represented by a person who is licensed to practice law in the State of Colorado. 
(O)  Rules of Procedure: The board may adopt additional rules of procedure to supplement the procedures outlined in this section. 
(2248 2603 2648 2922 3390) 
1-24-4. - Political Activity. 
(A)  Employee Political Activity: City employees are hereby restricted from actively participating in the municipal politics of the City, but shall not be otherwise restricted from engaging in their normal rights and responsibilities as citizens. 
(B)  Prohibited Political Activity: 
(1)  An employee shall not: 
(a)  Use any City resource in support of or in opposition to any issue or candidate; 
(b)  Distribute or display political stickers, buttons or similar materials while in city uniform, during working hours or at City facilities; 
(c)  Actively campaign for or against any issue or candidate during working hours or at City facilities; 
(d)  Actively campaign for or against any issue or candidate while wearing a uniform that identifies the employee as a City employee; 
(e)  Serve as an officer of any organization which has the primary purpose of promoting the candidacy of any person for City office; 
(f)  Directly solicit, receive, collect, handle, disburse, contribute, or account for assessments, contributions, or other funds in support of the candidacy of any person for City office; 
(g)  Actively participate in a fund-raising activity of a candidate for City office; 
(h)  Actively organize or manage the political campaign of a candidate for City office; 
(i)  Solicit votes in support of or in opposition to a candidate for City office; 
(j)  Drive voters to the polls on behalf of a candidate for City office; 
(k)  Endorse or oppose a candidate for City office in a political advertisement, broadcast, campaign literature, or similar material; or 
(l)  Address a convention, caucus, rally, or similar gathering in support of or in opposition to a candidate for City office. 
(m)  The foregoing restrictions shall not be construed as (1) limiting the political activity of a spouse or any family member of an employee; (2) including an employee's unintentional or unwitting participation in City Council campaign materials or election activities or (3) "friending," "following" or similar interactions with City Council and mayoral candidates through social media sites such as Facebook, Twitter and LinkedIn, to the extent such interactions do not include any activity otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. 
(2)  All employees are free to engage in political activity to the widest extent consistent with the restrictions imposed by law and this section, so long as any such activity is done in the employee's capacity as a private citizen and not in the capacity of a City employee. Subject to the limitations of subsection one of this section, each employee retains the right to: 
(a)  Register and vote in any election; 
(b)  Display a political yard sign, picture, sticker, badge, or button; 
(c)  Participate in the nonpartisan activities of a civic, community, social, labor, or professional organization; 
(d)  Be a member of a political party or other political organization and participate in its activities to the extent consistent with this ordinance; 
(e)  Attend a political convention, rally, fund-raising function, or other political gathering, including those of candidates for City office; 
(f)  Sign a political petition as an individual, other than a petition for the nomination or recall of a City Councillor or the Mayor; 
(g)  Expend personal funds, make contributions in kind, and use personal time to urge electors to vote in favor of or against any issue or candidate before the electorate, except any candidate for City office; 
(h)  Seek election to City office, provided that the employee resigns or takes formally authorized unpaid leave from City employment prior to any campaign activities being undertaken on his or her behalf or filing a nomination petition; 
(i)  Run for nomination or election as a candidate in any election not involving City government; 
(j)  Be politically active in connection with a charter or constitutional amendment, referendum, approval of a municipal ordinance or any other question or issue of a similar character; and 
(k)  Otherwise participate fully in public affairs, except as prohibited by law, in a manner which does not materially compromise the public's confidence in the neutrality, efficiency, or integrity of the employee or the City government. 
(C)  Supervisors: No supervisor shall in any way coerce an employee to campaign for or against any candidate or issue, nor retaliate, intimidate or discriminate against any employee for any political activity permitted by this ordinance. 
(D)  Solicitation: It shall be unlawful for a candidate for the office of City Councillor or Mayor to solicit knowingly, directly or indirectly, a City employee to contribute money or campaign for or against any candidate for the office of City Councillor or Mayor. This provision shall not prohibit coincidental contacts with city employees through mass mailings or distribution of literature. 
(3720) 
CHAPTER 26. - HOUSING AUTHORITY 

1-26-1. - Housing Authority Established. 
    The City Council hereby finds and determines that: 
(A)  Unsanitary and unsafe inhabited dwelling accommodations exist in the City. 
(B)  There is a lack of safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations in the City available for all the inhabitants thereof. 
(C)  The City Council further desires to avail itself of the provisions of the Housing Authorities Law, Part 2 of Article 4 of Title 29, C.R.S., as it may be amended from time to time, and pursuant to said Act, establishes the Westminster Housing Authority to function in accordance with the state statutes. 
(1029 1699) 
1-26-2. - Appointment of members of authority. 
    All members of the City Council shall be Ex Officio Commissioners of the Housing Authority. The terms of office of such commissioners shall be coterminous with their terms of office on City Council. The Mayor shall be Ex Officio Chairman of the Commissioners. The Commissioners shall select from among their members a Vice-Chairman. 
(1029 1699) 
1-26-3. - Powers of the Authority. 
    The Housing Authority shall have each and every power granted to it pursuant to the Housing Authorities Law of the State of Colorado, as set forth in Part 2 of Article 4 of Title 29, C.R.S., and shall be subject to all limitations and provisions contained in said Housing Authority Act, together with all amendments thereto. 
(1029) 
CHAPTER 29. - UNCLAIMED INTANGIBLE PROPERTY 

1-29-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the administration and disposition of unclaimed intangible property that is in the possession of or under the control of the City. 
(2060) 
1-29-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Finance Director shall mean the finance director of the City of Westminster or such person's designee. 
    Owner shall mean a depositor, beneficiary, creditor, payee or other person having a legal or equitable interest in unclaimed intangible property, or a duly authorized legal representative or successor in interest of such person. 
    Unclaimed intangible property shall mean any intangible property, including, but not limited to, any moneys, checks, deposits, overpayments, refunds, unpaid wages or pension benefits, reimbursements, restitution payments, and any interest or income derived therefrom, that is held, issued or owing by the City in the ordinary course of the City's business, and that has not been claimed by its owner for a period of more than one year after the date it became payable or distributable. 
    "Unclaimed intangible property" does not include abandoned, lost, stolen or confiscated property that has been placed in the custody of the Chief of Police under Chapter 11 of Title VI. 
(2060) 
1-29-3. - Disposition of Unclaimed Intangible Property. 
(A)  Prior to the disposition of any unclaimed intangible property, the Finance Director shall send a written notice by first class mail to the owner's last known address. The notice shall include a description of the property, the amount or value of the property and the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall explain how the owner may inquire about or claim the property, and shall state that, if the owner fails to provide the City with a written claim for the return of the property within 60 days of the date of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the City and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(B)  When the notice provided for in subsection (A) of this section is returned undelivered, or when a last known address of the owner cannot be determined, and the unclaimed intangible property has a value of more than $20.00, the notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. 
(C)  If the City receives no written claim to the property within the 60-day claim period, the property shall become the sole property of the City and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(D)  If the City receives a written claim within the 60-day claim period, the City shall evaluate the claim and give written notice to the claimant within 60 days thereof that the claim has been accepted or denied in whole or in part. The City may investigate the validity of a claim and may request further supporting documentation from the claimant prior to disbursing or refusing to disburse the property. 
(E)  In the event that there is more than one claimant for the same property, the Finance Director may resolve said claims or may deposit the disputed property with the registry of the district court in an interpleader action. 
(F)  In the event that all claims filed are denied, the property shall become the sole property of the City, and any claim of the owner of such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(G)  Any legal action challenging a decision of the Finance Director shall be filed pursuant to rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure within 30 days of such decision or shall be forever barred. If any legal action is timely filed, the property shall be disbursed pursuant to the final order of the court having jurisdiction over the claim. 
(2060) 
CHAPTER 30. - CLAIMS BROUGHT BY AND AGAINST THE CITY 

1-30-1. - Legislative Declaration. 
    [The] City Council hereby finds and declares that, by virtue of the services and functions provided by the City and the consequences of unlimited liability, the City should be liable for its actions and those of its agents only as provided by the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act. 
(1411 1699) 
1-30-2. - Notice of Claim. 
    Any notice of claim shall be filed with the City Attorney or City Manager. 
(1411 1699 3002) 
1-30-3. - Settlement and Payment of Claims; Notification of Council. 
(A)  Notification of Council: At least quarterly, City Council shall be provided at a regular or special meeting a summary of all claims filed against the City. The City Council shall take no formal action on such claims, but any matter concerning a claim may be addressed in attorney-client session. The summary listing of all claims filed against the city shall include each claimant's name, amount of the claim and brief description of the claim. 
(B)  Claims Against the City: The City Manager, after receiving the advice of the City Attorney, shall have the authority to settle and authorize payment of any claim, to the extent the amount of payment is within the amount of the City Manager's authority to approve contracts as provided for in Chapter 1 of Title XV of the Westminster Municipal Code, as may be amended from time to time. With respect to the settlement of property and liability claims involving the City's self-insurance program, the City Manager may delegate his or her authority to the City's Risk Manager. The settlement and approval of all other claims against the City may be approved by the City Manager, after receiving the consent of the City Council with the advice of the City Attorney. 
(C)  The City Manager shall have the authority to settle on behalf of the City any claims or lawsuits that were brought by the City against any third party, to the extent the original value of such claim or lawsuit was within the amount of the City Manager's authority to approve contracts as provided for in Chapter 1 of Title XV of the Westminster Municipal Code. The settlement of claims or lawsuits above this amount may be approved by the City Manager after receiving the consent of the City Council with the advice of the City Attorney. The original value of any claim or lawsuit shall be based upon the reasonable determination of the City Attorney. 
(D)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, the Director of Finance is authorized to abate taxes as provided by Title IV of this Code. 
(1411 1784 2032 3002) 
1-30-4. - Time Period. 
    Any action filed against the City shall be commenced within the time period provided by law or shall forever be barred. 
(1411) 
1-30-5. - Exclusions. 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall not be applicable to the settlement or payment of: (1) routine claims submitted by city employees for health insurance benefit and similar benefit programs; (2) preauthorized property acquisitions, including condemnations, for which funds have been previously budgeted; and (3) workers compensation claims and unemployment compensation claims for which funds have been previously budgeted. 
(3002) 
CHAPTER 31. - MUNICIPAL LIENS 

1-31-1. - Municipal Liens. 
(A)  Any amount of money owed to the City for services, taxes, or assessments that concern or benefit the real property of the obligor shall automatically become a lien upon such real property. Such automatic liens will not be available where the payment obligation to the City is not directly related to use, maintenance, improvement, taxation, or other service to the real property involved. These liens shall become first and prior liens upon the property in question. These liens shall be in the nature of a municipal tax, and, as such, shall be perpetual and continuing liens. The procedures contained in this Chapter shall be followed in enforcing such municipal liens, except in those instances where a different procedure is prescribed by another section of this Code. 
(B)  If payments due the City have not been otherwise collected, the Director of Finance may certify the amount due to the County Treasurer of the county in which the real property of the person owing the money to the City is located. The County Treasurer, upon receipt of the statement of the Finance Director establishing the amount owed, shall collect the amount owed in the same manner as municipal taxes are collected, provided, however, that upon notice to the Treasurer by the City that the city intends to pursue judicial foreclosure of the lien so established, the treasurer shall refrain from attempting to collect the amount due. 
(C)  The procedure contained in this Chapter is not intended to establish an exclusive method for collection of amounts owed to the City, and nothing contained herein shall preclude the city from pursuing other methods of collection, including judicial foreclosure of city liens. 
(1680 2125) 
1-31-2. - Discharge of Lien. 
    Within 30 days of payment of the full amount owed to the City, the Finance Director shall notify the County Treasurer of the county in which the payor's property is situated that the amount due the City has been paid, and that any liens resulting from that debt shall be discharged. 
(1680) 
CHAPTER 32. - OFFICE OF EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 

1-32-1. - Intent and Purpose. 
    It is the intent of the City Council to establish and maintain a local emergency agency as described in the Colorado Disaster Emergency Act of 1992, Part 21 of Article 32 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended. Except as provided in this Chapter, city departments shall continue to exercise the responsibilities and authority specified in the City Charter or by ordinance. 
(1322 1741 2068 2921) 
1-32-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Chapter, all definitions found in Section 24-32-2103, C.R.S., apply as definitions to this Chapter, except as follows: 
    Emergency shall include the terms disaster and disaster emergency as the context may require. 
(1322 1741 2068 2400 2921) 
1-32-3. - Organization and Appointments. 
    The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to establish an office of emergency management as the coordinating agency for all emergency events, utilizing to the fullest extent the services and resources of existing departments within the City. An Emergency Management Coordinator shall be appointed to direct appropriate planning, management and coordination in all phases of emergency management, including mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery. 
(1322 1741 2068 2921) 
1-32-4. - Duties and Responsibilities. 
    The office of emergency management shall be responsible for preparing and keeping current an emergency plan and management system (EPMS), delineating measures to be implemented by the City before, during and after an emergency event. An emergency management system shall be developed and tested to assure capability of managing emergency events. 
(1322 1741 2068 2400 2921) 
1-32-5. - Emergency Plan and Management System. 
    An EPMS shall be developed and maintained by the office of emergency management, subject to approval of the City Manager. The plan will identify department responsibilities, including requirements for maintenance of specific facilities and department emergency procedures and critical resource information. 
(1322 1741 2068 2921) 
1-32-6. - Procedures. 
(A)  Declaration of emergency: The Mayor shall have the power to declare that a state of emergency exists when, in his/her opinion, such an event has occurred or the threat of such event is imminent. 
(B)  Declaration in writing: Declaration of emergency shall be in writing and shall describe the nature of the emergency, the area threatened, the conditions that have brought it about, and the conditions that would remedy it. The City Manager shall be responsible for publication and dissemination of information to the public and shall file the declaration with the City Clerk and forward a copy to the state office of emergency management. 
(C)  Effect of declaration: The issuance of a declaration of emergency shall automatically empower the City Manager to exercise any and all of the emergency powers permitted by state and local law and shall activate all relevant portions of the EPMS. The City Council shall convene to perform its legislative powers as the situation demands, and shall receive reports through the City Manager and evaluate and enact policy and other incident support as required. Nothing in this Chapter shall abridge or curtail the powers of the City Council. 
(D)  Duration: 
(1)  A state of emergency shall remain in effect until the City Council or City Manager declares that the threat of danger has passed or that the emergency conditions no longer exist. However, a state of emergency shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days, unless the City Council approves a longer duration. 
(2)  City Council may by motion terminate a state of emergency at any time and the City Manager shall immediately issue a notice affecting the same. 
(3)  Any declaration continuing or terminating a state of emergency shall be filed with the City Clerk and a copy shall be forwarded to the state office of emergency management. 
(1322 1741 2068 2921) 
1-32-7. - Emergency Response Powers. 
(A)  The City Manager may exercise any and all powers granted by applicable state law subsequent to issuance of the emergency declaration. 
(B)  During the existence of a state of emergency, the City Manager may promulgate such regulations as he or she deems necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical resources. These regulations shall be confirmed at the earliest practical time by the City Council, shall be given widespread circulation, and shall be disseminated to the news media. These regulations may include, but shall not be limited to, powers granted by applicable state law. Specifically, the City Manager may: 
(1)  Suspend the provisions of this Code that prescribe procedures for conduct of City business, if strict compliance would in any way prevent, hinder, or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency. 
(2)  Transfer the direction, personnel, or functions of city departments for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services. 
(3)  Subject to any applicable legal requirements to provide compensation, commandeer or utilize any private property, if the City Manager finds this necessary to cope with the emergency. 
(4)  Direct and compel evacuation of persons from any stricken or threatened area within the City, if the City Manager deems this action necessary for the preservation of life or other emergency mitigation, response, or recovery measures. 
(5)  Prescribe routes, modes of transportation, and destinations in connection with evacuation. 
(6)  Control ingress to and egress from a disaster area, the movement of persons within the area, and the occupancy of premises therein. 
(7)  Suspend or limit the sale, dispensing, or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives, or combustibles within the City. 
(8)  Make provisions for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing. 
(9)  Waive all provisions for competitive bidding and direct the purchasing agent to purchase necessary supplies in the open market at not more than commercial prices. 
(C)  The City Manager is authorized to exercise all powers permitted by City Charter and state law to require emergency services of any city officer or employee and command the aid of as many citizens of the City as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for civil defense workers. 
(1322 1741 2068 2921) 
1-32-8. - Compensation. 
    Compensation for services or private property used by the City in responding to an emergency shall be compensated as specified by contract or as required by state law, subject to the principles and procedures set forth in Section 24-32-2111, C.R.S., and Articles 1 to 7 of Title 38, C.R.S. 
(1322 1741 2068 2921) 
1-32-9. - Line of Succession of Mayor. 
    If the Mayor is unable to perform the duties or functions set forth in this Chapter, then the powers and duties conferred upon the Mayor shall be performed in descending order as follows: by the mayor pro tempore, then by the council member most senior in length of service, then by the council member whose last name begins with a letter that is the closest to the beginning of the alphabet. 
(1741 2068) 
1-32-10. - Conflicting Ordinances, Orders, Rules and Regulations Suspended. 
    Any orders, rules and regulations promulgated during a proclaimed state of emergency shall take precedence over existing ordinances, rules and regulations, if a conflict arises. 
(1741 2068 2921) 
1-32-11. - Violation of Regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter, or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority contained in this Chapter, or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any person in the exercise of any duty or authority pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(1322 1741 2068 2921) 
1-32-12. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Chapter or of any regulations or plan issued pursuant to the authority contained herein shall be punished by a fine or by imprisonment or by both such fine and imprisonment pursuant to the provisions in Section 1-8-1 of this Code. 
(1322 1741 2068 2921) 
CHAPTER 33. - GIFTS 

1-33-1. - Gifts to city councillors, members of the city's boards and commissions, and city employees. 
(A)  No city councillor, member of a city board or commission, or city employee, directly, or indirectly through the spouse or any legal dependent thereof, shall solicit, receive or accept cash, a gift of substantial value, or a gift of substantial economic benefit that: 
(1)  Given the circumstances, a reasonable person would conclude would tend to cause the city councillor, board or commission member, or city employee to depart from the faithful and impartial discharge of his or her public duties; or 
(2)  The city councillor, board or commission member, or city employee knows or that a reasonable person in his or her position should know is primarily for the purpose of rewarding the city councillor, board or commission member, or city employee for official action taken or to be taken. 
(B)  Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed or construed as limiting the authority of the City Manager to regulate the receipt, acceptance, or solicitation of cash and gifts by city employees. In the event of any conflicts between any such regulation established by the City Manager and any provision of this ordinance, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any city councillor, board or commission member, or city employee to solicit, accept, or receive any cash or gift in violation of this Chapter. Any such violation is a criminal offense and punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1 of this Code. 
(3341) 
CHAPTER 34. - COLLECTIVE BARGAINING FOR FIREFIGHTERS 

1-34-1. - Statement of Policy. 
    It is the intent of the City to protect the integrity of the City Charter and preserve the City's Home Rule Authority under Colorado law, while maintaining competitive market-based wages and benefits for City employees, providing for Fire Department employee input, protecting management and employee rights, protecting the safety of employees and citizens, maintaining equity to all employees, facilitating employee engagement and opportunities for positive change, building respectful relationships between labor and management, keeping communication open, approaching bargaining in an interest-based manner whenever possible, all in a manner that is financially sustainable and fiscally responsible. Further, it is the public policy of the City to promote the public health, safety and welfare by assuring at all times the orderly and uninterrupted operations and services of City government. To carry out these policies and promote labor relations between the City and the commissioned members of the Fire Department, the City hereby recognizes the rights of qualified members of the Fire Department to join organizations of their own choosing for the purpose of representation in matters affecting employee relations; establishes a framework for collective bargaining and employee input; and provides that all bargaining impasses be submitted to non-binding arbitration and, if necessary, to a vote of the registered electors of the City. 
( Ord. No. 3882, § 1, 5-30-2017 ) 
1-34-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning: 
    American Arbitration Association shall mean the American Arbitration Association or its successor organization. 
    Bargaining unit shall mean all full-time commissioned members of the Westminster Fire Department up to and including the rank of Captain. 
    Benefits shall mean provision of: general leave, personal leave, leave for holidays, leave for illnesses, bereavement leave, pregnancy leave, birth of a child/adoption leave, family leave, injury leave (not to include workers' compensation), leave for jury duty/witness service, union leave, compensatory time, tuition reimbursement, uniform allowances, military leave, and levels of contribution to health insurance plans selected by the City. 
    Certified employee organization shall mean an organization or union elected by the bargaining unit and certified by the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Collective bargaining shall mean to meet at reasonable times to confer in good faith on subjects for collective bargaining and to reduce agreements on such subjects for collective bargaining to a written contract. 
    Collective bargaining agreement shall mean any and all terms on subjects for collective bargaining: to which the corporate authorities and the certified employee organization have voluntarily agreed; accepted by the corporate authorities and the employee organization from the recommendations of an advisory fact-finder; or selected by the electorate pursuant to Section 1-34-10, W.M.C. 
    Corporate authorities shall mean the City Manager, the City Council, or their officially designated representatives. 
    Final offer shall mean the last written offer made by a party no less than seven days prior to the commencement of the non-binding arbitration hearing. 
    Good faith shall mean an honest and sincere attempt to reach a mutually acceptable resolution of all issues in dispute through the bargaining process; however, the obligation to bargain in good faith does not compel a party to agree to a proposal or require the making of a concession. 
    Impasse or bargaining impasse shall mean that the City and certified employee organization have been unable to reach agreement and have become deadlocked on a specific subject for collective bargaining. 
    Items related to personal safety shall mean allowances for the purchase of non-issued personal safety equipment, the establishment and composition of a safety committee and the establishment and composition of (a) committee(s) to meet and confer on specifications for the purchase of fire and ambulance apparatus, Department tools and equipment and personal protective equipment. 
    Non-binding arbitration shall mean the use of a third-party neutral, an advisory fact-finder, who makes a determination on an issue-by-issue basis on any subjects for collective bargaining upon which the City and certified employee organization have reached a bargaining impasse. Such determination is non-binding upon the parties, and no enforceable arbitration award is issued. 
    Principals shall mean: (i) with respect to the corporate authorities, the City Council; and (ii) with respect to the certified employee organization, its members who are not on the team it designates to engage in collective bargaining. 
    Subjects for collective bargaining shall mean wages; benefits; items related to personal safety; representation in the disciplinary process, but not the decision to discipline; promotional procedure, but not the content/criteria for promotions nor the decision to promote; grievance procedures; dues deduction; and the payment of fair share fees. Subjects for collective bargaining shall not include those public and management rights set forth in Section 1-34-3, W.M.C. or matters that would conflict with federal or state constitutional, statutory, municipal ordinance, or Charter provisions. Upon mutual agreement, nothing prohibits the parties from negotiating over other matters, as long as such matters are not public and management rights as defined in Section 1-34-3. Such other matters shall not be subject to non-binding arbitration or submission to the electors of the City for final resolution unless both parties agree to submit the matter. 
    Wages shall mean the pay plan structure for the annual salary (base wage) of each position title within the bargaining unit and shall also include overtime, compensatory time, acting/provisional pay, call back pay, response pay and any other type of ancillary pay recognized by the City. 
( Ord. No. 3882, § 1, 5-30-2017 ) 
1-34-3. - Public and Management Rights. 
(A)  The following are the inherent and exclusive rights of the City, which shall not be the subjects of collective bargaining: 
(1)  To direct and schedule the work of its employees, including but not limited to determining schedules, staffing, shifts, hours and the scheduling of leave; 
(2)  To determine training needs, methods of training, and employees to be trained; 
(3)  To determine or consolidate operations, offices, and work sites, including, but not limited to permanently or temporarily moving operations in whole or in part to other locations; 
(4)  To hire, promote, demote, classify, evaluate, and retain employees in positions within the City; however, the certified employee organization may negotiate promotional procedure, but not the content/criteria for promotions nor the decision to promote; 
(5)  To demote, suspend, discharge, or otherwise discipline employees; however, representation in the disciplinary process shall be a subject of collective bargaining; 
(6)  To make, alter and enforce rules, regulations, orders and policies, and from time to time, to change such rules, regulations, orders and policies; 
(7)  To establish, select, administer, alter, amend and control insurance, pension, and retirement plans for employees; 
(8)  To lay-off employees because of lack of work, lack of funds, or for other legitimate reasons determined by the corporate authorities and to determine the method and criteria for recall; 
(9)  To determine and implement the methods, equipment, facilities and other means and personnel by which municipal operations are to be conducted, and to take steps it deems necessary to maintain the efficiency and safety of said operations and of the personnel engaged therein; and 
(10)  To determine its budget, organization, and the merits, necessity, and level of any activity or service provided by the City. 
( Ord. No. 3882, § 1, 5-30-2017 ) 
1-34-4. - Strikes, Work Stoppages, Slowdowns, and Mass Absenteeism Prohibited. 
(A)  In order for the City to discharge its Charter obligations to provide fire protection functions and protect the health, welfare, and safety of its citizens, it is essential that City services continue at all times without disruption. Acceptance of public employment carries with it an obligation and responsibility to act affirmatively at all times to ensure the continuation and promotion of the public's health, safety, and welfare. Accordingly, all employees and employee organizations are hereby prohibited from engaging in strikes, work stoppages, slowdowns, concerted disruptions or mass absenteeism. Any person who violates this prohibition shall be subject to any of the following without limitation: reprimand; suspension or discharge; and, in the case of violation of this prohibition by the certified employee organization: withdrawal of recognition, cancellation of any collective bargaining agreement with said organization, injunctive relief, suit for damages, and any other reasonable penalty or remedy, including attorneys' fees and costs in any such suit. 
( Ord. No. 3882, § 1, 5-30-2017 ) 
1-34-5. - Employee Rights. 
(A)  Members of the bargaining unit shall have the right to form, join, and participate in the activities of employee organizations of their choosing for the purpose of representation for collective bargaining, and they shall also have the right to refuse to join or participate in any activities of employee organizations and shall have the right to represent themselves individually and have individual grievances adjusted without resort to employee organizations; provided, however, that any resolution reached as a result of such individual representation or grievance may not be contrary to the terms of any collective bargaining agreement actually in effect and applicable to such bargaining unit members. 
(B)  Neither the City, nor any member of the bargaining unit, nor any employee organization, nor any certified employee organization, shall interfere with, intimidate, restrain, coerce, or discriminate against any employee because of the exercise of the foregoing rights. 
( Ord. No. 3882, § 1, 5-30-2017 ) 
1-34-6. - Selection, Recognition and Decertification of Certified Employee Organization. 
(A)  The employee organization selected in a secret ballot vote by the majority of the bargaining unit members shall be the certified employee organization recognized by the City as the sole and exclusive agent for all members of the bargaining unit for purposes of collective bargaining unless and until such certified employee organization is decertified by a majority vote of the members of the bargaining unit as set forth herein. Only the certified employee organization shall be entitled to engage in collective bargaining for the bargaining unit. 
(B)  Questions concerning the selection or decertification of a certified employee organization may be raised by a petition signed by at least 30 percent of the members of the bargaining unit. Such a petition may be submitted at any time to the corporate authorities provided that in the event there is then a certified employee organization, no petition may be filed within 12 months of the certified employee organization's certification by the American Arbitration Association; and provided further that no petition may be filed during the term of an existing collective bargaining agreement, except during the period from October 1 to October 31 before the final year of such agreement. 
(C)  When a petition is filed concerning the selection or decertification of a certified employee organization, the corporate authorities shall determine whether it contains the requisite number of signatures and whether such signatures are authentic and notify the American Arbitration Association of its conclusion. If the petition has the requisite number of authenticated signatures, the American Arbitration Association shall determine the question of selection or decertification of any certified employee organization by taking a secret ballot of members of the bargaining unit and certifying in writing the results thereof to the corporate authorities and the employee organization(s) involved. The secret ballot election shall be conducted not less than 15 calendar days or more than 30 calendar days from the date the corporate authorities notify the American Arbitration Association that the petition contains the requisite number of authenticated signatures. The American Arbitration Association shall certify the results of the above-described election within three business days of the close of the polls. The cost of running the election shall be borne equally by each employee organization on the ballot. 
( Ord. No. 3882, § 1, 5-30-2017 ) 
1-34-7. - Obligation to Bargain Collectively. 
(A)  The City and the certified employee organization shall have the duty to engage in collective bargaining with respect to subjects for collective bargaining through their designated representatives. Bargaining meetings will not be public and neither party will attempt to negotiate directly with the Principals. 
(B)  In order to begin the collective bargaining process, it is the obligation of the certified employee organization to serve written notice of its request for collective bargaining on the corporate authorities no later than February 1 st of the year before the contract period which will be the subject of collective bargaining, with bargaining to commence no later than April 1 st immediately following the notice. 
( Ord. No. 3882, § 1, 5-30-2017 ) 
1-34-8. - Collective Bargaining Agreement. 
(A)  Agreements reached by the corporate authorities and the certified employee organization shall be set forth in a written collective bargaining agreement prepared by them. The collective bargaining agreement shall not conflict with federal or state constitutional, statutory, municipal ordinance, or Charter provisions dealing with the same matters, and shall be restricted to the subjects for collective bargaining as defined in this ordinance. The term of any such collective bargaining agreement shall commence on the first day of the first full pay period of the calendar year and last not less than one year and not more than three years. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the collective bargaining agreement shall not be binding upon the parties, either in whole or in part, until and unless the members of the certified employee organization have ratified said agreement by a majority vote in a secret ballot, and until and unless the City Council shall act by majority vote to formally approve said agreement. 
(C)  The collective bargaining agreement shall be signed by authorized representatives of the certified employee organization, the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk. 
( Ord. No. 3882, § 1, 5-30-2017 ) 
1-34-9. - Impasse Resolution. 
(A)  In the event that the certified employee organization and the corporate authorities are unable within 30 days from and including the date of their first collective bargaining meeting to reach agreement on a collective bargaining agreement, any and all unresolved subjects for collective bargaining shall be submitted to non-binding arbitration. The advisory fact-finder's recommendation shall be limited to the outstanding subjects for collective bargaining upon which the corporate authorities and the certified employee organization (the "parties") have not reached tentative agreement, but are at impasse. 
(B)  Within three business days after the expiration of the time period referred to above, the parties shall inform the American Arbitration Association that non-binding arbitration is desired. Within ten calendar days thereafter, the American Arbitration Association shall simultaneously send to each party an identical list of seven names of those qualified to act in the capacity of an advisory fact-finder. Within seven calendar days, beginning with the certified employee organization, the parties shall alternately strike one name from the list until one individual is selected. Upon completion of the selection process, the advisory fact-finder shall have 25 days in which to commence a hearing. A subsequent period of seven days shall be allowed for the conduct of such hearing and the parties shall have seven days to submit briefs after the conclusion of the hearing. The advisory fact-finder shall be given a period of up to 15 days following the conclusion of the hearing or submission of briefs, whichever is later, in which to render a recommendation(s). 
(C)  The advisory fact-finder shall consider, weigh, and be guided by the following criteria: 
(1)  The lawful authority of the City; 
(2)  Stipulations and tentative agreements of the parties; 
(3)  The interest and welfare of the public; 
(4)  The cost of the parties' positions, taking into consideration all factors normally a part of sound fiscal policy; 
(5)  Comparison of the wages, benefits, and other relevant terms or conditions of employment of the employees involved with other employees performing similar services in public employment in comparable Colorado communities; 
(6)  The overall compensation presently received by the bargaining unit employees, including wages; vacation, holidays, and other excused paid time; insurance and pensions; medical and hospitalization benefits; the continuity and stability of employment; and all other benefits received; and 
(7)  Other generally-accepted criteria or factors. 
(D)  The advisory fact-finder shall consider the final offer of the corporate authorities and the final offer of the certified employee organization on each subject for collective bargaining at impasse. The recommendation of the advisory fact-finder on each subject for collective bargaining at impasse shall be either the final offer of the corporate authorities or the final offer of the certified employee organization with respect to that subject for collective bargaining. The fact-finder may not craft his/her own resolution to an outstanding subject for collective bargaining. The advisory fact-finder shall state the reasons for the recommendations. 
(E)  The recommendations of the fact-finder shall be advisory only. Within 12 calendar days of receipt of the recommendations of the fact-finder, the parties shall meet and simultaneously, and in writing, notify each other of their respective determination to accept or reject the recommendations of the advisory fact-finder. Only the unresolved subjects for collective bargaining remaining after this meeting shall be submitted to the election process set forth in Section 1-34-10, W.M.C. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the parties from reaching a settlement on any or all subjects for collective bargaining prior to the last date the City Council can revoke or cancel any scheduled election. 
(F)  All fees and expenses related to non-binding arbitration will be shared equally by the City and the certified employee organization, except that each party shall be responsible for compensating its own representatives and witnesses. 
(G)  Whenever the parties deem it appropriate or beneficial to do so, they may jointly agree to engage the services of facilitators or mediators to assist in reaching agreement on one or more items. It is specifically contemplated that the parties might engage individuals who have demonstrated knowledge or expertise in a given topic under discussion or skills and abilities in dispute resolution to serve as facilitator or mediator. The parties will share the fees and expenses of such individuals equally, unless otherwise agreed. 
( Ord. No. 3882, § 1, 5-30-2017 ) 
1-34-10. - Election. 
(A)  If the parties are unable to resolve all of the issues within the 12 calendar day period described in [Section] 1-34-9, W.M.C., the City Council shall cause the rejected and unresolved recommendations of the fact-finder and the corresponding final offer of the rejecting party to be referred to a vote of the people held in a coordinated November election (pursuant to C.R.S Section 1-1-104 (6.5)), provided that such election shall take place in the year in which such impasse occurs. If both parties reject the recommendation(s) of the fact-finder, the ballot shall contain the respective rejected and unresolved final offers of the parties. The electorate shall be provided with the following choices: (1) the final offer of the corporate authorities; (2) the final offer of the certified employee organization; or (3) the recommendations of the fact-finder; whichever is applicable. The final offer or recommendations, as applicable, receiving approval by a majority vote of the registered electors voting on the issue shall be deemed approved and be binding on both parties. 
(B)  Expenses of any coordinated November election called under this section shall be paid by the party rejecting the advisory fact-finder's recommendation or shared equally if both parties reject the advisory fact-finder's recommendations. In the event that City issues other than those contemplated by this Chapter are also to be decided in the same election, then the certified employee organization shall pay only its proportionate share of the election expenses. Such fees shall be placed into an escrow fund at the time the notice of call of election is published in the newspaper of general circulation. 
( Ord. No. 3882, § 1, 5-30-2017 ) 
1-34-11. - Time Limits. 
    Any time limit contained in this Chapter, other than the time for notice and commencement of negotiations in [Section] 1-34-7, W.M.C. and the time for conducting the election in [Section] 1-34-10, W.M.C. may be modified for that year upon the written consent of the corporate authorities and the certified employee organization. 
( Ord. No. 3882, § 1, 5-30-2017 ) 
Title II. - COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS 
CHAPTER 1. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS-GENERAL PROVISIONS 

2-1-1. - Appointment of Members; Terms. 
(A)  To be eligible for appointment to a board or commission, a person shall have been a resident of the City for at least one year immediately prior to the date of appointment and shall be a registered elector of the city on that date and throughout the appointee's tenure in office. 
(B)  No person appointed to a board or commission shall hold any other City of Westminster office, either appointive or elective during his term of service on the board or commission. 
(C)  Each regular member and alternate member shall be appointed by majority vote of City Council for a term of two years, unless a longer or shorter term is required to satisfy the provisions of Subsection 2-1-1(E) below. Each member may serve up to four consecutive terms, after which time the member shall be required to take no less than a one-term break in service before becoming eligible for membership on that board again. All terms shall expire on December 31, unless City Council has failed to appoint or reappoint a member, in which case the member's term shall be extended until council action. Any vacancy that occurs prior to the end of a term shall be filled by the City Council within 45 days after such vacancy occurs, and the appointee shall complete the term of the member or alternate member whose term became vacant. 
(D)  Each member and alternate member shall serve without compensation. 
(E)  Terms shall be staggered as follows: 
(1)  For five-member boards or commissions, three members shall have terms that expire on even-numbered years and two members shall have terms that expire on odd-numbered years. 
(2)  For seven-member boards or commissions, four members shall have terms that expire on even-numbered years and three members shall have terms that expire on odd-numbered years. 
(3)  For eight-member boards or commissions, four members shall have terms that expire on even-numbered years and four members shall have terms that expire on odd-numbered years. 
(4)  For 13-member boards or commissions, seven members shall have terms that expire on even-numbered years and six members shall have terms that expire on odd-numbered years. 
(5)  Alternates shall have terms that expire on odd-numbered years. 
    This subsection shall not apply to the election commission. 
(F)  Member emeritus: The City Council hereby creates the office of member emeritus of the various boards and commissions. City Council shall designate a member of a board or commission a member emeritus at such times and for such service as council deems appropriate. A member emeritus is welcome to continue attendance at a board or commission meeting, and the chairperson and members of the board or commission may request the opinion or information of the member emeritus during the portion of the board or commission meeting when members of the public customarily speak. The member emeritus will not be a voting member, or an alternate member, of the board or commission. 
(G)  Any personally identifying information, other than name and address, provided by a candidate for a board or commission, pursuant to charter Subsection 5.1(d) or in connection with an application for office, will be deemed as having been received in confidence and not subject to disclosure under the Colorado Open Records Act, except as may be required by an order of district court. Any such personally identifying information contained in a report, required to be maintained pursuant to charter Subsection 5.1(d), shall be redacted by the City Clerk prior to disclosure of the remainder of the report. 
(2068 2402 3102 3272 3372 3633 3729; Ord. No. 3888, § 1, 6-26-2017 ) 
2-1-2. - Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of Board or Commission. 
    Biennially, at its first regular meeting of an odd-numbered calendar year, each board or commission shall elect one of its members to be chairperson and one of its members to be Vice-Chairperson, each for a term of two years. In the event either position becomes vacant before the end of the term, the board or commission shall elect a regular member to serve as Acting Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson until the end of the term. No member shall be eligible for election as Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson unless that member has previously served at least one year as a member of the board or commission; provided, however, that if no member is so eligible, the board or commission shall elect the member it deems best qualified. This Section shall not apply to the election commission. 
(2068 2402) 
2-1-3. - Role of Alternates. 
    The alternate members of the board or commission shall endeavor to follow the same rules of conduct as regular members. The alternate members of the board or commission shall attend the meetings of the board or commission and shall have all of the rights and powers of the regular members; except that, the alternate member shall not vote or otherwise participate in a matter before the board or commission, unless fewer than all regular members are in attendance at the meeting. If the alternate member attends a meeting in a voting capacity, and the public hearing on a matter is continued, the alternate member shall vote on the matter, unless the regular member whose place was taken by the alternate listens to the tape of the prior public hearing, reviews the exhibits, and has become familiar with the matter before the board or commission. If a different regular member is absent at the hearing to which the public meeting has been continued, the alternate may vote on the matter in the absent member's place. The alternate may not vote on a matter in which the public hearing has been continued, unless the alternate has listened to the tape of the prior public hearing, reviews the exhibits, and has become familiar with the matter before the board or commission. 
(2068 2402) 
2-1-4. - Vacancies of Office. 
    The office of any member of any board or commission shall be declared vacant by the City Council: 
(A)  For any reason specified by statute or by City Charter as creating a vacancy in office. 
(B)  If the officer shall be found guilty by a competent tribunal of any act constituting misconduct in office under the provisions of the City Charter. 
(C)  If such officer shall miss four consecutive regular meetings of such board or commission, or 25 percent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the city, unless such absences shall be excused by such board or commission at the time of each absence. 
(D)  If the officer is removed from office by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 2-1-5. 
(2068) 
2-1-5. - Removal of Members. 
    Members of any board or commission may be removed from office for any reason specified by statute for removal of city officers or for any act declared by the City Charter to constitute misconduct in office or to create a vacancy. Alternate members may be removed from office without cause. 
(2068) 
2-1-6. - Conduct of Meetings. 
(A)  The boards and commissions of the City shall conduct closed executive sessions pursuant to the standards adopted in Subsections 1-11-3(C), (D), (E), and (F) of this Code, and only for the purposes stated therein. No final action may be taken in a closed executive session. 
(B)  Unless otherwise provided for in this Code, notice to the public of the meetings of boards and commissions shall be given as may be required by the individual by-laws adopted by each board or commission. 
(C)  Any board or commission that conducts a public hearing shall record such hearing stenographically or electronically. The board or commission may choose stenographic or electronic recording at its sole discretion. A written transcription of the record shall be made upon the request of any person and payment in advance of the estimated cost of production of the transcript. The action of a board or commission shall not be invalidated by any mechanical or other malfunction in the recording process. 
(D)  No member of a board or commission shall vote on any question in which he has a conflict of interest, other than the common public interest. On all other questions put to vote, each member who is present shall vote either "yes" or "no," unless excused by the unanimous consent of the remaining members present. Application to be excused from voting must be made before the vote is called by the presiding officer. The member shall briefly state the reason for his request to be excused and the decision thereon shall be made without debate. 
(2068 2734 3599) 
2-1-7. - Legal Advisor. 
    Any board or commission may, upon request, be represented by the City Attorney's office. 
(2068) 
2-1-8. - Attendance. 
(A)  Definition: For the purposes of City Charter Section 5.3 concerning vacancies in board and commission offices, whether an absence is "excused" or "unexcused" shall be determined as follows: 
    Excused absence shall mean an absence in instances of family emergency, work-related commitments, medical necessity or vacation outside of the Denver metropolitan area involving the board/commission member. 
    Unexcused absence shall mean an absence when no prior notification is provided to the chairperson or staff liaison. An absence can also be deemed unexcused when notification is provided to the chairperson or staff liaison, but the reason for absence does not meet the requirements of an excused absence. An absence is unexcused when it is not related to the instances of family emergency, work-related commitments, medical necessity or vacation outside of the Denver metropolitan area involving the board or commission member. 
(B)  In order for an absence from a meeting to be termed "excused," the member shall provide notification to the chairperson or staff liaison, by telephone or in written form, at least 24 hours in advance of any regular or special meeting. Such notification may be excused by the chairperson only in extenuating circumstances, which shall be considered on a case-by-case basis. The member will be required to provide a reason for the requested absence, which will be reviewed by the chairperson and declared at the meeting as an excused or unexcused absence by the chairperson. Upon motion by any unaffected member of the board or commission at the same or next following meeting, the decision of the chairperson as to whether the absence is excused or unexcused may be reviewed and either sustained or overturned by a vote of the entire board or commission. A record of this decision shall be made in the minutes of the meeting. 
(2772) 
CHAPTER 2. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 

2-2-1. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the "planning commission" or "commission," consisting of seven regular members and two alternate members. 
(319 374 1588 1741 2068 2300) 
2-2-2. - Powers and Duties. 
    The powers and duties of the Planning Commission shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(A)  The review and approval of a planning document regarding the future growth and development of the City considering the following, as applicable: population distribution and growth; local resources and finances; circulation and transportation; existing and future land usage; park, recreation and school requirements; location and capacity of public and private utilities; subdivision regulations; zoning regulations for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and use of buildings, structures and premises and the minimum areas, width and depth of lots; existing and proposed county and regional comprehensive plans; and any other factors specified by City Council. 
(B)  The review of proposed development plans within the boundaries of the City to determine their compliance with applicable ordinances and resolutions, the City's planning document and their conformance with good planning practices. Preliminary plats, official development plans and amended preliminary plats and official development plans not approved administratively by the City Manager shall be decided by the Planning Commission in accordance with Title XI, Chapter 5, Section 13 of this Code. 
(C)  The review of all proposed annexations to the City to determine their compliance with applicable ordinances, resolutions, plans and policies of the City, and their conformance with good planning practices, and the subsequent submittal of the annexation proposals to the City Council, together with the Planning Commission's recommendations for approval or rejection and any recommendations regarding the terms of an annexation agreement between the petitioners and the City. 
(D)  The review of all zoning and rezoning requests to determine compliance with existing ordinances, resolutions, plans and policies of the City and their conformance with good planning practices. 
(E)  The review of requests for variances from the following provisions of Title XI, land development and growth management procedures, W.M.C.: 
(1)  Section 11-7-4, W.M.C., regarding off-street parking standards; 
(2)  Those portions of Chapter 11 specified in Section 11-11-8, W.M.C., regarding sign regulations; 
(3)  Section 11-4-5, W.M.C., regarding density schedule; 
(4)  Section 11-4-6, W.M.C., regarding special regulations; 
(5)  Section 11-16-1, et al., W.M.C., regarding antennas, towers, and telecommunications facilities; 
(6)  Those portions of Section 11-4-12, W.M.C., specified in Subsection 11-4-12(I), W.M.C., regarding satellite earth stations; 
(7)  Section 11-4-15, W.M.C., as it applies to nonconforming structures; and 
(F)  The review and determination of appeals from the Planning Manager's interpretation of the zoning map and the zoning district boundary lines thereon, under Section 11-4-2, W.M.C. 
(G)  The review and determination of all special use permit applications. 
(H)  The review of a request from one individual lot owner in a detached single-family housing development for a variance from an ODP requirement affecting said lot, as provided in Subsection 11-5-10(a)(1), W.M.C. 
(319 1741 1970 2068 3495 3497 3599 3634; Ord. No. 3983 , § 1, 4-8-2019) 
2-2-3. - Policy from Council. 
    The City Council shall establish the policies to be followed by the planning commission regarding developments, the growth management plan, annexation, zoning, public hearings, and similar matters affecting the commission, and shall from time to time review and reaffirm or revise said policies. 
(1741 2068) 
2-2-4. - Rules and Regulations. 
(A)  The planning commission shall meet at least once each month if there are matters pending and such other times as it may deem necessary. Each member of the commission shall be required to vote on each item before the commission unless a conflict of interest has been determined to exist. A member of the commission may vote on items where they were absent if the hearing is continued, provided they have reviewed the electronic recording of the previous testimony prior to the continuation of the hearing. If the recording is not reviewed, then this affected member is to be excused from voting on the matter, due to having not heard the entire testimony presentation. 
    Members may be excused from voting on previous meetings' minutes if they were absent from that respective meeting. Being excused from voting must be recognized by the chairperson and duly noted in the minutes of the present meeting. 
(B)  The commission shall make and adopt its own bylaws, subject to the approval of the City Council, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following procedures: 
(1)  The election of officers and establishment of the duties of such officers. 
(2)  The scheduling and conduct of regular and special meetings and public hearings. 
(3)  The submittal of applications and petitions for annexations, development plan approvals, amendments to development plans, zonings and rezonings, variances, special use permits and any matter within the jurisdiction of the planning commission. 
(4)  The exercise of any of the duties of the planning commission set forth in this Code. 
(319 2068 2768 3495 3497) 
2-2-5. - Referrals to Planning Commission. 
    Unless otherwise provided for in this Code, all applications and petitions for annexations, subdivision development plan approvals, amendments to preliminary and official development plans, zonings and rezonings, plat approvals, and such other matters as the City Council or City Manager may deem pertinent shall be referred to the planning commission for its review and action in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5, Section 13 of Title XI of this Code. 
(319 1741 1970 2068 3599) 
2-2-6. - Commission Recommendations. 
(A)  When the planning commission is required to submit recommendations to the council, such recommendations shall be substantially in one of the following forms: 
(1)  Approval; 
(2)  Approval subject to specified conditions; or 
(3)  Rejection because of specified findings. 
(B)  Each recommendation shall be accompanied by findings of fact sufficient to support the recommendation. 
(319 1741 2068) 
2-2-7. - Acting Chairperson; Quorum; Procedure. 
    In the absence of the elected chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall assume the duties of the chairperson for that respective meeting. A quorum shall consist of four members, and a decision of a majority of the members present shall control. Any absent member may join in a pending decision of the commission subject to Section 2-1-3, W.M.C. 
(2768 3495) 
2-2-8. - Variance Procedure and Standards. 
(A)  In addition to any procedural hearing requirements the commission may adopt by rule, the commission shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  The public, the applicant and the planning commission shall be given notice, as provided in Section 11-5-13, W.M.C., of all variance hearings and, except as provided by Subsection 2-1-6(a), W.M.C., all hearings shall be open to the public. 
(2)  The commission shall render written decisions, accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon. Conclusions based on any provision of this Chapter, code, or any city rules or regulations shall contain a reference to such provision, rule or regulation and shall also contain the reason the conclusion is deemed appropriate in light of the facts found. 
(3)  All witnesses shall be sworn or shall affirm their testimony in the manner required in courts of record. 
(4)  The commission shall decide on any matter within 35 days after date of hearing thereon. Decision in favor of any applicant shall be approval of the matter requested and shall be an order to the chief building inspector to carry out such action, subject to any conditions imposed by the commission. 
(B)  The commission may grant a variance if it finds that all of the following requirements are satisfied, where applicable: 
(1)  That the strict application of the provisions of Title XI of this Code would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship that is inconsistent with the general purpose and intent of this Code. 
(2)  That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, such as irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of the lot, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the affected property. 
(3)  That these unusual circumstances or conditions do not exist throughout the neighborhood or district in which the property is located. 
(4)  That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, the property cannot be reasonably developed in conformity with the provisions of this Code. 
(5)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the present or prior actions of the applicant. 
(6)  That the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property. 
Any application not meeting such criteria shall be denied. In approving an application meeting the above criteria, the commission may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purpose of Title XI or the various adopted codes. 
(C)  Decisions of the commission are final subject only to an appeal to district court. 
(3495 3634) 
CHAPTER 3. - PERSONNEL BOARD 

2-3-1. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a personnel board, hereinafter referred to as "the board," consisting of five regular members and two alternate members to be appointed by majority vote of council. Such members shall be known to be in sympathy with the intent and purpose of Chapter VI of the City Charter. 
(854 1741 2068) 
2-3-2. - Powers and Duties. 
    The board shall hear appeals brought by employees on matters of suspension, demotion, or dismissal pursuant to the requirements of Chapter VI of the City Charter and Chapter 24 of Title I of this Code. 
(854 1741 2068) 
2-3-3. - General Rules. 
    Regular meetings of the board shall be established by the board. The board shall adopt its own rules and procedures consistent with Chapter VI of the City Charter, and any applicable ordinances or resolutions enacted by City Council. 
(854 1741 2068) 
2-3-4. - Legal Counsel. 
    Subject to the provisions of Chapter 24 of Title I of this Code, on all contested legal matters coming before the board, the board and the City Manager shall have separate legal counsel retained by the City to represent their separate interests. 
(854 1013 1741 2068) 
CHAPTER 4. - PARKS, RECREATION, LIBRARIES AND OPEN SPACE ADVISORY BOARD 

2-4-1. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a parks, recreation, libraries and open space advisory board, hereinafter referred to as "the board," comprised of the seven regular members of the parks, recreation and libraries board, the six current regular members of the open space advisory board seated at the time of creation of this board. At the time of creation, in order to comply with Section 2-1-1, W.M.C., all members shall start new terms. However, based on length of service, four of the seven members coming from the parks, recreation and libraries board and three of the six members coming from the open space advisory board shall serve terms that expire on even-numbered years. The other members' terms shall expire on odd-numbered years. Through attrition, the Board will eventually be comprised of 11 regular members. 
(3272 3729; Ord. No. 3838, § 1, 9-12-2016 ) 
2-4-2. - Advisory Members. 
    An employee appointed by the director of parks, recreation and libraries, an employee appointed by the director of community development, and one member of the City Council, to be appointed by the mayor, shall be advisory members of the parks, recreation, libraries and open space advisory board and shall have the right to participate in all meetings of the board; except that they shall not have the right to vote. 
(3272 3729) 
2-4-3. - Powers and Duties. 
    The powers of the parks, recreation, libraries and open space advisory board shall be advisory only, and the board shall have the following duties: 
(A)  To assist staff and council in the promotion of parks, recreation libraries and open space and their services to the community, as well as to assist in the evaluation of the related missions, roles and services in response to community needs; 
(B)  To obtain feedback from the community and make recommendations to the Director of Parks, recreation and libraries regarding the City's long-range plan for the development, maintenance and improvements of parks, recreation and library facilities, programs and services; 
(C)  To obtain feedback from the community and make recommendations based on such input to City Council regarding management of open space and prospective open space acquisitions; 
(D)  In consultation with appropriate city staff, to identify and prioritize potential open space acquisitions by the City and to submit the board's recommendations about such acquisitions to City Council; 
(E)  To advise staff, with council's approval, on the administration of such gifts of money, property, or endowments as may be granted to and accepted by the council for parks, recreation, library or open space purposes, and to take such steps as the board may deem feasible to encourage gifts in support of the City's parks, recreation, library and open space programs, and to administer a grant-in-aid program directed at individuals who would be unable, due to financial considerations, to participate in parks, recreation, library and open space programs; 
(F)  When asked by the director, to evaluate applications for special need passes to city recreation facilities by the public and to recommend approval or denial; 
(G)  To review requests by the public for the removal of library materials; materials will be removed from the libraries' collections upon unanimous approval of the board; 
(H)  Upon request by the director, to review and make recommendations on any parks, recreation and libraries' fee or charge in an amount that exceeds the approval authority of the City Manager; 
(I)  To administer the City's neighborhood enhancement program in any and all aspects as may be necessary to meet the goals and objectives of the program; 
(J)  When asked by the director, to review complaints, suggestions and other communications by the public regarding parks, recreation, libraries and open space programs and facilities, and to make recommendations to the director regarding said communications; 
(K)  To conduct a secret shopper program to visit all city parks, recreation, libraries and open space facilities for feedback to the director on customer service issues; 
(L)  To advise the director on such policies, rules and regulations and other matters as the board believes necessary and proper for the management and development of the parks, recreation, libraries and open space programs and facilities; and 
(M)  To perform any other related duties as assigned by council. 
(3272 3729; Ord. No. 3838, § 2, 9-12-2016 ) 
2-4-4. - Meetings. 
    The board shall decide on a meeting day and time. The board shall meet at least six times per year, as the chairperson of the board requests. A record of the minutes of each meeting shall be kept and placed in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection. Except as provided by Subsection 2-1-6(a), W.M.C., all meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(3272 3729) 
2-4-5. - Bylaws. 
    The board shall make and adopt its own bylaws, subject to approval by the City Council, in conformity with applicable statutes and ordinances. 
(3272) 
2-4-6. - Acting Chairperson; Quorum. 
    The Vice-Chairperson of the board shall assume the duties of the Chairperson in the absence of the Chairperson. In the absence of both the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, the board shall designate an acting Chairperson, if necessary. A quorum shall consist of a majority of those members entitled to act, and a decision of a majority of the quorum of such members shall control. 
(3272) 
CHAPTER 5. - SPECIAL PERMIT AND LICENSE BOARD 

2-5-1. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a special permit and license board, hereinafter referred to as "the board," consisting of seven regular members and one alternate member. 
(908 1741 2068) 
2-5-2. - Powers and Duties. 
    The special permit and license board, acting as the local licensing authority pursuant to Title V of this Code, shall conduct public hearings, approve or deny applications for licenses, renew or deny renewal of licenses, suspend or revoke licenses, hear appeals of adverse actions taken against city-issued licenses, and carry out all other functions authorized by Title V of this Code and Colorado beer, liquor and special event codes. All decisions of the board are final, subject only to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(1741 2037 2068 2229 2251 2769 2984 3398 3497 3578) 
2-5-3. - Bylaws. 
    The board shall make and adopt by resolution its own bylaws, in conformity with applicable statutes and ordinances. Bylaws shall be reviewed annually for necessary updating. 
(908 2068 2229 2769) 
2-5-4. - Acting Chairperson; Quorum; Procedure. 
    In the absence of the elected Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall assume the duties of the Chairperson for that respective meeting. A quorum shall consist of four members, and a decision of a majority of the members present shall control. Any absent member may join in a pending decision of the board subject to Section 2-1-3, W.M.C. All public hearings shall, at a minimum, be recorded electronically, or, as deemed necessary by the Chairperson, may be stenographically recorded by a court reporter engaged by the City and paid out of fees paid by the applicant. 
(908 1741 2068 2229 2769) 
2-5-5. - Meetings. 
    The board shall meet at least twice a month, unless there is no business to conduct. Each member of the board shall be required to vote on each item before the board, unless a conflict of interest has been determined to exist. A member of the board may vote on items where they were absent if the hearing is continued, provided they have reviewed the electronic recording of the previous testimony prior to the continuation of the hearing. If the recording is not reviewed, then this affected member is to be excused from voting on the matter, due to having not heard the entire testimony presentation. 
    Members may be excused from voting on previous meetings' minutes if they were absent from that respective meeting. Being excused from voting must be recognized by the Chairperson and duly noted in the minutes of the present meeting. 
(908 2068 2769) 
CHAPTER 8. - HUMAN SERVICES BOARD 

2-8-1. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a Human Services Board, hereinafter referred to as "the board," consisting of five regular members and one alternate member. 
(1698 2068 3294) 
2-8-2. - Powers and Duties. 
    The board shall review, evaluate and recommend to City Council funding levels for the budget year based on submittals to the City Council by outside human services agencies and other outside organizations. The board shall also perform such other duties as may be assigned to it by the City Council. 
(1698 2068) 
2-8-3. - Membership of Board. 
    It is the intent of City Council that selection of the board be made so that, to the extent possible, the board members represent expertise in the following areas: (1) health services; (2) housing; (3) community services; (4) senior citizens; and (5) education or cultural services. 
(1698 2068) 
2-8-4. - Level of Funding; Criteria. 
(A)  The City Council shall notify the board by July 18th of each year the estimate of funds that may be available for appropriation to outside human services and other related agencies in the subsequent calendar year. The board shall review and evaluate requests received by outside human services and other related agencies for funding for the subsequent calendar year, and shall make a report to the City Council by August 1st each year recommending which requests should be funded and the level of funding within the total estimate of funds available for this type of activity. The board's recommendations shall be advisory only. 
(B)  The criteria to be used by the board in evaluating requests for funding shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Programs shall benefit Westminster citizens and shall provide a needed service to the community. 
(2)  Programs shall be independently organized and managed. 
(3)  Programs shall have obtained not-for-profit status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code. 
(4)  Programs must have documented proof that they have unsuccessfully applied for funds from other sources or that there is a compelling reason for requesting funds from the City. 
(5)  Programs shall be efficiently and effectively managed. 
(6)  Programs shall use conventional accounting methods and be able to provide a means for the board to track the use of funds obtained from the City. 
(7)  Program requests shall include an updated annual financial report, a report of Westminster residents served annually, and the percentage of clientele that are Westminster residents. 
(C)  Any program that fails to meet all of the criteria listed in subsection (B) of this Section shall not be recommended for funding. 
(D)  The board shall annually evaluate each request for funding, even if the program was funded in the prior year. 
(1698 2068) 
2-8-5. - Acting Chairperson; Quorum; Procedure. 
    The Chairperson may designate a member of the board to assume the Chairperson's duties in the Chairperson's absence. A quorum shall consist of three members, and a decision of a majority of the members of the entire board shall control. 
(1698 2068) 
2-8-6. - Bylaws. 
    The board shall adopt its own bylaws to establish the time, frequency and procedures of meetings. These bylaws shall be consistent with applicable statutes and ordinances and shall not be effective until approved by the City Council. 
(1698 2068) 
CHAPTER 9. - ELECTION COMMISSION 

2-9-1. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created an election commission, hereinafter referred to as "the commission," consisting of the City Clerk and four regular members. 
(1741 2068) 
2-9-2. - Powers and Duties. 
    The commission shall oversee all elections conducted by the City and, in cases where election procedures are in doubt, the election commission shall prescribe the procedures to be followed. 
(1741 2068) 
2-9-3. - Appointment; Chairperson. 
    Members of the commission shall be appointed at the first meeting of the City Council in January following a regular city election. The City Clerk shall serve as chairperson of the commission. 
(1741 2068) 
CHAPTER 13. - ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY BOARD 

2-13-1. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created an environmental advisory board, hereinafter referred to as "the board," consisting of seven regular members and one alternate member. 
(2290) 
2-13-2. - Advisory Members. 
    One City staff member, and one member of the City Council, to be appointed by the Mayor, shall be advisory members of the board and shall have the right to participate in all meetings of the board; except that, they shall not have the right to vote. 
(2290) 
2-13-3. - Powers and Duties. 
    The powers of the board shall be advisory only, and the board shall have the following duties: 
(A)  To advise City Council and staff on matters in the community pertaining to solid waste disposal, yard waste recycling, air quality enhancements, hazardous waste management, and storm water quality; 
(B)  To make recommendations to City Council and staff regarding the development of City-wide community and/or neighborhood programs to address long-range recycling and solid waste disposal issues; programs to address grass, tree limb, and leaf recycling; programs to address air quality enhancement, such as ground-level ozone programs; to address hazardous waste recycling and/or disposal; and to educate the community and serve in an advisory capacity regarding storm water quality programs; 
(C)  To encourage citizen participation in community recycling efforts and promote public education on the environmental benefits of various community programs, including curbside recycling, Christmas tree recycling, composting, ground-level ozone action alerts, wood burning bans, and household hazardous waste disposal opportunities; 
(D)  To adopt, subject to approval of the council, rules and regulations for the conduct of meetings of the board; 
(E)  The board shall not make recommendations or advise on matters pertaining to land use, wildlife, water quality, transportation issues, or internal city organization policies or programs relating to environmental issues, including anything related to staffing or other personnel-type matters; and 
(F)  To recommend to or advise City Council on other environmental related items as assigned by Council. 
(2290 2810) 
2-13-4. - Meetings. 
    The board shall be convened as agreed upon by a majority of members, at least four times per year, and as the Chairperson of the board requests. A record of the minutes of each meeting shall be kept and placed in the office of the city clerk for public inspection. Except as provided by Subsection 2-1-6(a), W.M.C., all meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(2290 2810) 
CHAPTER 14. - INCLUSIVITY BOARD 

2-14-1. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created the inclusivity board, hereinafter referred to as "the board," consisting of up to 13 regular members with two alternate members. Each member may serve up to four consecutive terms, after which time the member shall be required to take at least a one-term break in service before being eligible for membership again. 
( Ord. No. 3806, § 1, 11-9-2015 ; Ord. No. 3888, § 2, 6-26-2017 ) 
2-14-2. - Advisory Members. 
    An employee appointed by the City Manager's office, and one member of the City Council, to be appointed by the Mayor, shall be advisory members of the board and shall have the right to participate in all meetings of the board; except that they shall not have the right to vote. 
( Ord. No. 3806, § 1, 11-9-2015 ) 
2-14-3. - Powers and Duties. 
    The powers of the board shall be advisory only and shall be as follows: 
(A)  To proactively advise and respond, as requested, to City Council and staff on issues of inclusivity. 
(B)  To advocate for the entire community and collaborate to promote and encourage a climate of inclusion. 
(C)  To obtain feedback on matters of inclusivity from the community proactively or at the request of City Council or staff, and recommend appropriate courses of action. 
(D)  To provide advice on creating a climate of inclusion and increasing cultural competency within the Westminster organization. 
(E)  To research, proactively advise and respond to requests from City Council and staff about ways other cities optimize participation by all residents in the civic, economic, cultural and social life of the community. 
(F)  To proactively advise and to respond to requests from City Council and staff on ways to educate, encourage and engage citizen participation, including but not limited to reaching out to faith communities, schools and community organizations. 
(G)  To proactively advise and to respond to requests from City Council and staff on ways to attract people from a wide range of cultures, beliefs, orientations, ages, physical capacities and socio-economic levels to live, work and play in Westminster. 
(H)  To facilitate and ensure the regular collection of comprehensive demographic information about the entire Westminster population using a variety of methods to ensure input from all types of people, regardless of location, physical limitations, or variety of languages. 
(I)  To facilitate communication in order to proactively connect underserved or excluded populations with appropriate city services and resources and with services provided in the private/non-profit sectors, while also encouraging collaboration among affected communities, and private and public sectors. 
(J)  To actively pursue continuing education in the various areas of inclusivity for the benefit of the inclusivity board, City Council and staff, with sufficient revenue available to seek, as needed, outside counsel and experts in the field. 
(K)  To work with city staff to obtain feedback from the community and recommend ways to improve communication between diverse communities within the City, while fostering relationships among people and organizations by sharing cultures and ideas. 
(L)  To perform any other related duties as may be assigned by City Council. 
( Ord. No. 3806, § 1, 11-9-2015 ) 
2-14-4. - Meetings: 
    The board shall decide on a meeting day and time. The board shall meet monthly unless there is no business to discuss, as the Chairperson of the board requests. A record of the minutes of each meeting shall be kept and placed in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection. Except as provided by Subsection 2-1-6(a), W.M.C., all meetings of the board shall be open to the public. Each member of the board shall be required to vote on each item before the board, unless a conflict of interest has been determined to exist. 
( Ord. No. 3806, § 1, 11-9-2015 ) 
2-14-5. - Bylaws. 
    The board shall make and adopt its own bylaws in conformity with applicable statutes and ordinances, and the board shall review its bylaws annually for necessary updating. 
( Ord. No. 3806, § 1, 11-9-2015 ) 
2-14-6. - Acting Chairperson; Quorum. 
    The Vice-Chairperson of the board shall assume the duties of the Chairperson in the absence of the Chairperson. In the absence of both the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, the board shall designate an acting Chairperson, if necessary. A quorum shall consist of a majority of those members entitled to act, and a decision of a majority of the quorum of such members shall control. 
( Ord. No. 3806, § 1, 11-9-2015 ) 
Title III. - DEPARTMENTS 
CHAPTER 1. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

3-1-1. - Department Created. 
    There is hereby created a Police Department that shall consist of the Chief of Police and other sworn and civilian personnel as may be provided by the City Council. 
(1552 1696) 
3-1-2. - Appointment of Chief of Police. 
    The Chief of Police shall be appointed by and be responsible to the City Manager. Such appointment shall be for an indefinite period pursuant to Section 1-13-3, W.M.C. The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and shall have supervision over all sworn and civilian personnel assigned to the department. 
(1552 1696) 
3-1-3. - Duties of Chief. 
(A)  The Chief of Police is responsible for the efficient and effective operation of the Police Department, as well as performing those duties prescribed by the City Manager. 
(B)  The Chief of Police may make or prescribe such Police Department policies, procedures and rules as he shall deem advisable, consistent with the City's personnel policies and rules. Such policies, procedures and rules shall be binding on all police department personnel. Such policies, procedures and rules may include, but shall not be limited to, the conduct of police department personnel, uniforms and equipment to be worn or carried, hours and types of service delivery, deployment schedules, leaves, the investigation of citizen complaints, and all other similar matters necessary or desirable for the efficiency and effectiveness of police operations. 
(293 1552 1696) 
3-1-4. - Duties of Police Department Personnel. 
(A)  It shall be the duty of all personnel assigned to the Police Department to actively support and strive to achieve the department's targeted goals and objectives, as set forth by the Chief of Police. 
(B)  It shall also be the duty of Police Department personnel who have enforcement authority to enforce the law in a fair and reasonable manner, recognizing both the statutory and judicial limitations of police authority, and the constitutional rights of all persons. 
(1552 1696 3192) 
3-1-5. - Peace Officer. 
    A person who meets all standards imposed by law on a peace officer is a peace officer, and, notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person other than a person designated in this Code is a peace officer. At a minimum, a peace officer has authority to enforce the Westminster Municipal Code, as directed, while acting within the scope of his or her authority and in the performance of his or her duties. 
(3192) 
3-1-6. - Police Officer. 
(A)  A police officer, including the Chief of Police, Deputy Chiefs, Commanders, Sergeants, and senior police officers, is a peace officer whose authority shall include the enforcement of all laws of the State of Colorado and who shall be certified by the peace officers standards and training board pursuant to state statute. 
(B)  In addition to the authority set forth in subsection (A) of this Section, police officers shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this Code and the City Charter and shall have the authority granted to them pursuant to the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
(C)  Police officers shall be sworn members of the Police Department. 
(3192) 
3-1-7. - Community Service Personnel. 
(A)  There is hereby created the functional positions of community service personnel. 
(B)  The community service personnel are authorized to enforce the provisions of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(C)  The community service personnel shall be deemed peace officers for the limited purpose of enforcing the provisions of the Westminster Municipal Code. The community service personnel shall have the power to issue complaints and summonses for violations of Westminster Municipal Code provisions and the Model Traffic Code, pursuant to Rule 206, Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, and section 1-22-18, W.M.C. 
(1241 1696 3192) 
3-1-8. - Animal Management Personnel. 
(A)  There is hereby created the functional positions of animal management personnel. 
(B)  The animal management personnel are authorized to enforce the provisions of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(C)  The animal management personnel shall be deemed peace officers for the limited purpose of enforcing the provisions of the Westminster Municipal Code. The animal management personnel shall have the power to issue complaints and summonses for violations of Westminster Municipal Code provisions, pursuant to Rule 206, Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, and Section 1-22-18, W.M.C. 
(1242 1696 3192) 
3-1-9. - Traffic Accident Investigation Personnel. 
(A)  There is hereby created the functional positions of traffic accident investigation personnel. 
(B)  The traffic accident investigation personnel are authorized to enforce the provisions of the Westminster Municipal Code and the model traffic code. 
(C)  The traffic accident investigation personnel shall be deemed peace officers for the limited purpose of enforcing the provisions of the Westminster Municipal Code and the model traffic code. The traffic accident investigation personnel shall have the power to issue complaints and summonses for violations of Westminster Municipal Code provisions and the Model Traffic Code, pursuant to RULE 206, Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, and Section 1-22-18, W.M.C. 
(3192) 
3-1-10. - Liquor Investigations Personnel. 
(A)  There is hereby created the functional positions of liquor investigations personnel. 
(B)  The liquor investigations personnel are authorized to enforce the provisions of the Westminster Municipal Code, the Colorado Beer Code and the Colorado Liquor Code, Title 12, C.R.S. 
(C)  The liquor investigations personnel shall be deemed peace officers for the limited purpose of enforcing the provisions delineated in subsection (B). The liquor investigations personnel shall have the power to issue complaints and summonses for violations of Westminster Municipal Code provisions, pursuant to Rule 206, Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, and Section 1-22-18, W.M.C. 
(3192) 
3-1-11. - Code Enforcement Personnel. 
(A)  The code enforcement personnel, previously created in the Department of Community Development, are hereby transferred and recreated in the police department; provided, however, that code enforcement personnel shall remain in the Department of Community Development, as directed by the City Manager. The code enforcement personnel in the Department of Community Development shall have all the authority established herein, and such duties as the City Manager shall direct. 
(B)  It shall be the duty of the code enforcement personnel to enforce specific provisions of the Westminster Municipal Code, as directed. 
(C)  The code enforcement personnel shall be deemed peace officers for the limited purpose of enforcing the provisions of the Westminster Municipal Code. The code enforcement personnel shall have the power to issue complaints and summonses for violations of Westminster Municipal Code provisions, pursuant to Rule 206, Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, and Section 1-22-18, W.M.C. 
(2249 3192 3633) 
3-1-12. - Code Enforcement Personnel Entry Upon Property. 
(A)  Right of Entry-Generally: 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the Westminster Municipal Code, or whenever code enforcement personnel have probable cause to believe that there exists upon any premises any condition that constitutes a violation of the provisions of this Code, the code enforcement personnel may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed on him, provided that, if such premises is occupied, the code enforcement personnel shall first present proper credentials and request entry and, if such premises is unoccupied, shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or occupant or other person or persons having charge or control of the premises and, upon locating the owner, occupant or other person or persons, shall present proper credentials and request entry. 
If the owner or occupant cannot be located after a reasonable effort, a notice of intent to inspect shall be posted on the premises. The notice shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that, in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a Municipal Judge of the City. For purposes of this Section, premises is defined as that area outside of a habitable structure. 
(2)  After entry is refused or 24 hours after the premises has been posted, the code enforcement personnel may appear before the Municipal Judge and, upon a showing of probable cause, shall obtain a search warrant entitling him to enter upon the premises. Upon presentation of the search warrant and proper credentials, or possession of same in the case of unoccupied premises, the code enforcement personnel may enter upon the premises using such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry therein. 
(3)  For purposes of this subsection, "probable cause" exists where the facts and circumstances within the code enforcement personnel's knowledge are sufficient to warrant a man of reasonable caution in the belief that a code violation has been or is being committed. The person applying for such warrant shall not be required to demonstrate specific knowledge of the condition of the particular premises at issue in order to obtain a search warrant. 
(B)  Unlawful Resistance: It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of the premises to resist reasonable force used by the code enforcement personnel acting pursuant to this Section. 
(2249 3192) 
CHAPTER 2. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

3-2-1. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a fire department that shall consist of the Fire Chief and other sworn and civilian personnel as may be provided by the City Council. 
(896 1696) 
3-2-2. - Appointment of Fire Chief. 
    The Fire Chief shall be appointed by and be responsible to the City Manager. Such appointment shall be for an indefinite period pursuant to Section 1-13-3, W.M.C. The Fire Chief shall be the head of the Fire Department and shall have supervision over all personnel assigned to the department. 
(839 1696) 
3-2-3. - Duties of Fire Chief. 
(A)  The Fire Chief is responsible for the efficient and effective operation of the Fire Department, as well as performing those duties prescribed by the City Manager. 
(B)  The Fire Chief shall have the following additional duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the discipline, good order and proper conduct of all of the paid and volunteer personnel of the Fire Department. 
(2)  The Fire Chief shall have command and control of all officers and members of the department, paid or volunteer, and of all persons and equipment present at fires. 
(3)  It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to enforce all ordinances of the City that relate to fire protection or prevention. 
(C)  The Fire Chief may make or prescribe such Fire Department policies, procedures and rules as he shall deem advisable consistent with the City's personnel policies and rules and approved by the City Manager. Such policies, procedures and rules shall be binding on all Fire Department personnel. Such policies, procedures and rules may include, but shall not be limited to, the conduct of fire department personnel, uniforms and equipment to be worn or carried, hours and types of service delivery, deployment schedules, the investigation of citizen complaints, and all other similar matters necessary or desirable for the efficiency and effectiveness of fire operations. 
(D)  The Fire Chief shall establish appropriate fees for the use of the Fire Department training tower facility by other Fire Departments, fire districts or other organizations for training purposes. Such fees shall take into consideration comparable fees established by other jurisdictions for similar facilities, if any. Fees may be set at a rate for each day of use, and may include a flat fee for a use involving more than one day. Fees shall be listed in a written schedule. Such fees may be changed from time to time by the Fire Chief. 
(839 1696 1699 2640) 
3-2-4. - Duties of Officers and Members. 
    In the performance of their duties, all officers and members of the Fire Department shall obey the orders of their superior officers. At the scene of any fire or any other incident to which the Fire Department responds, in the absence of the Fire Chief, the highest ranking and most senior officer or member present shall assume the duties and full authority of the chief until relieved of such duties by the Fire Chief or a superior officer. 
(1563 1696) 
3-2-5. - Authority. 
    The Fire Chief and all members of the Fire Department shall have the power and authority granted to them by the Colorado Revised Statutes, the City Charter and this Code. 
(896 1696) 
3-2-6. - Assistance Outside City Limits. 
    The Fire Department shall not respond to alarms outside the corporate limits, leaving the City unprotected, except that when assistance is requested by a Fire Department Chief, or when contractual mutual assistance arrangements with neighboring fire departments have been made, or when specific standby arrangements have been made with a neighboring department at the time of the outside alarm, then the fire equipment may leave the corporate limits, provided such departure is approved by the chief or, in the absence of the chief, a duly authorized chief officer. (896) 
3-2-7. - Prohibited Acts; Penalties. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful to knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be transmitted to or within the Fire Department or any other city agency that deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any able-bodied person to refuse to obey a summons to aid in extinguishing any fire or to disobey any other order of a member or officer of the Fire Department duly issued in connection with and in furtherance of the performance of that member's or officer's official duties. 
(C)  Any person found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this Section shall be punished by a fine or a jail sentence or by both fine and jail sentence pursuant to the limits specified in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(896 1696) 
3-2-8. - Right of Entry. 
    During a fire or other emergency, the Chief of the Fire Department and members acting under his orders shall have authority to enter any building in the proper performance of their duties. 
(896 1696) 
CHAPTER 3. - DEPARTMENT OF PARKS, RECREATION AND LIBRARIES 

3-3-1. - Department Created. 
    There is hereby created a department of parks, recreation and libraries that shall consist of the director of parks, recreation and libraries and such other personnel as may be provided by the City Council. 
(1283 1696 1889) 
3-3-2. - Appointment of Director. 
    The Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries shall be appointed by and be responsible to the City Manager. Such appointment shall be for an indefinite period pursuant to Section 1-13-3, W.M.C. The Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries shall be the head of the Department of Parks, Recreation and Libraries and shall have supervision over all personnel assigned to the department. 
(1696 1889) 
3-3-3. - Organization. 
    The Department of Parks, Recreation and Libraries consists of the parks division, the recreation division, and the library division. Divisions may be added or deleted when such changes in departmental organization are approved by the City Manager. The respective division heads shall work under the general supervision of the Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries. 
(1889) 
3-3-4. - Duties and Responsibilities. 
(A)  The Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries is responsible for the efficient and effective operation of the library program, and the development and administration of a comprehensive year-round parks and recreation program, to perform all duties set forth in this Code, and those duties prescribed by the City Manager. 
(B)  The Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries may make or prescribe such department policies, procedures and rules as he shall deem advisable consistent with the City's personnel policies and rules and approved by the City Manager. Such rules shall be binding on all department personnel. Such policies, procedures and rules may include, but shall not be limited to, the conduct of the Parks, Recreation and Libraries Department, displays and exhibits, administration of gifts, public relations, and all other similar matters necessary for the efficiency and effectiveness of the department's operations. The director shall also be responsible for ensuring the enforcement of all ordinances and applicable rules and regulations regarding the use of department facilities. 
(1282 1696 1699 1889) 
3-3-5. - Park Ranger. 
(A)  There is hereby created the position of park ranger. 
(B)  It shall be the duty of a park ranger to enforce all the provisions of Title XIII of this Code. A park ranger shall be deemed to be a duly authorized agent of the director of parks, recreation and libraries pursuant to Section 13-2-10, W.M.C., for purposes of exercising the powers set forth therein. 
(C)  A park ranger shall be deemed to be a peace officer for the limited purpose of enforcing the provisions of Title XIII of this Code. A park ranger shall have the power to issue complaints and summonses for violations of Title XIII, pursuant to Rule 206, Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, and Section 1-22-18, W.M.C. 
(D)  A park ranger shall not be deemed to be a sworn member of the Police Department pursuant to Section 3-1-4, W.M.C. 
(1909; Ord. No. 3838, § 3, 9-12-2016 ) 
CHAPTER 4. - DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 

3-4-1. - Department Created. 
    There is hereby created a Department of Community Development that shall consist of the Director of Community Development and such other personnel as may be provided by the City Council. 
(1096 1696) 
3-4-2. - Appointment of Director. 
    The Director of Community Development shall be appointed by and shall be responsible to the City Manager. Such appointment shall be for an indefinite period pursuant to Section 1-13-3, W.M.C. The Director of Community Development shall be the head of the Department of Community Development and shall have supervision over all personnel assigned to the department. 
(1096 1696) 
3-4-3. - Duties and Responsibilities of the Director. 
(A)  The Director of Community Development is responsible for the efficient and effective operation of the Department of Community Development, as well as performing those duties prescribed by the City Manager. 
(B)  The Director of Community Development may make or prescribe such rules and regulations as he or she shall deem advisable consistent with the City's personnel policies and rules. Such policies, procedures and rules shall be binding on all Department of Community Development Personnel. 
(C)  The Director of Community Development shall be Chief Administrator of the Department of Community Development and shall have supervisory responsibility for the activities of all divisions within the department. 
(1096 1696 1747 3633) 
CHAPTER 5. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND UTILITIES 

3-5-1. - Department Created. 
    There is hereby created a Department of Public Works and Utilities that shall consist of the Director of Public Works and Utilities and such other personnel as may be provided by the City Council. 
(1152 1696) 
3-5-2. - Appointment of Director. 
    The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall be appointed by and responsible to the City Manager. Such appointment shall be for an indefinite period pursuant to Section 1-13-3, W.M.C. The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall be the head of the Department of Public Works and Utilities and shall have supervision over all personnel assigned to the department. 
(1152 1696) 
3-5-3. - Duties of the Director. 
(A)  The Director of Public Works and Utilities is responsible for the efficient and effective operation of the Department of Public Works and Utilities, as well as performing those duties prescribed by the City Manager. 
(B)  The Director of Public Works and Utilities may make or prescribe such Department of Public Works and Utilities' policies, procedures and rules as he shall deem advisable consistent with the City's personnel policies and rules and approved by the City Manager. Such policies, procedures and rules shall be binding on all Department of Public Works and Utilities personnel. 
(1152 1696) 
CHAPTER 6. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 

3-6-1. - Department Created. 
    There is hereby created a Finance Department that shall consist of the Director of Finance and such other personnel as may be provided by the City Council. 
(1283 1696) 
3-6-2. - Appointment of Director of Finance. 
    The Director of Finance shall be appointed and may be discharged by the City Manager, subject to the confirmation of the City Council. Such appointment shall be for an indefinite period pursuant to Section 1-13-3, W.M.C. The Director of Finance shall be the head of the Finance Department and shall have supervision over all personnel assigned to the department. 
(1282 1696) 
3-6-3. - Duties of the Director of Finance. 
(A)  The Director of Finance is responsible for the efficient and effective operation of the Finance Department, as well as performing those duties prescribed by the City Manager. 
(B)  The Director of Finance may make or prescribe such Finance Department policies, procedures and rules as he shall deem advisable consistent with the City's personnel policies and rules and approved by the City Manager. Such policies, procedures and rules shall be binding on all Finance Department personnel. Such policies, procedures and rules may include, but shall not be limited to, the conduct of Finance Department personnel, hours, and types of service delivery, and all other similar matters necessary or desirable for the efficiency and effectiveness of finance operations. 
(C)  The Director of Finance shall collect all monies of the City, the collection of which is not provided for elsewhere by the charter or law. The Director of Finance shall receive from other officers and employees of the City all money belonging to and receivable by the City that may be collected by such officers and employees, including fines, license fees, taxes, assessments and all other charges. All money shall be turned over to the Director of Finance upon collection or receipt. 
(D)  The Director of Finance shall disburse all City monies in accordance with the provisions of state statutes, the charter and procedures to be established by the City Council. 
(E)  The Director of Finance shall serve as treasurer of the City and perform the duties of the treasurer that are set forth in the City Charter. 
(1282 1283 1696) 
CHAPTER 7. - DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 

3-7-1. - Department Created. 
    There is hereby created a Department of Information Technology that shall consist of the Director of Information Technology and such other personnel as may be provided by the City Council. 
(2636) 
3-7-2. - Appointment of Director of Information Technology. 
    The Director of Information Technology shall be appointed by and be responsible to the City Manager. Such appointment shall be for an indefinite period pursuant to Section 1-13-3, W.M.C. The Director of Information Technology shall be the head of the Department of Information Technology and shall have general supervision over all personnel assigned to the department. 
(2636) 
3-7-3. - Duties and Responsibilities. 
(A)  The Director of Information Technology is responsible for the efficient and effective operation of the information technology department, as well as performing those duties prescribed by the City Manager. 
(B)  The Director of Information Technology is responsible for providing strategic vision and direction for the use of technology throughout the City. 
(2636) 
CHAPTER 8. - DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES 

3-8-1. - Department Created. 
    There is hereby created a Department of General Services that shall consist of the Director of General Services and such other personnel as may be provided by the City Council. 
(1369 1696 1747) 
3-8-2. - Function. 
    The Director of General Services shall be appointed by and be responsible to the City Manager. Such appointment shall be for an indefinite period pursuant to Section 1-13-3, W.M.C. The Director of General Services shall be the head of the Department of General Services and shall have supervision over all personnel assigned to the department. 
(1696 1747) 
3-8-3. - Duties and Responsibilities. 
    The Director of General Services is responsible for the efficient and effective operation of the department of general services, as well as performing those duties prescribed by the City Manager. 
(1369 1696 1747) 
CHAPTER 10. - DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES 

3-10-1. - Department Created. 
    There is hereby created a Department of Human Resources that shall consist of the Director of Human Resources and such other personnel as may be provided by the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 3883, § 1, 5-22-2017 ) 
3-10-2. - Function. 
    The Director of Human Resources shall be appointed by and be responsible to the City Manager. Such appointment shall be for an indefinite period pursuant to Section 1-13-3, W.M.C. The Director of Human Resources shall be the head of the Department of Human Resources and shall have supervision over all personnel assigned to the department. 
( Ord. No. 3883, § 1, 5-22-2017 ) 
3-10-3. - Duties and Responsibilities. 
    The Director of Human Resources is responsible for the efficient and effective operation of the Department of Human Resources, as well as performing those duties prescribed by the City Manager. 
( Ord. No. 3883, § 1, 5-22-2017 ) 
CHAPTER 11. - DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

3-11-1. - Department Created. 
    There is hereby created a Department of Economic Development that shall consist of the Director of Economic Development and such other personnel as may be provided by the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 3883, § 2, 5-22-2017 ) 
3-11-2. - Function. 
    The Director of Economic Development shall be appointed by and be responsible to the City Manager. Such appointment shall be for an indefinite period pursuant to Section 1-13-3, W.M.C. The Director of Economic Development shall be the head of the Department of Economic Development and shall have supervision over all personnel assigned to the department. 
( Ord. No. 3883, § 2, 5-22-2017 ) 
3-11-3. - Duties and Responsibilities. 
    The Director of Economic Development is responsible for the efficient and effective operation of the Department of Economic Development, as well as performing those duties prescribed by the City Manager. 
( Ord. No. 3883, § 2, 5-22-2017 ) 
CHAPTER 12. - DEPARTMENT OF POLICY AND BUDGET 

3-12-1. - Department Created. 
    There is hereby created a Department of Policy and Budget that shall consist of the Assistant City Manager and such other personnel as may be provided by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 3992 , § 1, 6-24-2019) 
3-12-2. - Function. 
    The Assistant City Manager shall be appointed by and be responsible to the City Manager. Such appointment shall be for an indefinite period pursuant to Section 1-13-3, W.M.C. The Assistant City Manager shall be the head of the Department of Policy and Budget and shall have supervision over all personnel assigned to the department. 
(Ord. No. 3992 , § 1, 6-24-2019) 
3-12-3. - Duties and Responsibilities. 
    The Director of Policy and Budget is responsible for the efficient and effective operation of the Department of Policy and Budget, as well as performing those duties prescribed by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 3992 , § 1, 6-24-2019) 
Title IV. - TAX ADMINISTRATION 
CHAPTER 1. - TAX ADMINISTRATION 

4-1-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this title, shall have the following meaning, unless specifically defined in another chapter: 
    Business shall mean all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, direct or indirect. 
    Charitable organization shall mean any entity which: 
(1)  Has been certified as a non-profit organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; and 
(2)  Is an organization which exclusively, and, in a manner consistent with existing laws and for the benefit of an indefinite number of persons or animals, freely and voluntarily ministers to the physical, mental or spiritual needs of persons or animals, and thereby lessens the burdens of government. 
    City shall mean the municipality of Westminster. 
    Code shall mean the Westminster Municipal Code. 
    Collection costs shall include, but is not limited to, all costs of audit, assessment, bank fees, hearings, execution, lien filing, distraint, litigation, locksmith fees, auction fees and costs, prosecution and attorney fees. 
    Finance Director shall mean the Finance Director of the City of Westminster or such other person designated by the City. "Finance Director" shall also include such person's designee. 
    Gross sales, for the purpose of this chapter, shall include any relevant definition of "gross sales" included in other chapters of this title. 
    License shall mean a Westminster sales and/or use tax license. 
    Occupational taxes shall mean the taxes levied by Chapter 5 and Chapter 7 of this title. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee, or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by court or otherwise, or any group or combination acting as a unit. 
    Price, for purposes of this chapter, shall include any definition of "price" included in other chapters of this title. 
    Purchase or sale, for purposes of this chapter, shall include any definition of "purchase" or "sale" included in other chapters of this title. 
    Retailer, for purposes of this chapter, shall include any definition of "retailer," "operator" or "vendor" included in other chapters of this title. 
    Return shall mean any form prescribed by the Finance Director for computing and reporting a total tax liability. 
    Tax, for purposes of this chapter, shall include any definition of "tax" included in other chapters of this title. 
    Tax deficiency or deficiency shall mean any amount of tax, penalty, interest, or other fee that is not reported and/or not paid on or before the due date that any return or payment of the tax is required under the terms of this title. 
    Taxable sales shall mean gross sales less any exemptions and deductions specified in this title. 
    Taxable services shall mean services subject to the tax pursuant to this title. 
    Taxpayer shall mean any person obligated to collect and/or pay tax under the terms of this title. 
    Tax policy shall mean, for the purposes of Colorado Constitution Article X, Section 20, the provisions of this title that govern the persons upon whom the City's tax is imposed and the transactions to which the City's tax applies, including tax exemptions and tax deductions, but excluding any provisions concerning fees, interest charges, or penalties related to the administration and enforcement of said tax policy. 
    Total tax liability shall mean the total of all tax, penalties and/or interest owed by a taxpayer and shall include sales tax collected in excess of such tax computed on total sales. 
(2032 2972 3371 3544; Ord. No. 3889, § 1, 6-26-2017 ) 
4-1-2. - Exemption; Burden of Proof. 
(A)  The burden of proving that any retailer is exempt from collecting or remitting tax shall be on the retailer under such reasonable requirements of proof as the finance director may prescribe. 
(B)  The burden of proving that any consumer is exempt from remitting the use tax shall be on such consumer under such reasonable requirements of proof as the finance director may prescribe. 
(C)  The burden of proving that any taxpayer is exempt from remitting the occupation tax shall be on the taxpayer under such reasonable requirements of proof as the finance director may prescribe. 
(2032 2972 3371) 
4-1-3. - Deductions and Credits. 
(A)  Deductions from Gross Sales: If included in reported gross sales, the following are deductible from gross sales: 
(1)  Refunds. The price of admissions, accommodations, tangible personal property, or taxable services returned by a purchaser when the price and the tax collected are refunded in cash or by credit. 
(2)  Bad Debts. Taxable sales originally financed by the taxpayer and held as debt on the taxpayer's books that are found to be worthless and are actually and properly charged off as bad debts for federal income tax purposes. Any amount so deducted and subsequently collected by the taxpayer shall be subject to the tax. 
(3)  Interest and Finance Charges. The amount of interest or finance charges on credit extended in connection with any sale, if the interest or finance charges are separately stated from the price. 
(B)  Credits from Tax Due: Amounts previously paid pursuant to a tax levied by a municipality may be credited against the tax due on transactions or items, other than construction materials used in a project for which a city building permit is required, as follows: 
(1)  When the present owner or user has previously paid a legally imposed sales or use tax on the transaction or item; except that the amount of such credit shall not exceed the amount of tax on such transaction or item computed at the rate established by Section 4-2-3, W.M.C. 
(2)  When the present owner or user of construction equipment has not previously paid a legally imposed sales or use tax attributable to any one municipality on the full price of such equipment, the credit shall be the aggregate value of all such taxes paid on such equipment up to the amount of tax due to the City on such equipment. 
(C)  Collection Fee: For each reporting period ending on or before December 31, 2010, every retailer shall be entitled to a collection and remittance fee equal to the lesser of $100.00 or two and one-half percent of the sum of the tax computed and any excess tax collected. A retailer shall apply this fee as an offset against the amount of tax due to the City at the time of remittance. Such fee shall be forfeited for any tax that is not reported and paid by the due date. Failure to apply this fee as an offset against the amount of tax due at the time of remittance shall result in forfeiture of the collection fee. This paragraph shall not apply to use tax. 
(2032 2972 3371 3552; Ord. No. 3889, § 2, 6-26-2017 ) 
4-1-4. - Acquisition of Business. 
(A)  Purchase of an Existing Business: 
(1)  Seller's Responsibilities. Any person engaged in business in the City who sells such business shall file a final return. The reporting period for such return shall end on the date of the transfer of ownership of the business. 
(2)  Purchaser's Responsibilities. 
(a)  Any person who purchases an existing business shall be responsible for determining the total tax liability from that business, and shall withhold from the initial purchase payment an amount sufficient to cover all such total tax liability, unless the former owner produces a receipt from the city showing that the total tax liability has been paid or a certificate from the city that there is no total tax liability. 
(b)  Any amount so withheld shall be paid to the city within ten days of the date of the sale of the business. 
(c)  Any purchaser who fails to withhold such total tax liability, or fails to remit to the City the amount so withheld within the ten-day period allowed, shall, as well as the seller, be liable for any unpaid total tax liability. 
(B)  Acquisition of an Existing Business by Means Other Than Purchase: Any person who acquires or takes control of an existing business or the assets of an existing business by means other than purchase shall be responsible for payment of any total tax liability from that business. 
(2032 3544) 
4-1-5. - Retailer Responsible for Collection and Payment of Tax. 
    Every retailer engaged in business in the City shall be liable and responsible for payment of an amount equivalent to the taxable sales multiplied by the specified rate. 
(A)  Tax Added to Price: Retailers shall add the tax imposed, or the average equivalent thereof, to the price, showing such tax as a separate and distinct item. Except as provided in this subsection, no retailer shall advertise, or hold out, or state to the public or to any consumer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof shall be assumed or absorbed by the retailer, or that it will not be added to the price, or, if added, that it or any part thereof shall be refunded. 
(1)  Sales tax may be included in the price of any malt, vinous or spirituous liquor sold by the drink. 
(2)  Sales tax may be included in the price of items sold from coin-operated devices or the price of utilizing such devices. 
(3)  Admissions tax may be included in the admission charge. 
(B)  Tax Constitutes Debt: Any tax added to the price by a retailer shall constitute a debt from the purchaser to the retailer until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. 
(C)  Excess Tax: No retailer shall retain any tax collected in excess of the tax computed, but shall report such excess collections on the return for the period in which it was collected and include it in the calculation of tax due. 
(D)  Disputed Tax: When a dispute arises between a retailer and a purchaser who claims that the sale is exempt from the tax, the retailer shall collect and the purchaser shall remit such tax. The purchaser may then submit a claim for refund to the City within 60 days of the date of purchase. Any such tax refunded by the City will be paid directly to the purchaser. 
(E)  Use of Electronic Location Database; Retailer Held Harmless: 
(1)  Any retailer responsible for the collection and payment of tax under this title may use an electronic database of state addresses that is certified by the state department of revenue pursuant to Section 39-26-105.3, C.R.S., to determine the jurisdictions to which tax is owed. 
(2)  Any retailer that uses the data contained in an electronic database certified by the state department of revenue pursuant to Section 39-26-105.3, C.R.S., to determine the jurisdictions to which tax is owed shall be held harmless for any tax, penalty, or interest owed to the city that otherwise would be due solely as a result of an error in the electronic database, provided that the retailer demonstrates that it used the most current information available in such electronic database on the date that the sale occurred. Each retailer shall keep and preserve such records as prescribed by the Finance Director to demonstrate that it used the most current information available in the electronic database on the date that the sale occurred. Notwithstanding the above, if the error in collecting and remitting is a result of a deceptive representation, a false representation, or fraud, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply. 
(3)  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to use tax. 
(2032 2972 3371) 
4-1-6. - Trust Status of Tax in Possession of Retailer. 
    All tax collected by any retailer shall be the property of the City and remain public money in the hands of such retailer, who shall hold the same in trust for the sole use and benefit of the City until paid to the City. 
(2032) 
4-1-7. - Returns Required; Time for Filing and Paying Total Tax Liability. 
(A)  Except as provided in this section, every taxpayer shall, on or before the 20th day of the month, make a return to the finance director for the preceding calendar month, and file such return whether or not tax is due. 
(B)  Occupation Taxes: Every taxpayer required to report and remit occupation taxes shall file a return and remit any tax due pursuant to the applicable provisions of Chapter 5 and Chapter 7 of this title. 
(C)  Construction Equipment: Every person who uses construction equipment in the City shall, on or before the date the construction equipment is located in the City, make a return to the Finance Director, and file such return whether or not tax is due. 
(D)  Construction Materials: Every person who pays an estimated prepayment of use tax pursuant to Section 4-2-9, W.M.C., shall make a return to the Finance Director of use tax due in excess of such estimated prepayment. 
(1)  For public and private improvements, such return shall be made on or before the 30th day following written acceptance of any improvements by the City. 
(2)  For projects requiring a city building permit, such return shall be made on or before the 30th day following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or the date of final inspection by the building official, whichever occurs later. 
(3)  A return shall not be required if no additional use tax is due. 
(E)  Initial Use Tax: Every person who purchases or establishes a business inside the City shall, on or before the 20th day of the month following the first day of business, make an initial use tax return to the finance director, and file such return whether or not tax is due. 
(F)  Cessation of Business: Any person who sells out or quits business shall, within ten days, make a return to the Finance Director and file such return whether or not tax is due. 
(G)  Time for Payment: When a return of tax is required under this title, or regulations promulgated pursuant hereto, the person required to make such return shall, without assessment, pay such total tax liability to the finance director at the time and place fixed for filing the return. 
(H)  Alternate Reporting Schedule: If the accounting methods employed by the taxpayer, or other conditions, are such that returns made on a calendar month basis will impose unnecessary hardship, the finance director may, upon written request of the taxpayer, accept returns at such intervals as will, in the opinion of the Finance Director, better suit the convenience of the taxpayer, but not jeopardize the collection of the tax. The Finance Director may, by rule, permit taxpayers to make returns and pay taxes at intervals not greater than every 12 months. Authorization for such alternate method of reporting may be revoked by the Finance Director and, immediately following notice of such revocation, the taxpayer shall file returns and remit tax on a monthly basis as if the alternate method of reporting and remitting the tax had never been granted. 
(I)  Returns shall contain such information and be made in such manner and upon such forms as the Finance Director may prescribe. 
(J)  The signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent shall appear on all returns. A valid digital signature, or the equivalent thereof, on a filed return transmitted electronically over the internet or similar means, or a signature on a return sent via facsimile or other form acceptable to the finance director, is accepted and held as a written signature. 
(K)  For good cause shown in a written request of a taxpayer, the Finance Director may extend the time for making returns and paying or remitting tax due. 
(L)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false statement in connection with a return. 
(2032 2972 3371 3544 3553) 
4-1-8. - Reserved. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 3544) 
4-1-9. - Duty to Keep Books and Records. 
(A)  Every person engaged in business in the City shall keep and preserve for at least three years after the due date of the return or the payment of the tax, whichever is later, books, accounts, invoices, and other pertinent papers and records suitable in content and form to allow the accurate determination of the tax due on such return by the finance director. 
(B)  Every person who uses construction equipment inside the City shall keep and preserve, for at least three years after the due date of the return or the payment of the tax, records of the time each piece of construction equipment was located inside the City, invoices or records of the price of such construction equipment, and any sales or use tax paid on such construction equipment. 
(2032 3544) 
4-1-10. - Authority of the Finance Director. 
    The administration of this title is hereby vested in the Finance Director. 
(A)  Forms and Procedures: The Finance Director shall prescribe forms and administrative procedures for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the tax. 
(B)  Regulations: The Finance Director may formulate and promulgate appropriate regulations to effectuate the purpose of this title as provided by this Code. 
(C)  Additional Information: The Finance Director may require any person to make additional returns, render statements, furnish records, or make informational reports to determine whether such person is liable for payment or collection of the tax. 
(D)  Subpoenas: The Finance Director may issue a subpoena to command a person to attend and give testimony or to produce books, accounts and records. 
(1)  Any subpoena issued under the terms of this title shall be served as set forth in the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, including the payment of witness fees. When a witness is subpoenaed at the insistence of the taxpayer, the Finance Director may require that the cost of service of the subpoena and the fee be paid by the taxpayer. In the discretion of the Finance Director, a deposit to cover the cost of the subpoena and witness fees may be required. 
(2)  If a subpoena issued by the Finance Director is duly served and the respondent fails to attend, give testimony or to produce books, accounts and records as commanded, the Finance Director may request the City attorney to file a motion with the municipal court of the City for an order enforcing the subpoena. 
(E)  Oaths: The Finance Director is authorized to administer oaths and take testimony at the hearing. 
(F)  Agents: The Finance Director may designate agents to assist in the performance of the duties and responsibilities set forth in this title. 
(G)  Liquor Licenses: Prior to the renewal, transfer or issuance of a license to sell any malt, vinous, or spirituous liquor, the Finance Director shall certify to the City Clerk that all returns have been filed and taxes paid. 
(H)  Partial Payments; Payments in Installments: The Finance Director may accept any partial payment made and apply such payments towards the total tax liability or allow payment of a total tax liability on an installment basis. Payment of part, but less than the total, tax liability shall be first applied to penalty, if any, secondly to accrued interest, and, lastly, to the tax deficiency itself. Deposit of such payments shall not in any way imply that the remaining balance is or has been abated. Interest shall continue to accrue on the remaining tax deficiency until paid as provided by this chapter. 
(I)  Notices: Notices required by this title shall be in writing and delivered in person or sent post-paid by first-class mail, to the last known address of the taxpayer. 
(2032 2972 3371) 
4-1-11. - Audit of Records. 
(A)  For the purpose of ascertaining the correct total tax liability from any person engaged in business in the city, the finance director may conduct an audit by examining all books, accounts and records of such person. 
(B)  Upon demand by the Finance Director, all books, accounts and records shall be open at any time during the City's regular business hours for examination at the office of the Finance Director or some other place designated by the Finance Director for examination. Any person under audit may elect to pay for costs or expenses incurred by the City in order to have such audit conducted at a place other than the place designated by the finance director, but, in any case, the time and place of the audit shall be designated by the Finance Director. If any person refuses to voluntarily produce any of the foregoing information, the finance director may issue a subpoena to require that the taxpayer or their representative attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination. 
(C)  Any tax deficiency or overpayment ascertained through audit shall be computed by one or more of the following methods as the agent of the Finance Director deems appropriate: 
(1)  By comparing the tax prepaid with building permits or reported and paid on returns to the actual tax due. 
(2)  By identifying transactions on which the tax was not properly or accurately collected or paid. 
(3)  By identifying other irregularities in the calculation of tax due. 
(4)  By using any of the above methods on a representative sample of the taxpayer's records, and utilizing the results to project the amount of tax deficiency or overpayment, if any. 
(D)  Any charitable organization claiming exemption under the provisions of this title is subject to audit in the same manner as any other person engaged in business in the City. 
(E)  Coordinated Audit. Any taxpayer licensed in this City pursuant to Section 5-4-2, W.M.C., and holding a similar sales tax license in at least four other Colorado municipalities that administer their own sales tax collection, may request a coordinated audit as provided herein. 
(1)  Within 14 days of receipt of notice of an intended audit by any municipality that administers its own sales tax collection, the taxpayer may provide to the Finance Director of this City, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written request for a coordinated audit indicating the municipality from which the notice of intended audit was received and the name of the official who issued such notice. Such request shall include a list of those Colorado municipalities utilizing local collection of their sales tax in which the taxpayer holds a current sales tax license, and a declaration that the taxpayer will sign a waiver of any passage-of-time based limitation upon this City's right to recover tax owed by the taxpayer for the audit period. 
(2)  Except as provided in paragraph (6), any taxpayer that submits a complete request for a coordinated audit and promptly signs a waiver of the statute of limitations may be audited by this City during the 12 months after such request is submitted only through a coordinated audit involving all municipalities electing to participate in such an audit. 
(3)  If this City desires to participate in the audit of a taxpayer that submits a complete request for a coordinated audit pursuant to paragraph (2), the Finance Director shall so notify the Finance Director of the municipality whose notice of audit prompted the taxpayer's request within ten days after receipt of the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit. The Finance Director shall then cooperate with other participating municipalities in the development of arrangements for the coordinated audit, including arrangement of the time during which the coordinated audit will be conducted, the period of time to be covered by the audit, and a coordinated notice to the taxpayer of those records most likely to be required for completion of the coordinated audit. 
(4)  If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by this City, this City's Finance Director shall facilitate arrangements between this City and other municipalities participating in the coordinated audit, unless and until an official from some other participating municipality agrees to assume this responsibility. The Finance Director shall cooperate with other participating municipalities to, whenever practicable, minimize the number of auditors that will be present on the taxpayer's premises to conduct the coordinated audit on behalf of the participating municipalities. Information obtained by or on behalf of those municipalities participating in the coordinated audit may be shared only among such participating municipalities. 
(5)  If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by this City, this City's Finance Director shall, once arrangements for the coordinated audit between this City and other participating municipalities are completed, provide written notice to the taxpayer of which municipalities will be participating, the period to be audited and the records most likely to be required by participating municipalities for completion of the coordinated audit. The Finance Director shall also propose a schedule for the coordinated audit. 
(6)  The coordinated audit procedure set forth in this section shall not apply: 
(a)  When the proposed audit is a jeopardy audit; 
(b)  To audits for which a notice of audit was given prior to the effective date of this section; 
(c)  When a taxpayer refuses to promptly sign a waiver of the statute of limitations; or 
(d)  When a taxpayer fails to provide a timely and complete request for a coordinated audit as provided in paragraph (1). 
(2032 3544) 
4-1-12. - Tax Information Confidential. 
    All specific information gained under the provisions of this title that is used to determine the total tax liability from a taxpayer, whether furnished by the taxpayer or obtained through audit, shall be treated by the City and its officers, employees or legal representatives as confidential. 
(A)  Except as directed by judicial order or as provided in this section, no city officer, employee, or legal representative shall divulge any confidential information. 
(1)  The Finance Director may furnish to officials of any other governmental entity any confidential information, provided that said jurisdiction enters into an agreement with the City to grant reciprocal privileges to the City. 
(2)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a taxpayer or their duly authorized representative of a copy of such confidential information relating to such taxpayer, the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular taxpayers, or the inspection of such confidential information by an officer, employee, or legal representative of the City. 
(3)  The taxpayer shall be deemed to have consented to the disclosure of any confidential documents that are produced by either the City or the taxpayer in any public hearing or litigation arising from this title. 
(4)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the City's release of the terms of any business assistance or other agreement involving tax rebates or credits. 
(B)  If directed by judicial order, the officials charged with the custody of such confidential information shall be required to provide only such information that is directly involved in the action or proceeding. 
(2032 2972) 
4-1-13. - Timely Payment; Computation of Dates. 
(A)  Timely payment shall be evidenced by the postmark date if mailed; otherwise timely payment shall be evidenced by the City cashier validation date. 
(B)  Any due date, payment date, or deadline for remitting the total tax liability or providing information or taking other action that falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday recognized by either the Federal Government or State of Colorado shall be extended to the first business day following such weekend or holiday. 
(2032 2972) 
4-1-14. - Overpayment from Returns. 
    If the amount remitted with the return is more than the total tax liability as computed from information in such return, a notice of overpayment will be issued. After examining such notice, the taxpayer may either submit a claim for refund or report the correct total tax liability by filing an amended return. No refund of such overpayment shall be paid unless a signed claim for refund is submitted on or before the 30th day after the date of notice of overpayment. 
(2032) 
4-1-15. - Tax Overpayment Determined Through Audit. 
    If the City ascertains through an audit of a taxpayer's records that the total tax liability is less than the full amount paid, a notice of overpayment shall be issued. Such notice will serve as documentation for a claim for refund, if such claim is signed and submitted by the taxpayer within 30 days of the date of the notice of overpayment. 
(2032) 
4-1-16. - Tax Overpayments by Purchasers. 
    Refunds of tax paid to a retailer by a purchaser who claims that the sale is exempt from or not subject to the tax may be requested by such purchaser by signing and submitting a claim for refund on or before 60 days from the date of such purchase. 
(2032 3544) 
4-1-17. - Claim for Refund. 
    No tax overpayment shall be refunded unless a claim for refund is signed and submitted to the City by the taxpayer. 
(A)  Application: An application for refund of tax shall: 
(1)  Be made on a claim for refund form furnished by the City; 
(2)  Be signed by the taxpayer; and 
(3)  Include adequate documentation of the claim. 
(B)  Refunds to Retailers: 
(1)  Refunds of tax collected by a retailer are limited to those retailers who at the time of the refund have either credited to their customer's account or have refunded to their customer the taxes paid by their customer in error, if any. 
(2)  Refunds of tax collected by a retailer shall not be made to such retailer until the period during which a purchaser may claim refunds of such tax has expired, and then are limited to those amounts, if any, not previously paid by the City to the purchaser pursuant to any claim made by the same. 
(C)  Determination: The Finance Director shall examine the claim for refund and give written notice delivered in person or sent postpaid by first-class mail to the last known address of the taxpayer of the amount to be refunded or denied. The determination of the Finance Director shall become final 30 days from the date of personal service of the notice or the date of mailing of the notice; provided, however, that within said 30-day period, the taxpayer may petition the Finance Director in writing for a revision, modification, or cancellation of such determination in accordance with this chapter. A taxpayer who fails to protest the determination of the Finance Director within 30 days shall be forever enjoined from claiming a refund of the amounts denied therein, excepting, however, that the finance director may, at his sole discretion, grant leave to file a second claim in order to avoid a protest by an aggrieved taxpayer pursuant to this chapter. 
(D)  Refunds Not Assignable: The right of any person to obtain a refund pursuant to this chapter shall not be assignable. 
(E)  False Statements: It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false statement in connection with a claim for refund. 
(2032 2972 3544 3569) 
4-1-18. - Underpayments From Returns. 
    If the amount remitted with a return is less than the tax computed from information in such return, a notice of assessment shall be issued. 
(2032) 
4-1-19. - Failure to File Return; Failure to Provide Adequate Records for Audit; Estimated Notice of Assessment. 
(A)  If any taxpayer neglects or refuses to file a return by the due date, the Finance Director shall estimate the total tax liability as soon as practicable thereafter. Such estimate shall be based upon such information as may be available, with or without employing the investigative powers vested in the Finance Director by this chapter, and a notice of assessment shall be issued. Such estimate may be adjusted if a return showing the actual total tax liability is filed within 30 days from the date of personal service of the notice or the date of mailing of the notice. 
(B)  If the Finance Director determines that any taxpayer has neglected or refused to provide adequate books, accounts and records requested for audit, the Finance Director shall estimate the total tax liability. Such estimate shall be based upon such information as may be available, with or without employing the investigative powers vested in the Finance Director by this chapter, and a notice of assessment shall be issued. 
(C)  An estimated notice of assessment issued pursuant to this section shall be prima facie correct, and the burden of proof that the items, services, privileges, occupations, or other transactions for which modifications or cancellations of such assessment are sought are exempt from or not subject to taxation shall be on the taxpayer and such proof shall be by a preponderance of evidence. 
(2032 3544) 
4-1-20. - Tax Deficiencies Determined Through Audit. 
    If the City ascertains through an audit of the taxpayer's records that the tax due has not been fully reported or paid by the applicable due date, a notice of assessment shall be issued. 
(2032) 
4-1-21. - Penalties. 
(A)  Penalty for Tax Deficiency: A penalty of $15.00 or ten percent of the tax deficiency, whichever is greater, shall be levied on any tax deficiency. 
(B)  Penalty For Fraud: If any tax deficiency is due to fraud or the intent to evade the tax, the penalty shall be 50 percent of the total tax deficiency. 
(C)  Penalty for Repeated Enforcement: If three notices of assessment for the same type of tax have been issued to the same taxpayer within 36 consecutive months, a special penalty of 15 percent of the total tax liability, or $25.00, whichever is greater, shall be levied. 
(D)  Penalty for Recurring Distraint: If any taxpayer repeatedly fails, neglects, or refuses to pay the taxes levied by this title within the time required by this title, and the City has been required to issue distraint warrants to enforce the collection of the tax due from such taxpayer, the finance director is authorized to collect the tax deficiency, together with all interest and penalties thereon provided by law, and also an additional penalty of $250.00 each for the second and all subsequent distraint warrants regarding the taxpayer that are issued by the City pursuant to this chapter. 
(E)  Penalty for Improper Registration of a Motor Vehicle: If the Finance Director determines that a person has registered or caused to be registered a motor vehicle outside the City and that such motor vehicle should have been registered at an address in the City, the Finance Director shall levy a civil penalty of $500.00. 
(F)  Assessment and Collection of Penalty: The penalties levied by this section shall be assessed, collected, and paid in the same manner as provided in this title for the collection of tax due. Assessment and collection of a penalty shall not preclude the collection of any tax due, any interest due, or the imposition of any other civil or criminal penalty provided by law. 
(G)  Abatement of Penalty: Any penalty assessed in this section may be abated by the finance director if the Finance Director finds good cause therefor. 
(2032 2972 3371 3544) 
4-1-22. - Interest. 
    Interest shall be levied at the rate of one percent each month, or fraction thereof, that any tax deficiency remains unpaid. Except as provided in this chapter, interest properly assessed on any tax deficiency shall not be abated and shall be collected and paid in the same manner as the tax itself. 
(2032 2165 2972 3371) 
4-1-23. - Notice of Assessment. 
    The Finance Director shall issue a notice of assessment for any total tax liability. Notices of assessment shall be in writing and delivered in person or sent postpaid by first-class mail to the last known address of the taxpayer. Such total tax liability shall thereupon become an assessment, and such assessment shall be final and due and payable from the taxpayer to the City 30 days from the date of personal service of the notice or the date of mailing of the notice; provided, however, that within said 30-day period, the taxpayer may petition the finance director in writing for a revision, modification, or cancellation of such assessment in accordance with this chapter. A taxpayer who fails to protest an assessment within said 30-day period shall be forever enjoined from protesting or appealing said assessment or claiming a refund of amounts paid to the City pursuant thereto, excepting, however, that the finance director may, at his sole discretion, grant leave to file a claim for refund in order to avoid a protest by an aggrieved taxpayer. 
(2032 2792 3538 3544) 
4-1-24. - Abatement of Tax Deficiency. 
(A)  The Finance Director may abate up to ten percent of any tax deficiency or $5,000.00, whichever is greater, and the penalty and interest assessed thereon, if the finance director finds good cause therefor. The Finance Director shall submit a report of amounts abated in excess of $500.00 to the City Manager. 
(B)  If the Finance Director issues an estimated notice of assessment to a taxpayer who neglects to file a return by the due date, and the taxpayer subsequently demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Finance Director that the amount so estimated is greater than the actual total tax liability, the Finance Director may, for good cause shown, abate the estimated total tax liability to the extent it exceeds the actual total tax liability. 
(2032 3371) 
4-1-25. - Protest of Notice of Assessment or Denial of Refund. 
(A)  Any notice of assessment may be protested by the taxpayer to whom it is issued. 
(1)  A taxpayer claiming an error in assessment shall submit a written protest to the Finance Director within 30 days from the date of personal service or the date of mailing of the notice of assessment. Such protest shall state the facts and reasons for and the amount of the requested changes and shall otherwise comply with any rules and regulations promulgated by the Finance Director relating to protests and hearings. 
(2)  The taxpayer may assert any facts and make any arguments that, in the opinion of the taxpayer, are pertinent to the protest. Only matters contained in the protest shall be considered by the Finance Director. 
(3)  The taxpayer shall be prohibited from amending the protest to assert new facts or make new arguments more than ten days after the protest is received by the Finance Director, unless the Finance Director issues an order either requiring more definite statements or granting leave to amend the protest. 
(4)  When a timely protest is made that conforms to the requirements of this section, no further enforcement action will be instituted by the City for the portion of the assessment being protested unless: 
(a)  the taxpayer fails to pursue the protest in a timely manner; or 
(b)  the total tax liability will be jeopardized by delay and the City Manager has issued a jeopardy assessment and demand for payment pursuant to this chapter. 
(5)  The filing of a protest shall not toll the accrual of interest on the amount of tax due. 
(B)  Any notice that the Finance Director has denied a claim for refund, in whole or in part, may be protested by the taxpayer to whom it was issued. 
(1)  A taxpayer claiming an error in denial shall submit a written protest to the Finance Director within 30 days from the date of personal service or the date of mailing of the notice of the Finance Director's determination. Such protest shall state the facts and reasons for and the amounts of the requested changes and shall otherwise comply with any rules and regulations promulgated by the Finance Director relating to protests and hearings. 
(2)  The taxpayer may assert any facts and make any arguments that, in the opinion of the taxpayer, are pertinent to the protest. Only matters contained in the protest shall be considered by the Finance Director. 
(3)  The taxpayer shall be prohibited from amending the protest to assert new facts or make new arguments more than ten days after the protest is received by the Finance Director unless the Finance Director issues an order either requiring more definite statements or granting leave to amend the protest. 
(C)  Any timely protest that conforms to the requirements of this section entitles a taxpayer to a hearing under the provisions of this title. 
(1)  If, in the opinion of the Finance Director, the issues involved in such protest may be resolved administratively, the Finance Director may recommend an informal meeting with the taxpayer. 
(2)  Participation in such an informal meeting does not prevent either the taxpayer or the City from holding a hearing if the dispute cannot be resolved by such meeting. 
(3)  If the issues are satisfactorily resolved at an informal meeting and a hearing is not requested, the remaining total tax liability, if any, shall be paid on or before ten days after the date of the notification of the amount due. 
(2032 3371 3538 3544) 
4-1-26. - Hearings. 
(A)  The Finance Director shall notify the taxpayer in writing of the time and place fixed for hearing at least ten days prior thereto, unless the taxpayer agrees to a shorter time. 
(B)  Every hearing shall be held in the City before the Finance Director. 
(C)  The burden of proof that the items, services, privileges, occupations, or other transactions for which refunds of taxes are claimed, or for which modifications or cancellations of assessments are sought, are exempt from or not subject to taxation shall be on the taxpayer and such proof shall be by a preponderance of evidence. 
(D)  At such hearing, the Finance Director is authorized to administer oaths and take evidence and hear argument. Pursuant to this title, the Finance Director may issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses, the giving of testimony, and the production of books, papers, records or memoranda. 
(E)  After such hearing, the Finance Director shall issue a findings of fact, conclusions, and decision, which may modify or abate the tax, penalties and interest protested at the hearing, approve a refund, or uphold the assessment. The decision of the finance director shall be final upon its entry and shall be mailed to the taxpayer forthwith. 
(F)  After such hearing, the taxpayer shall not be entitled to a second hearing on the same notice of assessment or denial of refund nor shall the taxpayer be entitled to file a claim for refund for amounts denied or paid pursuant to the final decision of the Finance Director on the same. 
(G)  Unless the final decision of the Finance Director is appealed as provided in this chapter, the remaining total tax liability, if any, shall be paid on or before 30 days after its entry. 
(2032 2275 3544) 
4-1-27. - Appeals. 
(A)  Should the taxpayer be aggrieved by the final decision of the Finance Director subsequent to a hearing held pursuant to this chapter, the taxpayer may proceed to have the same reviewed in the district court in and for Adams County pursuant to Rule 106 (a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure as the same now provides or may hereinafter be amended. 
(1)  The petition or complaint for review must be filed within 30 days from the entry of the Finance Director's final decision. 
(2)  Upon filing a petition or complaint pursuant to this subsection, the taxpayer shall either file with the Finance Director a bond for twice the unpaid amount stated in the Finance Director's final decision, or deposit the unpaid amount with the Finance Director in lieu of posting a bond. Should the taxpayer deposit the unpaid amount with the Finance Director, no additional interest shall accrue on the tax deficiency. The taxpayer shall not be entitled to interest on any deposited amount returned in accord with the direction of the court. 
(B)  Alternative remedy for sales and use tax: After exhausting the remedies provided in this chapter, a taxpayer may elect to appeal a sales or use tax assessment or denial of a claim for a refund of a sales or use tax to the Colorado Department of Revenue pursuant to Section 29-2-106.1(3), C.R.S. A notice of this right shall be included in any notice of assessment or denial of refund in clear and conspicuous type. 
(C)  Any party, including the City, may appeal the decision of the district court, the Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Revenue, or other such tribunal having jurisdiction, using all judicial, appellate, and extraordinary proceedings available. 
(D)  A taxpayer who fails to timely appeal the final decision of the Finance Director pursuant to this section shall be forever enjoined from protesting or appealing the same or claiming a refund of amounts denied or paid to the City pursuant thereto. 
(2032 3544) 
4-1-28. - Lien for Tax Due. 
    The tax imposed by this title, together with the interest and penalties herein provided, and any costs of collection that may be incurred shall automatically be and, until paid, remain a lien upon the real property of and tangible personal property, including goods, stock in trade, and business fixtures, owned or used by any taxpayer, including tangible personal property used under lease, installment sale, or other contract agreement. Except as provided in this section, such lien shall be a first and prior lien and shall take precedence on all such property over all other liens or claims of whatsoever kind or nature. 
(A)  Priority of Liens Upon Real Property: A lien upon the real property of the taxpayer shall be a first and prior lien and shall have precedence over all other liens of whatsoever kind or nature, except as to preexisting claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor or purchaser whose rights shall have attached prior to the filing of a notice of lien by the Finance Director as hereinafter provided. 
(B)  Improvements to Real Property: The use tax imposed by this title upon any article of tangible personal property that is attached and affixed to realty, or the improvements and structures located thereon, situated within the City, together with interest and penalties herein provided, shall constitute a first and prior lien upon such realty and the improvements located thereon so benefited by the attaching and affixing of such articles of tangible personal property thereto, which lien shall have precedence over all other liens of whatsoever kind or nature, except as to preexisting claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor or purchaser whose rights shall have attached prior to the filing of a notice of lien by the Finance Director as hereinafter provided. 
(C)  Notice of Lien: The Finance Director may serve a notice of lien in such form as the Finance Director may prescribe with the owner or possessor of property on which a lien has attached or file said notice with the Secretary of State or the clerk and recorder of any county in Colorado in which the real or personal property is located. 
(D)  Exemption from Lien: 
(1)  The personal property of an owner who has made a bona fide lease to a taxpayer shall be exempt from the lien created in this subsection if such property can reasonably be identified from the lease description and if the lessee is given no right to become the owner of the property leased. This exemption shall be effective from the date of the execution of the lease if the lease is recorded within ten days of execution with the Secretary of State or County Clerk and Recorder of the county where the property is located or based. 
(2)  Motor vehicles that are properly registered in this state showing the lessor as owner thereof shall be exempt from such lien, except that such lien shall apply to the extent that the lessee has an earned reserve, allowance for depreciation not to exceed the fair market value, or similar interest that is or may be credited to the lessee. 
(3)  Where a lessor and lessee are blood relatives, or relatives by law, or have 25 percent or more common ownership, a lease between such lessee and such lessor shall not be considered as bona fide for purposes of this section. 
(E)  Enforcement Against Real Property: If a notice of lien is filed against real property, the Finance Director may direct the City Attorney to file a civil action to enforce such lien. The court may determine the interest in the property of each party, decree a sale of the real property, and distribute the proceeds according to such findings. Procedure for the action and the manner of sale, the period for and manner of redemption from the sale, and the execution of deed of conveyance shall be in accordance with the law and practice relating to foreclosures of mortgages upon real property. In any such action, the court may appoint a receiver of the real property involved in such action if equity so requires. 
(2032 3371) 
4-1-29. - Perpetuance of Lien. 
(A)  Any lien for total tax liability shall continue until a release of lien is filed by the Finance Director. 
(B)  Any person who purchases or repossesses real or personal property upon which a lien has attached shall be liable for the payment of such total tax liability up to the value of the property taken or acquired. 
(2032 3544) 
4-1-30. - Release of Lien. 
    Upon payment of the total tax liability or enforcement of the lien, the Finance Director shall file a release of lien with the County Clerk and Recorder of the county in which the lien was filed. 
(2032) 
4-1-31. - Civil Action to Recover Tax Due. 
(A)  Any unpaid total tax liability shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the City and the Finance Director may direct the City Attorney to file a civil action to collect such total tax liability. 
(B)  The return filed by a taxpayer or the notice of assessment issued by the Finance Director shall be prima facie proof of the total tax liability. 
(C)  If a judgment is obtained by the City, collection of the total tax liability may be made by attachment, garnishment or other means authorized by law. When attachment is sought, no bond shall be required of the Finance Director nor shall any sheriff require of the Finance Director an indemnity bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of execution upon any judgment. 
(2032) 
4-1-32. - Jeopardy Assessment. 
(A)  Issuance: If the collection of any total tax liability from a taxpayer, whether or not previously assessed, will be jeopardized by delay, the City Manager may declare the taxable period immediately terminated, order the Finance Director to determine the total tax liability, and issue a jeopardy assessment and demand for payment. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4-1-25(a), W.M.C., any total tax liability so assessed shall be due and payable immediately. 
(B)  Security for Payment: Enforcement of a jeopardy assessment and demand for payment may be stayed if the taxpayer gives security for payment that is satisfactory to the City Manager. 
(C)  Dispute of Jeopardy Assessment: If, in the opinion of the taxpayer, the jeopardy assessment is not for the correct amount of total tax liability, the taxpayer shall remit the total tax liability as assessed and submit a claim for refund to the City. 
(2032 2972 3371) 
4-1-33. - Levy, Distraint and Sale. 
(A)  The City Manager may sign and issue a warrant directed to any employee or agent of the City, or any sheriff of any county in Colorado, sometimes in this section collectively referred to as "agent," commanding the levy upon, and distraint and sale of all property and rights to property, except as exempted by this section of the taxpayer or on which a lien has attached for the payment of the total tax liability. 
(1)  Such warrant may be issued if the total tax liability is not remitted on or before 30 days from the date of a notice of assessment and no protest of such assessment has been timely filed. 
(2)  Such warrant may be issued if the total tax liability is not paid within 30 days from the final decision issued by the Finance Director after a hearing on a timely protested notice of assessment and no petition for appeal has been timely filed as provided by this title. 
(3)  Such warrant may be issued immediately if a jeopardy assessment and demand for payment has been issued. 
(B)  The City Manager may apply to the Municipal Court of the City for a warrant authorizing any employee or agent of the City to search for and distrain property located inside the City to enforce the collection of total tax liability. 
(1)  The City Manager shall demonstrate to the court that the premises to which entry is sought contains property that is subject to distraint and sale for total tax liability. 
(2)  If a jeopardy assessment and demand for payment has been issued, the city manager shall specify to the court why collection of the total tax liability will be jeopardized. 
(3)  The procedures to be followed in issuing and executing a warrant pursuant to this subsection shall comply with Rule 241 of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. 
(C)  Levy and Distraint: 
(1)  Levy and distraint may be made by serving a notice of levy or distraint warrant on any person in possession of, or obligated with respect to, property or rights to property subject to levy, including receivables, bank accounts, evidences of debt, and securities. 
(2)  Any person in possession of, or obligated with respect to, property or rights to property subject to levy upon which a levy has been made shall, upon demand of the City, surrender such property or rights to property or discharge such obligation to the City, except such part of the property or rights to property as is, at the time of such demand, subject to an attachment or execution under any judicial process. 
(3)  A person who fails or refuses to surrender any property or rights to property, subject to levy, upon demand by the City, is liable in person and estate to the City in a sum equal to the value of the property or rights to property not so surrendered, but not exceeding the amount of the total tax liability for the collection of which such levy has been made, together with costs of collection and interest on such sum at the rate determined pursuant to Section 4-1-22, W.M.C., from the date of such levy. Any amount, other than costs and additional interest, recovered under this paragraph shall be credited against the total tax liability for the collection of which this levy was made. 
(4)  A person in possession of, or obligated with respect to, property or rights to property subject to levy upon which a levy has been made who, upon demand by the City, surrenders the property or rights to property, or discharges the obligation to the City, or who pays a liability under paragraph (3) of this subsection is discharged from any obligation or liability of the delinquent taxpayer with respect to such property or rights to property arising from the surrender or payment. 
(5)  As used in this subsection, "person" includes an officer or employee of a corporation; an officer, member, manager, or employee of a limited liability company; an officer, employee, or elected official of the State of Colorado, its departments or institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof; or a member or employee of a partnership, who as such officer, member, manager, elected official, or employee, is under a duty to surrender the property or rights to property, or to discharge the obligation. 
(D)  Disposal of Distrained Property: 
(1)  The agent charged with the collection shall make or cause to be made an inventory of the property distrained, a copy of which, signed by the agent making such distraint, shall be served by leaving it with the owner or possessor of the property; or at the person's usual place of abode; or with any officer, manager, accountant, bookkeeper, general agent, registered agent, or agent for process; or finally by mailing by certified mail to the last known address of the owner or possessor, together with a copy of the warrant, a notice of the sum of the total tax liability and related expenses incurred to date, and notice of the time and place of sale. 
(2)  A notice of the time and place of the sale, together with a description of the property to be sold, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the county where distraint is made or, in lieu thereof and in the discretion of the Finance Director, the notice shall be posted at the courthouse of the county where distraint is made, and in at least two other places within such county. 
(3)  The time fixed for the sale shall not be less than ten days nor more than 60 days from the date of distraint. The sale may be postponed by the City or agent for no more than 90 days from the date originally fixed for the sale, except, however, if the property distrained consists of live animals, perishable goods, or is of other such nature that would, in the opinion of the Finance Director, make it dangerous or otherwise inadvisable to retain for said period, it may be immediately sold or disposed of by the agent. 
(4)  The property shall be sold at public auction for not less than a fair minimum price, and if the amount bid for the property is less than the fair minimum price so fixed, the property may be declared to be purchased by the City and the City shall file a release of lien thereof. If the property is purchased by the city, such property may be disposed of in the same manner as other city property. 
(5)  The property may be offered first by bulk bid, then subsequently for bid singularly or by lots, and the City or its agent may accept the higher bid. 
(6)  The property offered for sale shall be restored to the owner or possessor if, not less than 24 hours prior to the sale, the total tax liability, together with all costs of collection, are paid by the owner or possessor or other person holding an unperfected chattel mortgage or other right of possession. 
(7)  The City or its agent shall issue to each purchaser a certificate of sale, which shall be prima facie evidence of its right to make the sale and conclusive evidence of the regularity of its proceedings in making the sale, and shall transfer to the purchaser all right, title, and interest of the taxpayer in and to the property sold. 
(a)  When the property sold consists of certificates of stock, the certificate of sale shall be notice to any corporation, company, or association to record the transfer on its books and records. 
(b)  When the property sold consists of securities or other evidences of debt, the certificate of sale shall be good and valid evidence of title. 
(c)  When the property sold consists of a motor vehicle, the certificate of sale shall be notice, when received, to any public official charged with the registration of title to motor vehicles of such transfer and shall be authority to record the transfer in the same manner as if the certificate of title to such motor vehicle were transferred or assigned by the party holding the same, in lieu of any original or prior certificate, which shall be void, whether canceled or not. 
(8)  Any surplus remaining after satisfaction of the total tax liability, plus any costs of making the distraint and advertising the sale, may be distributed by the City first to other jurisdictions that have filed liens or claims of sales and use or personal property ad valorem taxes, and second to the owner, or such other person having a legal right thereto. 
(9)  The Finance Director shall submit a written account of the sale to the City Manager. 
(E)  Property Subject to Distraint; Exempt Property: Property of the taxpayer subject to distraint shall include the personal property of the taxpayer and the goods, stock in trade and business fixtures owned or used by any taxpayer, including those used under lease, installment sale, or other contract arrangement. Property exempt from distraint and sale shall include the personal property described as such in Subsection 4-1-28(d), W.M.C. 
(F)  Return of the Property: The taxpayer or any person who claims an ownership interest or right of possession in the distrained property may petition the City Manager, or the Municipal Court, if the property was seized pursuant to a warrant issued by the court, for the return of the property. 
(1)  The grounds for return of the property shall be that the person has a perfected interest in such property that is superior to the City's interest or that the property is exempt from the City's lien. 
(2)  The factfinder shall receive evidence on any issue of fact necessary to the decision of the petition. If the factfinder determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, in favor of the taxpayer or other petitioner, the property shall be returned. 
(G)  Notice of Intent to Levy: Every notice of assessment issued by the Finance Director shall contain notice of the City's right to enforce collection of the sum demanded by levy, distraint and sale pursuant to this section. 
(2032 2972 3371 3538 3544) 
4-1-34. - Status of Tax Due in Bankruptcy and Receivership. 
    Whenever the business or property of any taxpayer is subject to receivership, bankruptcy or assignment for the benefit of creditors, or distrained for property taxes, the total tax liability shall remain a claim and lien against the property of the taxpayer to which a lien has attached pursuant to this chapter. No sheriff, receiver, assignee or other officer shall sell the property of any such taxpayer under process or order of any court without first ascertaining from the finance director the amount of the total tax liability. The officer shall remit any total tax liability before making payment to any judgment creditor or other claimants. 
(2032 2972 3371) 
4-1-35. - Violations; Summons and Complaint; Penalty. 
(A)  It shall be a violation of this title to fail to perform any applicable affirmative duty specified in this title, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The failure of any person engaged in business in the City to obtain a license; 
(2)  The failure of any taxpayer to file a timely return or to make timely payment of any total tax liability; 
(3)  The failure of any resident individual or business to comply with the registration requirements for automotive vehicles; 
(4)  The making of any false or fraudulent statement by any person in any return, claim for refund, or hearing; or 
(5)  The evasion of collection of any tax by any person or the aiding or abetting of any other person in an attempt to evade the timely payment of tax due. 
(B)  The Finance Director may direct the issuance of a complaint and summons to appear before the Municipal Court of the City to any person who may be in violation of this title or of the rules and regulations promulgated by the Finance Director to enforce this title. 
(C)  Violations of this title are criminal offenses and shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment or both pursuant to Title VI of this Code. Each and every 24-hour continuation of any violation shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(2032 3371) 
4-1-36. - Statute of Limitations. 
    Unless the limitation period has been extended as provided in this section, the statute of limitations for provisions contained in this title shall be as follows: 
(A)  Refunds: 
(1)  No refund of tax paid to a retailer by a purchaser shall be issued to such purchaser unless a claim for refund is submitted to the City by the purchaser on or before 60 days from the date of such purchase. 
(2)  No refund of overpayment from returns shall be issued unless a notice of overpayment is submitted to the City on or before 30 days after the date of such notice of overpayment. 
(3)  No other refund shall be issued unless a claim for refund is filed on or before three years after the date such overpayment was paid to the city. 
(B)  Assessments: Except as provided in this section and unless such period is extended, the tax levied by this title and the penalty and interest applicable thereto, other than interest accruing thereafter, shall be assessed within three years after the return is filed, and no notice of lien shall be filed, or distraint warrant issued, or suit for collection instituted, or any other action to collect the same commenced, after the expiration of such period unless the finance director issues a notice of assessment within such period. 
(1)  For purposes of this section, a return shall include a construction equipment declaration, an initial use tax return, and any other form prescribed by the Finance Director for reporting a total tax liability. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, a return filed before the last day prescribed by law or by regulation promulgated pursuant to this title for the filing thereof shall be considered as filed on such last day. 
(3)  When a taxpayer fails or refuses to file a return, or files a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, the total tax liability may be assessed and collected at any time. 
(C)  Protests: No protest of a notice of assessment or denial of a claim for refund shall be valid if submitted to the Finance Director in other than written form or after the period allowed in this chapter. 
(D)  Except as otherwise provided in this title, a complaint or action for a violation of this title shall be instituted within three years after the alleged violation. 
(E)  Except for the period described in subsections (C) and (D) of this section, the period of limitation may be extended before its expiration. 
(1)  The taxpayer and the Finance Director may agree in writing to extend the period. 
(2)  If the City provides written notice to the taxpayer prior to the expiration of the period of limitation that the latter's records will be audited pursuant to this chapter, such period of limitation shall be extended for the audit period until 30 days after the date of the notice of assessment or notice of overpayment issued as a result of such audit. "Audit period" includes all reporting periods with due dates that fall within the 36-month period preceding the date of the notice of audit, or, if a city building permit is required, the period between the issuance of such building permit and the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. 
(F)  To the extent the periods described in this section have not expired or been extended, the finance director may issue assessments and refund taxes paid, notwithstanding any previous audit, investigation, assessment, or refund pertaining to the same. 
(2032 3371 3544 3633) 
4-1-37. - Legislative Intent. 
    Any changes to the City's tax policy resulting in a net revenue increase to the City shall be subject to voter approval in accordance with the provisions of Colorado Constitution Article X, Section 20. 
(2972) 
CHAPTER 2. - SALES AND USE TAX 

4-2-1. - Legislative Intent. 
    H.B. 1007, enacted by the Fifty-fifth Colorado General Assembly and approved by the Governor on June 6, 1985, sets forth procedures for the collection of sales and use taxes by home-rule cities. This title contains provisions that are consistent with some of those set forth in H.B. 1007. The City Council finds that Article XX of the Colorado Constitution grants plenary power to home-rule cities to levy and collect taxes within the City limits. The City Council does not endorse restrictions on the taxing power of home-rule cities. Thus, it is the intent of the City Council in enacting provisions consistent with H.B. 1007 to assist the business community, but not in any way to prejudice the City's right to fully exercise its constitutional authority to levy and collect taxes within its boundaries. 
(2032) 
4-2-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Auction shall mean any sale where tangible personal property is sold by an auctioneer who is either the agent for the owner of such property or is, in fact, the owner thereof. 
    Automotive vehicle shall mean any vehicle or device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, or any device used or designed for aviation or flight in the air. Automotive vehicle includes, but is not limited to, motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers, or mobile homes. Automotive vehicle shall not include devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Carrier access services shall mean the services furnished by a local exchange company to its customers who provide telecommunications services which allow them to provide such telecommunications services. 
    Coin-operated device shall mean any device operated by coins or currency or any substitute therefor. 
    Commercial packaging materials shall mean containers, labels, and/or cases, that become part of the finished product to the purchaser, used by or sold to a person engaged in manufacturing, compounding, wholesaling, jobbing, retailing, packaging, distributing or bottling for sale, profit or use, and is not returnable to said person for reuse. Commercial packaging materials does not include commercial shipping materials. 
    Commercial shipping materials shall mean materials that do not become part of the finished product to the purchaser which are used exclusively in the shipping process. Commercial Shipping Materials include but are not limited to containers, labels, pallets, banding material and fasteners, shipping cases, shrink wrap, bubble wrap or other forms of binding, padding or protection. 
    Construction equipment shall mean any equipment, including mobile machinery and mobile equipment, which is used to erect, install, alter, demolish, repair, remodel, or otherwise make improvements to any real property, building, structure or infrastructure. 
    Construction materials shall mean tangible personal property that, when combined with other tangible personal property, loses its identity to become an integral and inseparable part of a completed structure or project including public and private improvements. Construction materials include, but are not limited to, such things as: asphalt, bricks, builders' hardware, caulking material, cement, concrete, conduit, electric wiring and connections, fireplace inserts, electrical heating and cooling equipment, flooring, glass, gravel, insulation, lath, lead, lime, lumber, macadam, millwork, mortar, oil, paint, piping, pipe valves and pipe fittings, plaster, plumbing fixtures, putty, reinforcing mesh, road base, roofing, sand, sanitary sewer pipe, sheet metal, site lighting, steel, stone, stucco, tile, trees, shrubs and other landscaping materials, wall board, wall coping, wall paper, weather stripping, wire netting and screen, water mains and meters, and wood preserver. The above materials, when used for forms, or other items that do not remain as an integral or inseparable part of a completed structure or project, are not construction materials. 
    Consumer shall mean any person in the City who purchases, uses, stores, distributes or otherwise consumes tangible personal property or taxable services, purchased from sources inside or outside the City. 
    Contractor shall mean any person who shall build, construct, reconstruct, alter, expand, modify, or improve any building, dwelling, structure, infrastructure, or other improvement to real property for another party pursuant to an agreement. For purposes of this definition, Contractor also includes subcontractor. 
    Digital product shall mean an electronic product including, but not limited to: 
(1)  "Digital images" which means works that include, but are not limited to, the following that are generally recognized in the ordinary and usual sense as "photographs," "logos," "cartoons," or "drawings," 
(2)  "Digital audio-visual works" which means a series of related images which, when shown in succession, impart an impression of motion, together with accompanying sounds, if any, 
(3)  "Digital audio works" which means works that result from the fixation of a series of musical, spoken, or other sounds, including ringtones. For purposes of the definition of "digital audio works," "ringtones" means digitized sound files that are downloaded onto a device and that may be used to alert the customer with respect to a communication, and 
(4)  "Digital books" which means works that are generally recognized in the ordinary and usual sense as "books". 
    Engaged in business in the City shall mean performing or providing services or selling, leasing, renting, delivering or installing tangible personal property for storage, use or consumption within the City. Engaged in business in the City includes, but is not limited to, any one of the following activities by a person: 
(1)  Directly, indirectly, or by a subsidiary maintains a building, store, office, salesroom, warehouse, or other place of business within the taxing jurisdiction; 
(2)  Sends one or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons into the taxing jurisdiction to solicit business or to install, assemble, repair, service, or assist in the use of its products, or for demonstration or other reasons; 
(3)  Maintains one or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons on duty at a location within the taxing jurisdiction; 
(4)  Owns, leases, rents or otherwise exercises control over real or personal property within the taxing jurisdiction; or 
(5)  Makes more than one delivery into the taxing jurisdiction within a 12-month period by any means other than common carrier. 
    Farm closeout sale shall mean full and final disposition of all tangible personal property previously used by a farmer or rancher in farming or ranching operations which are being abandoned. 
    Farm equipment shall mean any farm tractor, as defined in Section 42-1-102(33), C.R.S., any implement of husbandry, as defined in Section 42-1-102(44), C.R.S., and irrigation equipment having a per unit purchase price of at least $1,000.00. Farm Equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, attachments and bailing wire, binders twine and surface wrap used primarily and directly in any farm operation. Farm Equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, parts that are used in the repair or maintenance of the Farm Equipment described in this Paragraph, all shipping pallets, crates, or aids paid for by a farm operation, and aircraft designed or adapted to undertake agricultural applications. Farm Equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, dairy equipment. Except for shipping pallets, crates or aids used in the transfer or shipping of agricultural products, Farm Equipment does not include: 
(1)  Vehicles subject to the registration requirements of Section 42-3-103, C.R.S., regardless of the purpose for which such vehicles are used; 
(2)  Machinery, equipment, materials, and supplies used in a manner that is incidental to a farm operation; 
(3)  Maintenance and janitorial equipment and supplies; and 
(4)  Tangible personal property used in any activity other than farming, such as office equipment and supplies and equipment and supplies used in the sale or distribution of farm products, research, or transportation. 
    Farm operation shall mean the production of any of the following products for profit, including, but not limited to, a business that hires out to produce or harvest such products; 
(1)  Agricultural, viticultural, fruit, and vegetable products; 
(2)  Livestock; 
(3)  Milk; 
(4)  Honey; and 
(5)  Poultry and eggs. 
    Food for home consumption shall mean food for domestic home consumption as defined in 7 U.S.C. Sec. 2012(k)(2014), as amended, for purposes of the supplemental nutrition assistance program, or any successor program, as defined in 7 U.S.C. Sec. 2012(t), as amended; except that "food" does not include carbonated water marketed in containers; chewing gum; seeds and plants to grow food; prepared salads and salad bars; packaged and unpackaged cold sandwiches; deli trays; and hot or cold beverages served in unsealed containers or cups that are vended by or through machines or non-coin-operated coin collecting food and snack devices on behalf of a vendor. 
    Garage sales shall mean sales of tangible personal property, except automotive vehicles, occurring at the residence of the seller, where the property to be sold was originally purchased for use by members of the household where such sale is being conducted. The term includes, but is not limited to, yard sales, estate sales, and block sales. 
    Gross sales shall mean the total amount received in money, credit, property or other consideration valued in money for all sales, leases, or rentals of tangible personal property or services. 
    Manufacturing shall mean the operation or performance of an integrated series of operations which places a product, article, substance, commodity, or other tangible personal property in a form, composition or character different from that in which it was acquired whether for sale or for use by a manufacturer. The change in form, composition or character must result in a different product having a distinctive name, character or use from the raw or prepared materials. 
    Mini-storage or mini-warehouse shall mean a building or group of buildings containing individual storage units rented or leased to individuals for the storage of merchandise, commodities or private property. 
    Mobile machinery and self-propelled construction equipment shall mean those vehicles, self-propelled or otherwise, which are not designed primarily for the transportation of persons or cargo over the public highways, and those motor vehicles which may have originally been designed for the transportation of persons or cargo over the public highways, and those motor vehicles which may have originally been designed for the transportation of persons or cargo but which have been redesigned or modified by the mounting thereon of special equipment or machinery, and which may be only incidentally operated or moved over the public highways. This definition includes but is not limited to wheeled vehicles commonly used in the construction, maintenance, and repair of roadways, the drilling of wells, and the digging of ditches. 
    Motor fuel shall mean gasoline, casing head or natural gasoline, benzoyl, benzene and naphtha, gasohol and any other liquid prepared, advertised, offered for sale, sold for use or used or commercially usable in internal combustion engines for the generation of power for the propulsion of motor vehicles upon the public highways. The term does not include fuel used for the propulsion or drawing of aircraft or railroad cars or railroad locomotives. 
    Municipality shall mean any municipal corporation or similar form of local government, including any city, town, and city and county, whether organized pursuant to charter, constitution or statute, in Colorado or another state, except counties, school districts, or special districts, and the City of Westminster. 
    Newspaper shall mean a publication, printed on newsprint, intended for general circulation, and published regularly at short intervals, containing information and editorials on current events and news of general interest. The term "newspaper" does not include: magazines, trade publications or journals, credit bulletins, advertising inserts, circulars, directories, maps, racing programs, reprints, newspaper clipping and mailing services or listings, publications that include an updating or revision service, or books or pocket editions of books. 
    Preprinted newspaper supplements shall mean inserts, attachments or supplements circulated in newspapers that: 
(1)  Are primarily devoted to advertising; and 
(2)  The distribution, insertion, or attachment of which is commonly paid for by the advertiser. 
    Prescription drugs for animals shall mean a drug which, prior to being dispensed or delivered, is required by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. Sect. 301, et. seq., as amended, to state at a minimum the symbol "Rx only", and is dispensed in accordance with any order in writing, dated and signed by a licensed veterinarian specifying the animal for which the medicine or drug is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. 
    Prescription drugs for humans shall mean a drug which, prior to being dispensed or delivered, is required by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. Sec. 301, et seq., as amended, to state, at a minimum, the symbol "Rx only," and is dispensed in accordance with any written or electronic order, dated and signed, by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, or given orally by a practitioner and immediately reduced to writing by the pharmacist, assistant pharmacist, or pharmacy intern, specifying the name and any required information of the patient for whom the medicine, drug or poison is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. 
    Price or purchase price shall mean: 
(1)  The aggregate value measured in currency paid or delivered or promised to be paid or delivered in consummation of a sale, without any discount from the price on account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, and exclusive of any direct tax imposed by the federal government or by this article, and, in the case of all retail sales involving the exchange of property, also exclusive of the fair market value of the property exchanged at the same time and place of the exchange, if: 
(a)  Such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business; or 
(b)  Such exchanged property is a vehicle, and is exchanged for another vehicle, and both vehicles are subject to licensing, registration, or certification under the laws of this state, including, but not limited to, vehicles operating upon public highways, off-highway recreation vehicles, watercraft, and aircraft. Any money or other consideration paid over and above the value of the exchanged property is subject to tax. 
(2)  "Price" or "purchase price" shall include: 
(a)  The amount of money received or due in cash and credits. 
(b)  Property at fair market value taken in exchange but not for resale in the usual course of the retailer's business. 
(c)  Any consideration valued in money, whereby the manufacturer or someone else reimburses the retailer for part of the purchase price and other media of exchange. 
(d)  The total price charged on credit sales, including finance charges that are not separately stated at the time of sale. An amount charged as interest on the unpaid balance of the purchase price is not part of the purchase price unless the amount added to the purchase price is included in the principal amount of a promissory note; except the interest or carrying charge set out separately from the unpaid balance of the purchase price on the face of the note is not part of the purchase price. An amount charged for insurance on the property sold and separately stated is not part of the purchase price. 
(e)  Installation, applying, remodeling or repairing the property, delivery and wheeling-in charges included in the purchase price and not separately stated. 
(f)  Transportation and other charges to effect delivery of tangible personal property to the purchaser. 
(g)  Indirect federal manufacturers' excise taxes, such as taxes on automobiles, tires and floor stock. 
(h)  The gross purchase price of articles sold after manufacturing or after having been made to order, including the gross value of all the materials used, labor and service performed and the profit thereon. 
(3)  "Price" or "purchase price" shall not include: 
(a)  Any sales or use tax imposed by the State of Colorado or by any political subdivision thereof. 
(b)  The fair market value of property exchanged if such property is to be sold thereafter in the retailer's usual course of business. This is not limited to exchanges in Colorado. Out-of-state trade-ins are an allowable adjustment to the purchase price. 
(c)  Discounts from the original price, if such discount and the corresponding decrease in sales tax due is actually passed on to the purchaser, and the seller is not reimbursed for the discount by the manufacturer or someone else. An anticipated discount to be allowed for payment on or before a given date is not an allowable adjustment to the price in reporting gross sales. 
    Private communications services shall mean telecommunications services furnished to a subscriber, which entitles the subscriber to exclusive or priority use of any communication channel or groups of channels, or to the exclusive or priority use of any interstate inter-communications system for the subscriber's stations. 
    Prosthetic devices for humans shall mean any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for human use which replaces a body part or aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed, manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular patient; and is prescribed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts. Prosthetic devices include, but are not limited to, prescribed auditory, ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental, or orthopedic devices or appliances, and oxygen concentrator's, and oxygen with related accessories. 
    Purchase or sale shall mean: 
(1)  The acquisition for any consideration by any person of tangible personal property, other taxable products or taxable services that are purchased, leased, rented, sold, used, stored, distributed, or consumed. These terms include capital leases, installment and credit sales, and property and services acquired by: 
(a)  Transfer, either conditionally or absolutely, of title or possession or both to tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services; 
(b)  A lease, lease-purchase agreement, rental or grant of a license, including royalty agreements, to use tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services. The utilization of coin-operated devices, except coin-operated telephones, which do not vend articles of tangible personal property shall be considered short-term rentals of tangible personal property. 
(c)  Performance of taxable services; or 
(d)  Barter or exchange for other tangible personal property, other taxable products, or services. 
(2)  The terms "purchase" and "sale" do not include: 
(a)  A division of partnership assets among the partners according to their interests in the partnership; 
(b)  The transfer of assets of shareholders in the formation or dissolution of professional corporations, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(c)  The dissolution and the pro rata distribution of the corporation's assets to its stockholders, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(d)  A transfer of a partnership or limited liability company interest; 
(e)  The transfer of assets to a commencing or existing partnership or limited liability company, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets ; 
(f)  The repossession of personal property by a chattel mortgage holder or foreclosure by a lienholder; 
(g)  The transfer of assets from a parent company to a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least 80 percent by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the subsidiary company; 
(h)  The transfer of assets from a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least 80 percent by the parent company to a parent company or to another subsidiary which is owned at least 80 percent by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the parent company or the subsidiary which received the assets; 
(i)  The transfer of assets between parent and closely held subsidiary companies, or between subsidiary companies closely held by the same parent company, or between companies which are owned by the same shareholders in identical percentage of stock ownership amounts, computed on a share-by-share basis, when a tax imposed by this title was paid by the transferor company at the time it acquired such assets, except to the extent that there is an increase in the fair market value of such assets resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating, or physical changing of the assets by the transferor company. To such an extent, any transfer referred to in this paragraph (i) shall constitute a sale. For the purposes of this paragraph (i), a closely held subsidiary company is one in which the parent company owns stock possessing at least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote and owns at least 80 percent of the total number of shares of all other classes of stock. 
    Qualified hospital organization shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  An organization that is exempt from federal income tax under Section 115 or Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, but only if the organization holds a license to operate a "general hospital" for people issued pursuant to Sections 25-3-101 and 25-3-102, C.R.S. (2012), as amended, including any successor provisions to those sections, and operates a general hospital in the City; 
(2)  A corporation or trust that is exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and that owns or employs personal property or improvements that are used in the operations of one or more organizations described in paragraph (1) of this definition; and either 
(a)  Directly controls, or is controlled by, one or more organizations described in paragraph (1) of this definition; or 
(b)  Is controlled by a management organization as defined in paragraph (3) of this definition in common with one or more organizations described in paragraph (1) of this definition; or 
(c)  Owns a hospital that is licensed to operate as a "general hospital" for people in the city pursuant to Sections 25-3-101 and 25-3-102, C.R.S. (2012), as amended, including any successor provisions to those sections, and that is operated by an organization described in paragraph (1) of this definition. 
(3)  An organization that is exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and a principal function of which is to manage the property or operations, or both, of one or more organizations described in paragraphs (1) or (2) of this definition; and 
(4)  A partnership, limited partnership, limited liability limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability company, or joint venture if all of the partners, members, joint venturers or other participants in such partnership, limited partnership, limited liability limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability company or joint venture are organizations described in paragraphs (1), (2) or (3) of this definition. 
    Resident shall mean a person who resides or maintains one or more places of business within the City, regardless of whether that person also resides or maintains a place of business outside of the City. 
    Retail sales shall mean all sales except wholesale sales. 
    Retailer shall mean any person selling, leasing or renting, or granting a license to use tangible personal property or services at retail. Retailer shall include, but is not limited to, any: 
(1)  Auctioneer; 
(2)  Salesperson, representative, peddler or canvasser who makes sales as a direct or indirect agent of, or obtains such property or services sold from, a dealer, distributor, supervisor or employer; 
(3)  Charitable organization or governmental entity which makes sales of tangible personal property to the public, notwithstanding the fact that the merchandise sold may have been acquired by gift or donation, or that the proceeds are to be used for charitable or governmental purposes. 
(4)  Retailer-contractor, when acting in the capacity of a seller of building supplies, construction materials, and other tangible personal property. 
    Retailer-contractor shall mean a contractor who is also a retailer of building supplies, construction materials, or other tangible personal property, and purchases, manufactures, or fabricates such property for sale (which may include installation), repair work, time and materials jobs, and/or lump sum contracts. 
    Return, for purposes of this chapter, shall include any definition of "return" included in other chapters of this title. 
    Sales tax shall mean the tax that is collected or required to be collected and remitted by a retailer on sales taxed under this chapter. 
    Software program shall mean a sequence of instructions that can be measured, interpreted and executed by an electronic device (e.g. a computer, tablets, smart phones) regardless of the means by which it is accessed or the medium of conveyance. Software program includes: 
(1)  Custom software program, which is a software program prepared to the special order or specifications of a single customer; 
(2)  Pre-written software program, which is a software program prepared for sale or license to multiple users, and not to the special order or specifications of a single customer. Pre-written software is commonly referred to as "canned," "off-the-shelf ("COTS")," "mass produced" or "standardized;" 
(3)  Modified software, which means pre-written software that is altered or enhanced by someone other than the purchaser to create a program for a particular user; and 
(4)  The generic term "software," "software application," as well as "updates," "upgrades," "patches," "user exits," and any items which add or extend functionality to existing software programs. 
    Special fuel shall mean kerosene oil, kerosene distillate, diesel fuel, all liquefied petroleum gases, and all combustible gases and liquids for use in the generation of power for propulsion of motor vehicles upon the public highways. The term does not include fuel used for the propulsion or drawing of aircraft, railroad cars or railroad locomotives. 
    Storage shall mean any keeping or retention of, or exercise dominion or control over, or possession of, for any length of time, tangible personal property not while in transit but on a stand still basis for future use when leased, rented or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the City from any person or vendor. 
    Storage facility shall mean any indoor or outdoor area, structure, warehouse or unit, whether mobile or immobile, that is ordinarily used to store tangible personal property. Storage facility shall not include kennels, lockers, mobile home pads, safe deposit boxes, and reservoirs . 
    Tangible personal property shall mean personal property that can be one or more of the following: seen, weighed, measured, felt, touched, stored, transported, exchanged, or that is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. 
    Tax shall mean the use tax due from a consumer or the sales tax due from a retailer or the sum of both due from a retailer who also consumes. 
    Telecommunications service shall mean the service of which the object is the transmission of any two- way interactive electronic or electromagnetic communications, including, but not limited to, voice, image, data and any other information, by the use of any means, but not limited to wire, cable, fiber optical cable, microwave, radio wave, Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), or any combination of such media, including any form of mobile two-way communication. 
    Television and entertainment services shall mean audio or visual content that can be transmitted electronically by any means, for which a charge is imposed. 
    Use shall mean the exercise, for any length of time by any person within the City of any right, power or dominion over tangible personal property or services when rented, leased or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the City from any person or vendor or used in the performance of a contract in the City whether such tangible personal property is owned or not owned by the taxpayer. Use also includes the withdrawal of items from inventory for consumption. 
    Use tax shall mean the tax paid or required to be paid by a consumer for using, storing, distributing or otherwise consuming tangible personal property or taxable services inside the City. 
    Wholesale sales shall mean sales by wholesalers to retailers, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers for resale and does not include a sale by wholesalers to users or consumers not for resale; latter types of sales shall be deemed to be retail sales and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Wholesaler shall mean any person doing an organized wholesale or jobbing business and selling to retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other Wholesalers, for the purpose of resale, and not for storage, use, consumption, or distribution. 
(2032 2165 2972 3371 3544 3626; Ord. No. 3889, § 3, 6-26-2017 ) 
4-2-3. - Rate; Imposition and Collection; Distribution. 
(A)  Sales Tax: There is hereby levied a tax or excise upon all sales of tangible personal property and services specified in Section 4-2-5, W.M.C. For sales transacted on or after January 1, 2004, but prior to January 1, 2033, the rate levied shall be three and eighty-five hundredths percent. Unless otherwise lawfully provided, the three and eighty-five hundredths percent tax rate shall be reduced to three and six-tenths percent on January 1, 2033. 
(B)  Use Tax: There is hereby levied a tax or excise upon the privilege of using, storing, distributing, or otherwise consuming in the City any article of tangible personal property or taxable services purchased, leased or rented from sources inside or outside the City on which the City sales tax has not been paid. For sales transacted on or after January 1, 2004, but prior to January 1, 2033, the rate levied shall be three and eighty-five hundredths percent. Unless otherwise lawfully provided, the three and eighty-five hundredths percent tax rate shall be reduced to three and six-tenths percent on January 1, 2033. 
(C)  Imposition and Collection: The tax specified in this section is imposed upon the purchaser. Any seller shall collect the tax and remit it to the City pursuant to Section 4-2-4, W.M.C. 
(D)  Distribution: Except as specified in this subsection, the City shall distribute all sales and use tax receipts first for costs of administration and collection of sales and use tax, next for the fulfillment of any sales and use tax bond covenants, and finally for any lawful purposes of the City. 
(1)  Collection at three and eighty-five hundredths percent rate: 
(a)  The City shall distribute six and forty-nine hundredths percent of all sales and use tax collected at the rate of three and eighty-five hundredths percent to the open space fund for the purpose of funding the open space acquisition program and development and enhancement of recreational facilities with up to one-half of such revenues to be used for the development of additional park land and open space, trail development, enhancement of existing parks and development and enhancement of recreational facilities as approved by Westminster voters on November 5, 1996. 
(b)  The City shall distribute 15.58 percent of all sales and use tax collected at the rate of three and eighty-five hundredths percent to improve and enhance the safety and security of Westminster residents as approved by Westminster voters on November 4, 2003. 
(2)  Collection at three and six-tenths percent rate: The City shall distribute 16.67 percent of all sales and use tax collected at the rate of three and six-tenths percent to improve and enhance the safety and security of Westminster residents as approved by Westminster voters on November 4, 2003. 
(3)  Collection at three and one-quarter percent rate: The City shall distribute seven and sixty-nine hundredths percent of all sales and use tax collected at the rate of three and one-quarter percent to the open space fund for the purpose of funding the open space acquisition program and development and enhancement of recreational facilities with up to one-half of such revenues to be used for the development of additional park land and open space, trail development, enhancement of existing parks and development and enhancement of recreational facilities as approved by Westminster voters on November 5, 1996. 
(E)  The tax imposed in this section shall continue to be levied and collected until amended or repealed by ordinance. 
(F)  The tax imposed in this chapter shall be in addition to all other taxes imposed by law. 
(2032 2379 2476 3071 3371 3633) 
4-2-4. - Tax Schedule. 
(A)  In order to avoid fractions of pennies, the tax payable by the purchaser or consumer to the retailer shall be computed by the retailer in accordance with a schedule or system approved by the Finance Director. The schedule or system shall be designed so that no tax levied by this chapter is charged on any purchase of $0.12 or less. However, the use of a schedule in collecting taxes from purchasers shall not relieve the retailer from liability for payment of the full amount of the tax levied in Section 4-2-3, W.M.C., above, on all of the taxable sales or services. 
(B)  Use of a schedule or system approved by the Finance Director shall not result in computation of a tax liability that is less than the amount that equals taxable sales multiplied by the specified rate. 
(2032 2476 3071) 
4-2-5. - Transactions and Items Subject to Tax. 
(A)  The tax levied by Subsection 4-2-3(A), W.M.C., shall apply to the price of the following: 
(1)  All tangible personal property that is sold, leased or rented, whether or not such property has been included in a previous taxable transaction, unless specifically exempt. 
(2)  Telecommunications service, except carrier access services and interstate private communications services, and except as otherwise provided by this section for mobile communication services, for all international, interstate and intrastate telecommunications service originating from or received on telecommunication equipment in the City, if the charge for the service is billed to an apparatus, telephone or account in this City, to a customer location in this City, or to a person residing in this City without regard to where the bill for such services is actually received. "Telecommunications services" do not include separately stated non-transmission services which constitute computer processing applications used to act on the information to be transmitted. 
(a)  Mobile telecommunications service shall be subject to the tax imposed by this chapter only if the service is provided by a home service provider to a customer whose place of primary use is within the City and the service originates within the City; further, the tax shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of the Act. 
(b)  As used in this subsection, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(i)  "Act" means the federal "Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act," 4 U.S.C. Sections 116 to 126, as amended. 
(ii)  "Customer" means customer as defined in Section 124(2) of the Act. 
(iii)  "Home service provider" means home service provider as defined in Section 124(5) of the Act. 
(iv)  "Mobile telecommunications service" means mobile telecommunications service as defined in Section 124(7) of the Act. 
(v)  "Place of primary use" means the place of primary use as defined in Section 124(8) of the Act. 
(c)  The Finance Director may require payment of the tax on any other basis permitted by this chapter when a customer fails to provide its place of primary use or the Act is determined to be inapplicable to the tax imposed by this chapter on mobile telecommunications services. 
(3)  Installation in the City of equipment required to receive or transmit telecommunication service. 
(4)  Gas, electricity and steam furnished for domestic, commercial or industrial consumption. 
(5)  Television and entertainment services, including charges for service, installation, connection, or any similar charge. 
(6)  Services of an operator when furnished with the lease or rental of tangible personal property, if such services are not separately stated. 
(7)  Rentals of storage space within the City, except for leases or rentals of storage space in conjunction with the lease of an area at which a business is conducted. 
(8)  Software programs. 
(9)  Digital products. 
(B)  The tax levied by Subsection 4-2-3(b), W.M.C., shall apply to the price of the following: 
(1)  Non-exempt tangible personal property purchased for use without payment of the sales tax and used, stored, or consumed inside the City, either personally or in conjunction with the rendering of a service. 
(2)  Tangible personal property purchased at wholesale or component parts purchased for manufacture that are subsequently used by the taxpayer, either personally or in the business. 
(3)  Taxable services purchased without payment of the sales tax. 
(4)  Automotive vehicles required to be registered at an address inside the City on which municipal sales tax has not been paid. The County Clerk of the county in which the registration occurs is authorized to collect such tax for the City prior to or at the time of registration. 
(a)  The determination of vehicle registration requirements for individuals shall be the same as for the determination of residency for voter registration purposes. 
(b)  The determination of vehicle registration requirements for automotive vehicles that are owned by a business and operated primarily for business purposes shall be based on the address from which such motor vehicles are principally operated and maintained. 
(2032 2972; Ord. No. 3889, § 4, 6-26-2017 ) 
4-2-6. - Exemptions From Sales Tax. 
(A)  The tax levied by Subsection 4-2-3(a), W.M.C., shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Automotive vehicles sold to nonresidents of the City for registration outside the City. 
(2)  Tangible personal property when both of the following conditions exist: 
(a)  The sales are to a person who resides or is located outside the City; and, 
(b)  The articles purchased are delivered to purchaser person outside the City by common carrier or by the conveyance of the seller or by mail, and such articles delivered are used outside the City. 
(3)  Prosthetic devices for humans, prescription drugs for humans, prescription drugs for animals, and items that are dispensed pursuant to a written order of a licensed practitioner of the healing arts. 
(4)  Cigarettes. 
(5)  All direct sales, except for construction materials used in a project for which a city building permit is required, to charitable organizations in the conduct of their regular exempt organizational functions and activities, when billed to and paid for by the charitable organization. 
(6)  All direct sales, except for construction materials used in a project for which a city building permit is required, to the United States Government, the State of Colorado, its departments or institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof in their governmental capacities only, when billed to and paid for by the governmental entity. 
(7)  Construction materials used in construction projects undertaken and managed directly by the City. 
(8)  All sales that the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States, or of the State of Colorado. 
(9)  Tangible personal property sold to a public utility company or railroad doing business both inside and outside the City for use in its business operations outside the City, even though delivery thereof is made inside the City. 
(10)  Motor fuel upon which there has been accrued or paid either the gasoline tax or special fuel tax required by Article 27 of Title 39, C.R.S., and that is not subject to refund. 
(11)  Farm equipment. 
(12)  Neat cattle, sheep, lambs, swine and goats; mares and stallions for breeding purposes. 
(13)  Feed for livestock or poultry, seeds, and orchard trees. 
(14)  Straw and other bedding for use in the care of livestock. 
(15)  Farm closeout sales. 
(16)  All wholesale sales to licensed wholesalers, except sales of property used or consumed by the wholesaler. 
(17)  Tangible personal property sold to a person engaged in manufacturing or processing for sale when the product being manufactured or processed is transformed in fact by the addition of the property, and such property becomes a constituent part of the finished product. 
(18)  Commercial packaging materials, but not commercial shipping materials. 
(19)  Napkins, straws or eating utensils sold to a retailer when the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The property is used in the consumption of food purchased; 
(b)  The cost of the property is included in the price of an item that is sold separately, rather than included in the price of a service; and 
(c)  The property is not returnable or intended for reuse. 
(20)  Newsprint and printer's ink for use by publishers, newspapers and commercial printers. 
(21)  Newspapers, but not including preprinted newspaper supplements. 
(22)  Tangible personal property sold for rental or leasing inventory, including, but not limited to, coin-operated devices, provided that such property is not otherwise used except for customer demonstration or display. 
(23)  Labor sold with tangible personal property, if such labor is stated separately on the invoice from the tangible personal property sold; except that, manufacturing or fabricating or other processing labor is never exempt. 
(24)  Construction materials, if the purchaser of such materials presents to the retailer a building permit, or other documentation acceptable to the City, that evidences that a use tax on such materials has been paid or is required to be paid to the City or a municipality. 
(25)  Tangible personal property sold through coin-operated devices for a price of $0.15 or less. 
(26)  Food for home consumption purchased with federal food stamps or with funds provided by the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children, 42 U.S.C. Section 1786, from retailers who qualify as follows: 
(a)  Retail food stores that primarily sell food for home preparation and consumption and in which one or more staple food items make up more than 50 percent of eligible food sales. These stores shall include: full-line grocery stores; convenience stores; stores that sell meat, poultry, or fish; stands that sell agricultural commodities; farmers' markets; milk routes; bread routes; day-old bread stores; bakeries that sell bread; and nonprofit cooperative food-purchasing ventures that are properly licensed to sell food in the state and locality in which they are operating. 
(b)  Firms whose primary business is not the sale of food for home preparation and consumption, but who have recognized grocery departments in which staple foods make up more than 50 percent of eligible food sales. 
(27)  Meals purchased with federal food stamps or with funds provided by the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children, 42 U.S.C. Section 1786, in the following instances: 
(a)  The meals are prepared for and served to residents of federally subsidized housing for the elderly; or are prepared for and served to persons who are 60 years of age or over or who receive supplemental security income benefits, and their spouses, in senior citizens' centers, apartment buildings occupied primarily by such persons, public or private nonprofit establishments (eating or otherwise) that contract with the appropriate agency of the state to offer meals for such persons at concessional prices; 
(b)  The meals are prepared for and delivered to persons 60 years of age or over and persons who are physically or mentally handicapped or otherwise so disabled that they are unable adequately to prepare all of their meals, when such meals are prepared for and delivered to them (and their spouses) at their home by a public or private nonprofit organization or by a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate state agency to perform such services at concessional prices; 
(c)  The meals are prepared for and served to narcotics addicts or alcoholics as part of drug addiction or alcoholic treatment and rehabilitation programs; 
(d)  The meals are prepared for and served to disabled or blind recipients of federal financial benefits under the Social Security Act who are residents in a public or private nonprofit group living arrangement that is certified for no more than 16 residents by the appropriate state agency or agencies under regulations issued under the Social Security Act; or 
(e)  The meals are prepared for and served to women and children temporarily residing in public or private nonprofit shelters for battered women and children. 
(28)  Carrier access services. 
(29)  Private communications services. 
(30)  Custom software programs, and labor sold to modify pre-written software programs, if such labor is stated separately on the invoice from the pre-written software programs . 
(31)  Garage sales in a residential area, not exceeding a consecutive three-day period or a total of 21 days per calendar year, but not including sales conducted by a professional or compensated agent of the owner of the items to be sold. 
(32)  Sales by a recognized youth group affiliated with a charitable organization or a governmental entity. 
(33)  Transactions subject to the admissions or accommodations tax imposed by this title when the charge for the admission or accommodation is separately stated. 
(34)  Water sold by the City. 
(35)  Insulin in all forms, dispensed pursuant to the direction of a licensed practitioner of the healing arts. Glucose to be used for the treatment of insulin reactions, diabetic urine and blood testing kits and materials, and insulin measuring and injecting devices. 
(36)  All sales, except of construction materials used in a project for which a city building permit is required, to qualified hospital organizations when billed to and paid for by the qualified hospital organization. 
(B)  The list of exemptions shall not be increased by implication or similarity. 
(2032 2165 2211 2261 2972; Ord. No. 3889, § 5, 6-26-2017 ) 
4-2-7. - Exemptions From Use Tax. 
(A)  The tax levied by Subsection 4-2-3(B), W.M.C., shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Tangible personal property that is exempt from the sales tax pursuant to Section 4-2-6, W.M.C. 
(2)  The storage of construction materials purchased on or after January 1, 1986. 
(3)  Tangible personal property purchased by a taxpayer during a time when the taxpayer was located outside the City and that: 
(a)  Was purchased on or after January 1, 1986, and was used by the taxpayer for a period of at least three years prior to the taxpayer's relocation to the City; or 
(b)  Was first used inside the City on or after January 1, 1994, and was used by the taxpayer for a period of at least six months prior to the taxpayer's relocation to the City. 
(c)  For purposes of this subsection, the term "relocation" means the establishment of a fixed, permanent building, store, office, salesroom, or other place of business within the City by a person who was not previously engaged in business in the City, or who was engaged in business in the City on a transient basis. "Relocation" shall not include the use of construction equipment or other property in the City by a person located outside the City, or the transfer of property from a location outside the City to an existing location within the City. 
(4)  Automotive vehicles if the owner is or was, at the time of purchase, a nonresident of the City who purchased the vehicle for use outside the City, and if the vehicle was previously registered, titled, and licensed outside the City. 
(B)  The list of exemptions shall not be increased by implication or similarity. 
(2032 2165 3544) 
4-2-8. - Secured Sales Transactions. 
    Whenever taxable tangible personal property is sold under a lease-purchase agreement, capital lease, or other conditional sales contract whereby the seller retains title as security for all or part of the price, or whenever the seller takes a chattel mortgage on such tangible personal property to secure all or part of the price, the full price of such property shall be reported for the period in which the sale was made. No refund or credit shall be allowed to either party to the transaction in case of repossession. 
(2032 3544) 
4-2-9. - Provisions Relative to Construction Materials. 
(A)  Public and Private Improvements: 
(1)  Except as provided by Subsection 4-2-6(A)(7), W.M.C., use tax shall be due on all construction materials used in making public and private improvements: 
(a)  Notwithstanding ownership of the land or improvements by a charitable organization or governmental entity, unless such charitable organization or governmental entity purchases all such construction materials directly and makes all such improvements using its own employees; and 
(b)  Notwithstanding the ultimate dedication of certain improvements to the City. 
(2)  Every user of construction materials who builds, reconstructs, alters, or improves land or improvements to land, including those improvements made in accordance with an agreement executed pursuant to Chapter 6, Title XI of this Code, shall remit use tax on construction materials used on such project, whether purchased from sources inside or outside the City, by one of the following methods: 
(a)  Estimated Prepayment. The estimated cost of construction materials shall be calculated by multiplying the cost of improvements or estimate thereof as listed in the public or private improvements agreement by 50 percent. Use tax on such estimated cost of construction materials shall be remitted to the Finance Director prior to commencing work. Upon receipt of the estimated prepayment, the Finance Director shall issue written documentation evidencing that the use tax due upon such construction materials has been paid directly to the City. Upon written acceptance of any improvements by the City, the user of construction materials shall compute the use tax due on the actual cost of construction materials used in the project and make a return of any tax due in excess of the estimated prepayment in accordance with Subsection 4-1-7(D), W.M.C. 
(b)  Actual Cost. Prior to commencing work, the user of construction materials shall notify the Finance Director in writing of his election to make monthly returns of use tax due. The Finance Director shall thereupon issue written documentation evidencing that the use tax due on such materials will be paid directly to the City. From the date work commences through the date of written acceptance of any improvements by the City, the user of construction materials shall, on or before the 20th day of each month, make a return to the Finance Director for the construction materials used during the preceding calendar month, and file such return, whether or not tax is due, in accordance with Subsection 4-1-7(A), W.M.C. 
(B)  Projects Requiring a City Building Permit: Except as provided by subsection 4-2-6(A)(7), W.M.C., every person, including any charitable organization or governmental entity, who is required to obtain a city building permit shall remit use tax on construction materials used on that project, whether purchased from sources inside or outside the City, by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Estimated Prepayment. The estimated cost of construction materials shall be calculated by multiplying the total valuation of the construction project entered on the building permit by the City building division, by 50 percent. Use tax on such estimated cost of construction materials shall be paid at the time the building permit is issued. Upon the later of the date of final inspection by the building official or the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the taxpayer shall compute the use tax due on the actual cost of construction materials and make a return of any tax due in excess of the estimated prepayment pursuant to Subsection 4-1-7(D), W.M.C. 
(2)  Actual Cost. Prior to commencing work, the taxpayer shall notify the Finance Director in writing of his election to make monthly returns of use tax due. The Finance Director shall thereupon issue the taxpayer written documentation evidencing that the use tax due on such materials will be paid directly to the City. From the date of issuance of the City building permit through the date of final inspection by the building official or the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever is later, the contractor shall, on or before the 20th day of each month, make a return to the finance director for the construction materials used during the preceding calendar month, and file such return, whether or not tax is due, in accordance with Subsection 4-1-7(A), W.M.C. 
(C)  Use taxes imposed upon other uses of construction materials within the City shall be reported and paid in the same manner as provided for the payment of use taxes imposed upon other tangible personal property. 
(2032 2972 3544 3553; Ord. No. 3889, § 6, 6-26-2017 ) 
4-2-10. - Computation of Use Tax on Construction Equipment. 
    In addition to the use tax on construction materials, use tax shall be due on construction equipment, including mobile machinery and self-propelled construction equipment, used inside the City. 
(A)  For construction contracts entered into prior to January 1, 1986, the full price paid by the current owner for construction equipment located inside the City shall be subject to the tax. 
(B)  For construction contracts entered into on or after January 1, 1986: 
(1)  The taxpayer shall identify construction equipment used inside the City as follows: 
(a)  Prior to or on the date the equipment is located inside the City, the taxpayer shall file with the City an equipment declaration on a form provided by the City. Such declaration shall state the dates on which the taxpayer anticipates the equipment will be located inside and removed from the boundaries of the City, shall include a description of each such anticipated piece of equipment, shall state the actual or anticipated price of each such anticipated piece of equipment, and shall include such other information as reasonably deemed necessary by the City. 
(b)  The taxpayer shall file with the City an amended equipment declaration reflecting any changes in the information contained in any previous equipment declaration no less than once every 90 days after the equipment is brought inside the City or, for equipment that is brought inside the City for a project of less than 90 days duration, such amended declaration must be filed no later than ten days after substantial completion of the project. Amended declarations for all other projects must be filed at least once every 90 days after the equipment is brought inside the City. 
(c)  The taxpayer need not declare any equipment for which the purchase price was less than $2,500.00. Such equipment shall be presumed to have been purchased in a municipality having a sales or use tax at a rate at least equal to the rate established pursuant to Section 4-2-3, W.M.C., and such tax shall be presumed to have been paid to that municipality. 
(2)  Construction equipment located inside the City for 30 consecutive days or less for which a declaration is properly filed shall be subject to the tax in an amount calculated as follows: one-twelfth of the price of the equipment at the time it was purchased shall be multiplied by the rate established by Section 4-2-3, W.M.C. 
(3)  Construction equipment located inside the City for more than 30 consecutive days, or equipment for which a declaration has not been properly filed, shall be subject to use tax on the full price of such equipment. 
(2032; Ord. No. 3889, § 7, 6-26-2017 ) 
4-2-11. - Nonresident Retailers. 
    Any retailer engaged in business in the City, but not maintaining an office in the City, who sells taxable tangible personal property or taxable services may petition the finance director to establish an alternate method of determining tax due. If the Finance Director finds that the imposition of the tax on an individual sales basis will impose an unnecessary hardship on the retailer, and if the type and occasion of sale so warrants, the Finance Director may establish such alternate method. 
(2032) 
4-2-12. - Inception of Business; Initial Use Tax. 
    Any person who purchases or establishes a business inside the City shall file an initial use tax return. 
(A)  Existing Businesses: Use tax shall be due on tangible personal property, except inventory held for lease, rental or resale, that is acquired with the purchase of a business. The tax shall be based on the price of such property as recorded in the bill of sale or agreement and constituting a part of the total transaction at the time of the sale or transfer, provided the valuation is as great or greater than the fair market value of such property. Where the transfer of ownership is a lump sum transaction, the use tax shall be due on the book value established by the purchaser for income tax depreciation purposes, or fair market value if no determination has been made. When a business is taken over by other than the most recent seller in return for the assumption of outstanding indebtedness, the tax shall be paid on the fair market value of all taxable tangible personal property acquired by the purchaser. Such tax shall be reported on an initial use tax return. The reporting period for such return shall be the period ending one day prior to the first day of business by the new owner. 
(B)  New Businesses: Use tax shall be due on the price of all tangible personal property, except inventory held for lease, rental or resale, that is purchased for use inside the City. Such tax shall be reported on the initial use tax return. The reporting period for such return shall be the period ending one day prior to the first day of business. 
(2032 3371) 
4-2-13. - Use Tax; Method of Payment. 
    Every consumer who has not paid the sales tax to a retailer shall, unless the credit established in Subsection 4-1-3(B)(2), W.M.C., applies, complete the use tax schedule of a return and remit the total tax liability to the City. 
(A)  The due date for licensed taxpayers shall be that established by Section 4-1-7, W.M.C. 
(B)  The due date for resident individuals shall be 20 days from the end of the month in which the taxable transaction occurred. 
(2032 2972) 
4-2-14. - Intercity Claims for Recovery. 
    The intent of this section is to streamline and standardize procedures related to situations where tax has been remitted to the incorrect municipality. It is not intended to reduce or eliminate the responsibilities of the taxpayer to correctly pay, collect, and remit sales and use taxes to the City. 
(A)  As used herein, "claim for recovery" means a claim for reimbursement of sales and use taxes paid to the wrong taxing jurisdiction. 
(B)  When it is determined by the Director of Finance of the City that sales and use tax owed to the City has been reported and paid to another municipality, the City shall promptly notify the taxpayer that taxes are being improperly collected and remitted, and that, as of the date of the notice, the taxpayer must cease improper tax collections and remittances. 
(C)  The City may make a written claim for recovery directly to the municipality that received tax and/or penalty and interest owed to the City, or, in the alternative, may institute procedures for collection of the tax from the taxpayer. The decision to make a claim for a recovery lies in the sole discretion of the City. Any claim for recovery shall include a properly executed release of claim from the taxpayer releasing its claim to the taxes paid to the wrong municipality, evidence to substantiate the claim, and a request that the municipality approve or deny, in whole or in part, the claim within 90 days of its receipt. The municipality to which the City submits a claim for recovery may, for good cause, request an extension of time to investigate the claim, and approval of such extension by the City shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(D)  Within 90 days after receipt of a claim for recovery, the City shall verify to its satisfaction whether all or a portion of the tax claimed was improperly received, and shall notify the municipality submitting the claim in writing that the claim is either approved or denied in whole or in part, including the reasons for the decision. If the claim is approved in whole or in part, the City shall remit the undisputed amount to the municipality submitting the claim within 30 days of approval. If a claim is submitted jointly by a municipality and a taxpayer, the check shall be made to the parties jointly. Denial of a claim for recovery may only be made for good cause. 
(E)  The City may deny a claim on the grounds that it has previously paid a claim for recovery arising out of an audit of the same taxpayer. 
(F)  The period subject to a claim for recovery shall be limited to the 36-month period prior to the date the municipality that was wrongly paid the tax receives the claim for recovery. 
(2032 2972) 
4-2-15. - Notice of Sales and Use Tax Ordinance Amendments. 
(A)  In order to initiate a central register of sales and use tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales tax collection, the Finance Director of the City shall file with the Colorado Municipal League, prior to the effective date of Chapters 1 and 2 of this title, a copy of the City sales and use tax ordinance reflecting all provisions in effect on the effective date of Chapters 1 and 2 of this title. 
(B)  In order to keep current the central register of sales and use tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales tax collection, the Finance Director of the City shall file with the Colorado Municipal League, prior to the effective date of any amendment, a copy of each sales and use tax ordinance amendment enacted by the City. 
(C)  Failure of the City to file such ordinance or ordinance amendment pursuant to this section shall not invalidate any provision of the sales and use tax ordinance or any amendment thereto. 
(2032) 
4-2-16. - Participation in Simplification Meetings. 
    The Finance Director shall cooperate with and participate on an as-needed basis with a permanent statewide sales and use tax committee convened by the Colorado Municipal League that is composed of state and municipal sales and use tax officials and business officials. Said committee will meet for the purpose of discussing and seeking resolution to sales and use tax problems that may arise. 
(2032) 
4-2-17. - Administration. 
    This chapter shall be administered in accordance with Chapter 1 of this title. 
(2032) 
CHAPTER 3. - ADMISSIONS TAX 

4-3-1. - Legislative Intent. 
    It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the City Council that on and after the effective date of this chapter, every person who pays to gain admission or access to a performance of a motion picture or an establishment licensed under the Colorado Beer or Liquor Codes; or any display of live animals and/or plants; or for the use of lanes and pin setters for bowling balls in a bowling alley in the City that is open to the public shall remit the tax imposed by this chapter, and every person, whether owner, lessee, or operator, who charges or causes to be charged admission to any such performance of a motion picture, establishment licensed under the Colorado Beer or Liquor Codes, any display of live animals and/or plants, or use of lanes and pin setters for bowling balls in a bowling alley shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(2032 2181 2972) 
4-3-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Admissions charge shall mean: 
(1)  Any charge for the right or privilege of admission to: 
(a)  A performance of a motion picture open to the public; or 
(b)  An establishment open to the public that is licensed to sell, dispense or serve fermented malt beverages (three and two-tenths percent beer) or alcoholic beverages (liquor) pursuant to state law; or 
(c)  Any public display of live animals and/or plants, including insects or fish. 
(2)  Any charge for the right or privilege to the use of bowling alleys and pin setters for bowling balls in a bowling alley open to the public, including charges for bowling by the line. 
(3)  Admissions charge includes the value of free passes and complimentary admissions tickets provided by the operator. 
    Charitable organization, for purposes of this chapter, shall include any definition of "charitable organization" included in other chapters of this title. 
    Gross sales shall mean the total amount received in money, credit, property or other consideration valued in money for all admissions charges. 
    Open to the public shall mean any place or event or activity, the admission or access to which is open to members of the public upon payment of a charge or fee. 
    Operator shall mean any person, whether owner, operator, lessee or any other person, who charges or causes to be charged: 
(1)  Admission to a performance of a motion picture theater open to the public. 
(2)  Admission to an establishment licensed to sell, dispense, or serve fermented malt beverages (three and two-tenths percent beer) or alcoholic beverages (liquor) pursuant to state law; or 
(3)  Admission to a bowling alley or fees for the utilization, lease or rental of bowling alleys and pin setters for bowling balls in a bowling alley open to the public, including charges for bowling by the line. 
(4)  Admission to any public display of live animals and/or plants, including insects or fish. 
    Price shall mean the aggregate value in money or any thing or things paid or delivered or promised to be paid or delivered for admissions charges. 
    Public shall mean any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, corporation, society, club, league, association, joint stock company, estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee, or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by court or otherwise, or any group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural, as well as the singular number. 
    Purchase or sale shall mean the acquisition or disposition for a price of: 
(1)  The right of privilege of admission to: 
(a)  A performance of a motion picture open to the public; or 
(b)  An establishment open to the public that is licensed to sell, dispense, or serve fermented malt beverages (three and two-tenths percent beer) or alcoholic beverages (liquor) pursuant to state law; or 
(c)  Any public display of live animals and/or plants, including insects or fish. 
(2)  The right to the use of bowling alleys and pin setters for bowling balls in a bowling alley open to the public, including bowling by the line. 
    Return, for purposes of this chapter, shall include any definition of "return" included in other chapters of this title. 
    Tax shall mean the admissions tax imposed by this chapter. 
    Vendor shall mean any operator as defined in this section. 
(2032 2181 2972 3371 3544; Ord. No. 3889, § 8, 6-26-2017 ) 
4-3-3. - Excise Tax Based on Admissions. 
    There is hereby imposed an excise tax of three percent of the price paid by any person or charged by any vendor for admissions charges as defined herein operating within the limits of the City of Westminster. Said excise tax is imposed upon the purchaser. Every vendor shall collect the tax and remit it to the City. Said excise tax is in addition to all other taxes imposed by law. 
(2032 3544) 
4-3-4. - Exempt Transactions. 
    The following persons, including vendors, are exempt from the payment or collection of the tax levied by this chapter. 
(A)  The United States government and the State of Colorado, and the political subdivisions thereof, including the City, in the conduct of their governmental functions. 
(B)  Charitable organizations in the conduct of their religious, charitable and eleemosynary functions, provided that a letter of exemption from the City is possessed by such organization. 
(C)  A school, other than a school held or conducted for private or corporate profit, in the conduct of its educational functions, provided that a letter of exemption from the City is possessed by such school. 
(D)  Any other person who pays an admissions charge that the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United states, or of the State of Colorado. 
(2032 3544) 
4-3-5. - Administration. 
    This chapter shall be administered in accordance with Chapter 1 of this title. 
(2032) 
CHAPTER 4. - ACCOMMODATIONS TAX 

4-4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Charitable organization, for purposes of this chapter, shall include any definition of "charitable organization" included in other chapters of this title. 
    Gross sales shall mean the total amount received in money, credit, property or other consideration valued in money for all rooms or accommodations. 
    Price shall mean the aggregate value in money or any thing or things paid or delivered or promised to be paid or delivered for rooms or accommodations. 
    Purchase or sale shall mean the acquisition or disposition for a price of the right to use rooms or accommodations. 
    Return, for purposes of this chapter, shall include any definition of "return" in other chapters of this title. 
    Room or accommodation shall mean any room, unit, or space for which a charge is made. 
    Tax shall mean the accommodation tax imposed by this chapter. 
    Vendor shall mean a motel, hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, guest house, guest ranch, or any other place that provides sleeping rooms or sleeping facilities and offers rooms and accommodations for a consideration. 
(2032 3371 3544; Ord. No. 3889, § 9, 6-26-2017 ) 
4-4-2. - Tax on Accommodations; Collection. 
(A)  Tax on Accommodations: For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1991, at 12:01 a.m., there is hereby levied a tax or excise of seven percent on the purchase price paid by any person or charged by any vendor on the lease, rental or other transaction of furnishing rooms or accommodations to any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess, any room or rooms or other accommodations. 
(B)  The tax specified in this section is imposed upon the purchaser. Every vendor shall collect the tax and remit it to the City. 
(C)  The tax specified in this section shall be in addition to all other taxes imposed by law. 
(2032 3544 3633) 
4-4-3. - Exempt Transactions. 
    The following transactions shall be exempt from the accommodations tax imposed under Section 4-4-2, W.M.C.: 
(A)  All sales made directly to charitable organizations in the conduct of their regular religious, charitable and eleemosynary functions and activities, provided that such sales are paid for directly to the seller by draft or warrant drawn on the funds of the exempt organization. 
(B)  All direct sales to the United States of America, to the State of Colorado, its departments, institutions, or political subdivisions that are acting in their governmental capacity, and to all sales to the City or its departments, provided that such sales are supported by requisition on official government purchase orders and paid for directly to the seller by draft or warrant drawn on the funds of that governmental entity. 
(C)  All sales to any person who uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess, any room or rooms or other accommodations who: 
(1)  Prior to use, possession, or obtaining the right to use or possess, enters into a written agreement for use, possession, or the right to use or possess a room or rooms or accommodations for a period of at least 30 consecutive days; and 
(2)  Subsequently pays for use, possession, or the right to use or possess a room or rooms or accommodations for a period of at least 30 consecutive days. 
(D)  All sales that the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States, or the State of Colorado. 
(2032 2165 3544; Ord. No. 3889, § 10, 6-26-2017 ) 
4-4-4. - Administration. 
    This chapter shall be administered in accordance with Chapter 1 of this title. 
(2032) 
CHAPTER 5. - LIQUOR AND BEER OCCUPATION TAX 

4-5-1. - Legislative Declaration. 
    The City Council hereby finds, determines and declares that, considering the nature of the business of manufacturing or selling, or offering for sale, malt, vinous or spirituous liquors or fermented malt beverages, and the relation of such business to the municipal welfare, as well as the relation thereto to the expenditures required of the City, and a proper, just and equitable distribution of the tax burdens within the City, and all other matters properly to be considered in relation thereto, the classification of such business as a separate occupation is reasonable, proper, uniform, nondiscriminating and necessary for a just and proper distribution of tax burdens within the City. Accordingly, the business of selling at retail any fermented malt beverage, malt, special malt, vinous or spirituous liquors is hereby defined and separately classified as an occupation as specified below. 
(2032) 
4-5-2. - Purpose of Tax. 
    The sole purpose of the taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter is to raise revenue pursuant to the taxing power of the City. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed as an attempt or means to regulate the sale of fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors. In the performance of its duties under state law as a local liquor licensing authority, City Council shall exclude from consideration any delinquency in the payment of any taxes due the City under this chapter. 
(2032) 
4-5-3. - Occupation Tax. 
    The following annual occupation taxes are hereby established and shall be paid by the liquor license applicant or liquor licensee to the City: 
License ..... Tax 
(1)  Retail liquor store license ..... $150.00 
(2)  Liquor-licensed drugstore license ..... $150.00 
(3)  Beer and wine license ..... $150.00 
(4)  Hotel and restaurant license ..... $325.00 
(5)  Tavern license ..... $325.00 
(6)  Club license ..... $100.00 
(7)  Arts license ..... $100.00 
(8)  Racetrack license ..... $325.00 
(9)  All licenses to sell fermented malt beverages ..... $150.00 
(10)  Brew pub license ..... $325.00 
(2032 2502) 
4-5-4. - Payment. 
(A)  The occupation tax shall be paid in addition to the annual license fees paid to the City and the state and shall be due and payable on or before the date of issuance or renewal of any license subject to such tax pursuant to this chapter. 
(B)  Upon receipt of the fee, the City shall issue a certificate showing the amount paid. The certificate shall at all times be conspicuously posted by the operator in his place of business. 
(C)  The Finance Director is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Upon the failure of the City Clerk to receive payment of the taxes due under this chapter from any applicant for a new license or for the renewal of an existing license, such failure shall be reported to the Finance Director, who shall take such actions as may be necessary and available for the collection of the delinquent taxes pursuant to the tax administration code. Interest shall accrue on all delinquent taxes as provided in the tax administration code. No refund of any tax paid in accordance with this chapter shall be made to any person who discontinues or sells the business during the duration of the license. 
(2032) 
4-5-5. - Administration. 
    This chapter shall be administered in accordance with Chapter 1 of this title. 
(2032) 
CHAPTER 7. - BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX ON TELEPHONE UTILITY COMPANIES 

4-7-1. - Legislative Intent. 
    The City Council does hereby find, determine and declare as follows: 
(A)  The operations of telephone utility companies involve substantial use of the public streets and rights-of-way, frequent excavations in the public streets and rights-of-way, and the regular installation, maintenance and repair of many poles, lines and cables in, under, and above the public streets and rights-of-way. 
(B)  The operations of telephone utility companies place a substantial burden on the City in its efforts to provide for the public safety, and efficiently maintain and administer the public streets and rights-of-way. 
(C)  Considering the nature of telephone utility companies and the burdens placed by such telephone utility companies on the City, the classification of such utilities separately from other businesses and occupations is reasonable and nondiscriminatory. 
(D)  The City Council of the City of Westminster is authorized to impose taxes on the privilege of engaging in occupations or businesses solely for the purpose of raising revenue. 
(1145) 
4-7-2. - Levy of Tax. 
    There is hereby levied on and against each telephone utility company operating within the City a tax on the occupation and business of maintaining a telephone exchange and lines connected therewith in the City of Westminster and of supplying local exchange telephone service to the inhabitants of the City. The amount of the tax levied hereby shall be $0.38 per month per telephone account for which local exchange telephone service is provided within the corporate limits of the City on the anniversary of the date on which the tax begins to accrue as provided in Section 4-7-3, W.M.C. 
(1145 3633) 
4-7-3. - Time Payment of Tax. 
    The tax levied by this chapter shall be due and payable in 12 equal monthly installments, each installment to be paid on the last business day of each calendar month. 
(1145 3633) 
4-7-4. - Filing Statement. 
    Within 30 days after the date on which the tax begins to accrue as provided in Section 4-7-3, W.M.C., each telephone utility company subject to this chapter shall file with the City Clerk, in such form as the clerk may require, a statement showing the total telephone accounts for which local exchange telephone service was provided within the corporate limits of the City on said date. Such statement shall be filed within 30 days after each anniversary of the date on which the tax begins to accrue, showing such accounts on the anniversary date. 
(1145) 
4-7-5. - Local Purpose. 
    The tax herein provided is upon occupations and businesses in the performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those functions relating to interstate commerce. It is expressly understood that none of the terms of this chapter be construed to mean that any telephone utility company is issued a franchise by the City. 
(3371) 
4-7-6. - Tax in Lieu of Other Business and Occupation Taxes. 
    The tax herein provided shall be in lieu of all other occupation taxes or taxes on the privilege of doing business in the City on any telephone utility company subject to the provisions of this chapter and, in addition, shall be in lieu of any free service furnished the City by any said telephone utility. 
(3371) 
4-7-7. - Administration. 
    This chapter shall be administered in accordance with Chapter 1 of this title. 
(3371) 
Title V. - LICENSING AND REGULATIONS 
CHAPTER 1. - PROCEDURES 

5-1-1. - Legislative Intent and Application of Title. 
(A)  City Council finds that: 
(1)  Licenses issued pursuant to this Title should be granted and held subject to compliance with the terms and conditions imposed by this Title and any other applicable laws; 
(2)  The granting and retention of any such license shall be deemed a privilege, and not a right; 
(3)  No license shall be issued or held contrary to the public health, safety, and welfare interests of the City and its citizens; 
(4)  It is in the public interest to provide for the denial, cancellation, suspension, and revocation of licenses issued pursuant to this Title in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the City and its citizens; 
(5)  This Title is enacted pursuant to the City's home-rule authority granted by Article XX, Section 6, of the Colorado Constitution; and 
(6)  The intent of the City Council in enacting this Title is to protect and promote the health, safety, and welfare interests of the City and its citizens through the licensing and regulation of those activities and businesses determined to pose a significant risk of harm to said interests if unlicensed and unregulated. 
(B)  The rules of procedure set forth in this Chapter are intended to provide a uniform, consistent, and expeditious method for conducting quasi-judicial hearings held pursuant to this Title and to afford persons due process of law. The special permit and license board may supplement the provisions of this Chapter by adopting further rules of procedure not inconsistent herewith. The rules of procedure set forth in this Chapter apply whenever a hearing is required by any provision of this Title, unless another procedure is specifically required by written agreement, state statute, or other provisions of this Code. 
(1956 3570) 
5-1-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Adverse action shall mean the suspension or revocation of an existing license authorized by this Title or the initial denial of an application for a license authorized by this Title. 
    Cancellation shall mean the City's administrative action of invalidating an issued license for the limited reasons set forth in this Section, which action is not considered to be an adverse action. 
    Interested person shall mean any person having a legally protected interest under law that is subject to potential injury in fact due to proposed final action pursuant to this Title, or any person defined as "interested" by law, or any person having a right of appeal pursuant to law or this Title. "Interested person" also includes any employee or official charged with the responsibility to issue and enforce the provisions of this Title. 
    Revocation shall mean the City's action to recall, withdraw or rescind an existing license according to the process afforded by this Title, and it excludes the administrative act of cancellation. 
(1956 3563 3570) 
5-1-3. - Adverse Actions. 
(A)  An adverse action may be initiated by any of the following persons or entities: 
(1)  Any department head of the City; 
(2)  Any employee or official charged with the responsibility to issue and enforce the provisions of this Title. 
(B)  An adverse action shall be initiated by filing with the City Manager or the City Manager's designee a written request that the adverse action be taken, which shall include the facts and grounds of the proposed adverse action. 
(C)  An adverse action may also be taken by the City Manager on his or her own volition. 
(3570) 
5-1-4. - Notice of Adverse Action. 
(A)  An applicant shall be notified of a denial and a licensee shall be notified of a suspension or revocation of a license and of the grounds for the proposed adverse action in writing. 
(B)  The notice of the proposed adverse action shall include: 
(1)  The grounds for proposed adverse action. 
(2)  A statement that the applicant or licensee, as applicable, may request a hearing before the special permit and license board by filing a request for the same not later than 30 days following the date of service of the notice of the proposed adverse action. 
(3)  A statement that the proposed adverse action described in the notice will be stayed during the 30 days in which a hearing may be requested or until a hearing has been held and a decision rendered, whichever is later; provided, however, that a finding of immediate undue risk as permitted in Subsection 5-1-5(c), W.M.C., may result in no stay. 
(C)  The notice of proposed adverse action may be served on the applicant or licensee, as applicable, by: 
(1)  Personal service by hand delivery, in which case service shall be deemed complete on the date such service occurs; or 
(2)  By mailing a copy of the notice of proposed adverse action by first-class mail to the last known address of the applicant or licensee, as applicable, or to the street address of the licensed premises, in which case service shall be deemed complete on the date of mailing. The holder of any license issued pursuant to this Title shall notify the City Clerk of any change of the holder's address for purposes of notification and service pursuant to this Chapter. 
(1956 3570) 
5-1-5. - Appeals. 
(A)  The applicant or licensee may appeal the notice of proposed adverse action by filing with the City Clerk in writing a request for a hearing before the special permit and license board within 30 days after the applicant or licensee is notified of the proposed adverse action. The request for hearing shall specify any reasons the requesting party believes the proposed adverse action was not justified. A hearing, when requested, shall be scheduled and held within a reasonable time, and reasonable notice of the hearing shall be given to the licensee or applicant. 
(B)  For any applicant or licensee who fails to appeal a proposed adverse action by failing to timely file a request for a hearing in the manner provided for in this Section, the proposed adverse action shall immediately take effect, and the applicant or licensee shall thereafter be barred from appealing the adverse action before the special permit and license board. Further, the failure to file a timely appeal of a proposed adverse action pursuant to this Section shall be deemed a failure to exhaust administrative remedies and a bar to judicial review. 
(C)  Any adverse action pursuant to this Title shall be automatically stayed upon the filing of a timely appeal pursuant to this Section; provided, however, upon a determination in writing by the city manager that a stay of the adverse action pending the appeal would pose an immediate undue risk to the public health, safety, or welfare, the adverse action shall not be stayed and the licensee shall cease operations pursuant to the license until the appeal is finally resolved. Notice of any such determination shall be given in a manner specified in Subsection 5-1-4(c), W.M.C., above. 
(D)  In computing any period of time prescribed by this Section, Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be counted as any other day. 
(E)  Upon completion of a hearing, the special permit and license board shall issue a decision within a reasonable time and according to Subsections 5-1-10(J) and (K), W.M.C. 
(3570) 
5-1-6. - License Denial. 
(A)  Unless otherwise limited by state law, a license application may be denied by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee based on the following grounds: 
(1)  All applicable provisions of the City Code and state law have not been met; 
(2)  The required fees have not been paid; 
(3)  The application is incomplete or contains false, misleading or fraudulent statements; 
(4)  Character of the applicant, based on his/her criminal history, to the extent such character and criminal history is within five years of the date of application and is relevant to the license requested by the applicant; 
(5)  Nonconformance of the business, premises, building or land use with this Code; 
(6)  Demand of the business for excessive City services; 
(7)  Discharge, intent or proposal to discharge wastes to the sanitary sewerage system that will exceed any of the limits set forth in Title VIII, Chapter 10 of this Code; 
(8)  Prior or ongoing violations of law in connection with the business; 
(9)  Previous revocation or suspension of a similar license held by the applicant; 
(10)  Any reason that would justify cancellation, suspension or revocation of a license; or 
(11)  Any ground provided by ordinance or statute. 
(1959 3570) 
5-1-7. - License Cancellation. 
(A)  Unless otherwise limited by state law, a license may be administratively cancelled by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee on the following limited grounds: 
(1)  The license was issued in error; 
(2)  Upon written request of the licensee; 
(3)  Upon a determination by the City, confirmed by a site visit to the business address, that the licensee has permanently ceased operation; or 
(4)  Upon grounds provided by ordinance or statute. 
(1959 3570) 
5-1-8. - License Suspension. 
(A)  Unless otherwise limited by state law, a license may be suspended on the following grounds: 
(1)  Upon any grounds that would authorize revocation of a license, except grounds that make revocation mandatory; 
(2)  When any activity conducted pursuant to such license violates an ordinance or statute; 
(3)  Upon grounds of repeated violations of this Code by the licensee; or 
(4)  Upon grounds provided by ordinance or statute. 
(1959 3570) 
5-1-9. - License Revocation. 
(A)  Unless otherwise limited by state law, a license may be revoked on the following grounds: 
(1)  Fraud or misrepresentation or false statements in the application for the license; 
(2)  Failure to make timely payment of any fees, charges or penalties imposed pursuant to this Title; 
(3)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting the business; 
(4)  Conducting the business contrary to the conditions of the license; 
(5)  Conducting the business in such a manner as to create a public nuisance as defined by ordinance or by statute or in a manner as to constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare; 
(6)  Conviction of any violation of federal, state or municipal law related to the operation of the licensed business; 
(7)  Repeated violations of one or more City ordinances at the licensee's place of business by the licensee or patrons of the business; 
(8)  Commission of an act or grounds that would have justified denial of the original application for a license; 
(9)  The conduct of the licensee's business consistently creates excessive need for City services and causes the City to expend public funds beyond normal requirements to protect the public health, welfare and safety; 
(10)  The business is of such a nature, or is operated in such a manner, that it is frequented by individuals (a) who consistently disrupt the normal and reasonable peace and tranquility of the neighborhood, or (b) who by intimidation, threat, harassment or other hostile conduct seriously disrupt any other business in the immediate neighborhood of the licensee, thereby causing such business unreasonable economic loss; 
(11)  The licensee fails to keep and maintain permanent records that, in accordance with accepted accounting practices as determined by the City Finance Director, are necessary for establishing the licensee's tax liability; 
(12)  Any violation of Title IV, W.M.C., concerning taxes; or 
(13)  Upon any grounds provided by ordinance or statute. 
(1959 3570) 
5-1-10. - Hearing Procedures. 
(A)  This Section shall apply to any hearing conducted pursuant to this Title. 
(B)  Any interested person who wishes to be heard at a hearing pursuant to this Title may appear personally or be represented by legal counsel at the hearing. 
(C)  The hearing shall be conducted by the special permit and license board. In the case of an appeal of an adverse action, the hearing shall be de novo, and the proponent of the adverse action shall have the burden to show, by a preponderance of evidence, that the grounds for the adverse action existed at the time the adverse action was taken. The adverse action may be defended by the City Manager, or the department head, employee, or official who initiated the adverse action, who may be represented by the City Attorney. 
(D)  The special permit and license board may: 
(1)  Establish by rule a fee for a hearing; 
(2)  Waive or refund hearing fees upon a showing of undue hardship; 
(3)  Administer oaths and affirmations; 
(4)  Issue subpoenas requiring the presence of persons and the production of documents reasonably necessary to the determination of any issue relevant to the hearing. The Chairperson shall sign and issue any such subpoenas. Subpoenas shall be enforced as provided in Section 1-22-5, W.M.C.; 
(5)  Rule upon offers of proof; 
(6)  Compel testimony; 
(7)  Receive evidence; 
(8)  Determine all relevant issues of material fact and whether the proposed adverse action comports with the requirements of the applicable laws; 
(9)  Dispose of motions relating to the discovery and production of relevant documents and things for inspection, copying, or photographing; 
(10)  Regulate the course of the hearing, including setting reasonable time limits on testimony or argument and restricting duplicative or irrelevant evidence or testimony; 
(11)  Set the time and place for continued hearings; 
(12)  Fix the time for filing of briefs and other documents; 
(13)  Direct the parties to appear and confer to consider simplification of issues, admissions of facts or documents to avoid unnecessary proof, and limitation of the number of witnesses; 
(14)  Issue appropriate orders that control the subsequent course of the proceeding; 
(15)  Dispose of motions and procedural matters; 
(16)  Control the decorum and conduct of the proceeding, including the reprimanding and exclusion from the hearing of any person engaging in improper or indecorous conduct; and 
(17)  Issue general or specific regulations in furtherance of its powers enumerated in this Section and take any other action authorized by ordinance or by rule consistent with law. 
(E)  All testimony shall be taken under oath or by affirmation. 
(F)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the orders of the special permit and license board, including the failure to obey any subpoena issued pursuant to this Section. 
(G)  The proceedings of the hearing shall be recorded through tape recording, stenographic, or other verbatim reproduction, and copies of the transcriptions of the proceedings shall be available, upon payment of the reasonable costs thereof, to the parties to the hearing or any interested person. 
(H)  At the hearing, each side may present evidence, documentary evidence, and rebuttal evidence, and conduct such cross-examination as the board may reasonably determine necessary for a full and true disclosure of the facts. The board may receive all or part of the evidence in written form, if the interests of the parties will not be substantially prejudiced and if the hearing will be expedited thereby. The board may receive and consider evidence not admissible under the civil rules of evidence if such evidence possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonable and prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. The board may exclude incompetent and unduly repetitious evidence, and may receive documentary evidence in the form of a copy or excerpt if the copy is deemed reliable. 
(I)  No ex parte material or representation of any kind or any other communication outside the hearing shall be considered by the board, unless it is fully disclosed on the hearing record and an opportunity is given for comment thereon at the hearing. 
(J)  The board may affirm, reverse, or modify, with or without conditions, any adverse action. The board shall issue, within a reasonable time, a final, written decision with findings of fact and conclusions of law, setting forth the grounds of the decision, based on the evidence presented at the hearing. The board shall serve the decision on each party to the hearing by mailing it first-class mail to the last address furnished to the City Clerk pursuant to Section 5-1-4, W.M.C., by the party. The decision shall be deemed final and effective as to such party on the date mailed. 
(K)  The board's final decision shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to Colorado Rule of Civil Procedure 106(a)(4). No ground may be presented for judicial review unless it was first presented to the special permit and license board prior to the decision thereof. 
(1959 2275 3570) 
5-1-11. - Penalty; Nuisance Declared. 
(A)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Title. Except as otherwise provided in this Title, any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this Title shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine pursuant to Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. Each day that a violation of any of the provisions of this Title continues to exist shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. 
(B)  The conduct of any activity or business in violation of this Title is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated pursuant to the provisions for the abatement of nuisance provided for in Chapter 4 of Title VIII of this Code. 
(3570) 
CHAPTER 2. - BUSINESS LICENSES 

5-2-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Business shall mean any profit or not-for-profit trade, vocation, occupation, profession, enterprise, service, or commercial activity at a fixed physical premise in the City, except that the term "business" shall not include any hobby or leisure activity not engaged in for profit or any home occupation licensed as such pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Title. 
(1959 3563 3570) 
5-2-2. - License Required. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any business in the City without first obtaining a license pursuant to this Chapter. A separate business license shall be required for each location of a business operating within the City limits. A business shall obtain such additional licenses, including a sales tax license, as may be required by federal or state law or this Code and the failure to do so shall be considered a violation of this Chapter. 
(B)  In the event that any business is being conducted in an unincorporated area at the time of the annexation of such area to the City, the business must conform to all licensing requirements contained in this Chapter and all other applicable licensing requirements contained in this Code. 
(1959 3563) 
5-2-3. - License Application and Administration. 
(A)  An applicant for a business license shall submit an application to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk. The application shall be investigated by the City Manager, in order to determine whether grounds exist for denial. If approval of the application is recommended as a result of the investigation, the City Clerk shall issue the license for a period of one year. The City Manager may approve the application with conditions reasonably deemed by the City Manager as necessary to protect the public health, welfare and safety. 
(B)  An application for renewal of the business license shall be filed with the City Clerk. The City Clerk, in his or her reasonable discretion, may request the City Manager to investigate the application, in order to determine whether grounds exist for denial. In the event a cancellation, suspension, or revocation proceeding is pending when a license renewal is filed, the application for a license renewal shall not be acted upon until the suspension or revocation proceeding has been completed. 
(C)  All licenses shall specify the name of the licensee, the business address, the nature of the business, the term of the license, and the date upon which it expires. Every license granted under the provisions of this Chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the place of business for the full term of the license. Licenses shall be removed upon expiration, cancellation, suspension, or revocation. It shall be the duty of each licensee to show the license at any reasonable time when requested to do so by any city official. 
(1959 3563) 
5-2-4. - Transfer. 
    Any transfer of a business to a new owner, whether by sale, gift or operation of law, shall cause a cancellation of the prior business license. The new owner shall not conduct business until a new business license has been obtained pursuant to this Chapter. 
(1959) 
5-2-5. - License Denial, Cancellation, Suspension or Revocation. 
    A business license may be denied, cancelled, suspended, or revoked for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter, or for any reason set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title. 
(1959 2574 3563) 
CHAPTER 3. - HOME OCCUPATION LICENSE 

5-3-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Home occupation shall mean any trade, vocation, occupation, profession, enterprise, service, or any commercial activity, for profit or not-for-profit, that is conducted in connection with the occupation of a dwelling unit meeting all of the zoning regulations set forth in Section 11-4-10, W.M.C., and that does not have a business license pursuant to Chapter 2 of this Title. The term "home occupation" shall not include any hobby or leisure activity not engaged in for profit. 
(1959 3563) 
5-3-2. - License Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a home occupation without first obtaining a home occupation license. 
(1959) 
5-3-3. - License Application and Administration. 
(A)  The applicant for a home occupation license shall submit an application to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk. The application shall be investigated by the City Manager, in order to determine whether grounds exist for denial. If approval of the application is recommended as a result of the investigation, the City Clerk shall issue the license. The City Manager may approve the application with conditions reasonably deemed by the City Manager as necessary to protect the public health, welfare and safety. 
(1959 2574 3443 3563) 
5-3-4. - Transfer. 
    Home occupation licenses are not transferrable. Any transfer of a dwelling unit to a new owner, whether by sale, gift or operation of law, shall cause a cancellation of any underlying home occupation license. The new owner shall not conduct a home occupation until a new license has been obtained pursuant to this Chapter. 
(1959 3563) 
5-3-5. - License Denial, Cancellation, Suspension, Revocation. 
    A home occupation license may be denied, cancelled, denied renewal, suspended or revoked for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter, or for any reason set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title. 
(1959 2574 3443 3563) 
CHAPTER 4. - SALES AND USE TAX LICENSE 

5-4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    License shall mean a Westminster sales and use tax license. 
    Engaged in business in the City shall mean performing or providing services or selling, leasing, renting, delivering or installing tangible personal property for storage, use or consumption within the City. Engaged in business in the City includes, but is not limited to, any one of the following activities by a person: 
(1)  Directly, indirectly, or by a subsidiary maintains a building, store, office, salesroom, warehouse, or other place of business within the taxing jurisdiction; 
(2)  Sends one or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons into the taxing jurisdiction to solicit business or to install, assemble, repair, service, or assist in the use of its products, or for demonstration or other reasons; 
(3)  Maintains one or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons on duty at a location within the taxing jurisdiction; 
(4)  Owns, leases, rents or otherwise exercises control over real or personal property within the taxing jurisdiction; or 
(5)  Makes more than one delivery into the taxing jurisdiction within a 12-month period. 
(1959 3563) 
5-4-2. - License Required. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be engaged in business in the City without first obtaining a license pursuant to this Chapter. 
(B)  Any person reporting use tax on an actual cost basis for one or more construction projects inside the City shall obtain a separate license for each project; except that persons who sell tangible personal property, together with the installation of such property, which installation requires a building permit, including but not limited to satellite dishes, hot tubs, decks, patios, and signs, may report tax on an actual cost basis for all projects inside the City under one license. 
(C)  A temporary license may be issued for temporary locations and/or special events for periods of seven consecutive days or less, not to exceed a total of 21 days per calendar year. 
(D)  Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed or construed to relieve any person who is engaged in business in the city from the obligation to collect and pay tax under Title IV of this Code. 
(1959 3563) 
5-4-3. - Exemptions. 
    No license shall be required for any governmental agency or exempt organization that is exempt from the taxes imposed by Title IV of this Code. 
(1959) 
5-4-4. - License Application, Term of License and Renewal. 
(A)  An applicant for a license shall submit an application to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City stating the information as may be required by the Finance Director. 
(B)  Each license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the business location for which it is issued. It shall be the duty of every person to whom a license has been issued, or any agent, servant, or employee utilized in the conduct of the business of the person licensed, to exhibit the license upon the request of a city official. 
(C)  No license shall be transferable. 
(1959 2574 3371 3563) 
5-4-5. - License Denial, Cancellation, Suspension, or Revocation. 
    A license may be denied, cancelled, suspended, or revoked for any reason stated in Chapter 1 of this Title or for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter. In addition, a license may be administratively cancelled upon the licensee's failure to respond to three consecutive notices of delinquency. 
(1959 2574 3563) 
CHAPTER 5. - CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE 

5-5-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter; shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Contractor shall mean any person who: 
(1)  Undertakes work with or for another person within the City to build, construct, alter, remodel, repair, equip, move or wreck any building or structure, or any portion thereof, or any public utility system, or public street, for which a permit from the City of Westminster is required and which work is to be accomplished for a fixed sum price, fee percentage or other compensation; 
(2)  Builds, constructs, alters or adds to any building or structure, either upon his own or another's property; 
(3)  Holds himself out to perform house moving or the moving of buildings or structures from one location to another; 
(4)  Holds himself out to perform the service of wrecking a building or other structure; 
(5)  Holds himself out to perform the service of plumber (which also requires a state master's license); or 
(6)  Holds himself out to perform the service of electrician (which also requires a state master's license). 
(1959 3563) 
5-5-2. - License Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any work as a contractor within the City without first obtaining a license pursuant to this Chapter. No permits shall be issued for work to be done by an unlicensed contractor. 
(1959 3563) 
5-5-3. - Exemptions. 
(A)  The license requirement shall not apply to: 
(1)  An owner of a single-family or duplex residential property who alters, repairs, remodels, equips, moves, or wrecks the building he owns when the owner furnishes all the material and labor. 
(2)  An owner who builds or constructs his own residence, or a building or structure accessory thereto that is intended for his own personal use. This exemption shall be permitted only once within a period of one year; otherwise, a license as a contractor shall be required. 
(B)  The exemption from license requirements does not waive permit requirements. 
(1959 3563 3599) 
5-5-4. - License Application; Renewal. 
(A)  Application for license shall be made at the City Building Division. The application for every license required by this Chapter shall contain: 
(1)  The name of the person desiring the license, and the names of the individual members of such firm, or of each of the directing officers of such corporation. 
(2)  The residential address of each applicant, or each of the individual members of such firm, or of each of the directing officers of such corporation. 
(3)  The address of the principal place of business. 
(4)  The street address, if any, where such business is to be carried on, if different from the other addresses previously stated. 
(5)  The class of license desired. 
(6)  Any other relevant information required by the terms of the provisions pertaining to the class of license sought. 
(7)  State master's license number for electricians and plumbers (no single master plumber or electrician may request a license for more than one company). 
(8)  The fee required by this Chapter. 
(B)  All licenses shall expire 12 months from date of issuance, unless cancelled, suspended or revoked, and shall be renewed annually upon application for renewal and payment of the required fees. Renewal may be denied pursuant to the provisions below. 
(1959 2574 3563) 
5-5-5. - Classification and Fees. 
(A)  The following classes of license and fees are hereby established: 
(1)  Class A Contractor. This license shall entitle the holder to contract for the construction, alteration, or repair of any type or size of structure permitted by this Code. The annual fee shall be $110.00. 
(2)  Class B Plumber. The annual fee for plumbers holding a State of Colorado Master's License shall be $110.00. 
(3)  Class C Electrician. No fee shall be charged for a license of a person holding a state license. 
(4)  Class D public way contractor. This class license shall entitle the holder to contract for work affecting public property or grounds, utility systems (either city-owned or contracting with the City for service of any type) or work within any street right-of-way, utility easement, or other public property. The annual fee for this class license shall be $110.00. 
(B)  It shall be the duty of every contractor to exhibit its license upon request of the Chief Building Official, his authorized representative, or any law enforcement officer of the City. 
(1959 2305 3563) 
5-5-6. - License Denial, Non-Renewal, Cancellation, Suspension, or Revocation. 
(A)  A license may be denied, cancelled, denied renewal, suspended or revoked for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter, for any reason set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title, or as listed below. 
(1)  The City Manager may suspend or revoke any license for unskillfulness, carelessness, or willful violation of any order for corrective action issued by the Chief Building Official. 
(2)  Any violation of the city building codes. 
(1959 2574 3563) 
5-5-7. - Bonds and Insurance Required. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any class D contractor to engage in any work without first obtaining a right-of-way excavation/construction permit from the City. 
(B)  Before the issuance of a right-of-way excavation/construction permit to a class D contractor, the contractor shall provide a surety bond payable to the City in the amount of $5,000.00, which bond shall be conditioned upon faithful compliance with all applicable laws and all terms and conditions of the right-of-way excavation/construction permit and shall also indemnify and hold the City harmless from any liability resulting from the class D contractor's work. If the class D contractor's work is done on behalf of the City as principal, and a performance bond is required by the contractor's agreement with the City, then no additional bond shall be required pursuant to this Section. Franchised entities are exempt from this requirement, unless otherwise required by the individual franchise or by state or federal law. Independent contractors of franchised entities are not exempt, unless so provided by the applicable franchise. 
(C)  Before the issuance of a right-of-way excavation/construction permit, the contractor shall submit satisfactory certificates of either the insurance coverage required under his contract, or insurance in accordance with the following schedule, whichever is greater: 
TYPE OF INSURANCE AMOUNT (1) Workmen's compensation Statutory-In conformance with the Workmen's Compensation Act of Colorado (2) Employer's liability $500,000.00 (Aggregate) This insurance shall protect the contractor against all claims under the workmen's compensation laws and employer's liability laws of the State of Colorado. (3) Comprehensive automobile liability:  (a) Bodily injury $500,000.00 (each person)  (b) Property damage $500,000.00 (each occurrence) This insurance shall be written in comprehensive form and shall include all motor vehicles licensed for highway use, whether they are owned, non-owned, or hired. (4) Comprehensive general liability:  (a) Bodily injury $500,000.00 (each person)  (b) Property damage $500,000.00 (each occurrence) This insurance shall be written in comprehensive general liability form and shall include coverage for subcontractors. If work undertaken may require blasting, explosive conditions, or underground operations, the comprehensive general liability coverage shall include coverage of blasting, explosion, collapse of buildings, or damage to underground property. The insurance required in this Section shall be continued throughout the period of the contract work and maintenance period.  
(1959 3563) 
CHAPTER 7. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION 

5-7-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Collector shall mean the person or entity providing collection service for solid waste or recyclable materials. 
    Commercial customers shall mean any premise utilizing collection service where a commercial, industrial or institutional enterprise is carried on, including, without limitation, restaurants, hospitals, schools, day care centers, office buildings, nursing homes, clubs, churches and public facilities and multi-family customers. 
    Curbside shall mean at or near the perimeter of residential premises, whether or not there is a curb, but does not mean or permit placement on the sidewalk or in the street. 
    Curbside collection shall mean the collection of solid waste or recyclables placed at a curbside location. 
    Multi-family customers shall mean attached housing or multi-family residential properties for which there is a communal system for the collection of solid waste. 
    Recyclable materials shall mean materials that have been separated from solid waste and can be recovered as useful materials and are properly prepared for the purpose of recycling, provided that such materials have been designated by the city manager as recyclable pursuant to Subsection 5-7-9(a), W.M.C. 
    Recycling shall mean the process of recovering useful materials from solid waste, including items for re-use. 
    Residential customers shall mean all residential properties, regardless of whether or not individual units are included in homeowners' associations. 
    Service shall mean collecting, transporting or disposing of solid waste or recyclable materials. 
    Solid waste shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible waste, excluding discarded or abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, sewage, sludge, septic tank and cesspool pumpings or other sludge, discarded home or industrial appliances, hazardous wastes, materials used as fertilizers or for other productive purposes and recyclable materials that have been source separated for collection. 
    Solid waste collector shall mean the person who provides solid waste collection service on a regular, recurring schedule. 
    Source separation shall mean to separate recyclable materials from solid waste at the waste source. 
(247 1959 2017 2984 3657) 
5-7-2. - License Required. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a solid waste or recyclable materials collector within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a collection license for such activity. 
(B)  The following persons or entities are not required to obtain a license: 
(1)  A civic, community, benevolent or charitable nonprofit organization that collects, transports and markets materials for resource recovery solely for the purpose of raising funds for a charitable, civic or benevolent activity; 
(2)  A person who transports solid waste or recyclable materials produced by such person; 
(3)  A property owner or agent thereof who transports solid waste or recyclable materials left by a tenant upon such owner's property, so long as such property owner does not provide solid waste collection service for compensation for tenants on a regular or continuing basis; 
(4)  A demolition or construction contractor or landscaper who produces and transports solid waste in the course of such occupation, where the solid waste produced is merely incidental to the particular demolition or construction work being performed by such person. 
(247 1959 2017) 
5-7-3. - License Application. 
(A)  Any person desiring to obtain a license to engage in the business of solid waste or recycling materials collection shall make written application to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City. The application must be completed in its entirety. 
(B)  The application shall be reviewed by the City Manager who shall conduct such additional investigation as he deems necessary and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the license. 
(C)  In determining whether to grant or deny a license, the City Manager shall take into consideration: 
(1)  The character of the applicant or its officers or directors, especially any previous license violations or criminal convictions; 
(2)  Whether licenses granted by the City are adequate to meet the reasonable needs of the community; 
(3)  If the applicant has previously done business in the City, the number of complaints received from citizens concerning the applicant's operations; and 
(4)  The review and conclusion, if any, of the environmental advisory board. 
(247 1959 2017 2984) 
5-7-4. - License Administration. 
(A)  Every license issued by the City shall indicate the business name and address, the mailing address, and the license fee paid by the licensee. The licensee is required to have a prominently displayed and affixed decal issued by the City in accordance with and subject to the terms and conditions provided in this Chapter for the issuance of a license and such other rules and regulations concerning the display of such decals that the City Clerk may issue from time to time. 
(B)  Whenever a licensee wishes to add or change vehicles authorized to operate within the City, the licensee shall submit a written request for a license amendment to the City Clerk, together with identifying information for each new vehicle to be licensed and the fees required by this Chapter. 
(C)  Every licensee who changes his business address shall notify the City Clerk promptly in writing. 
(247 1959 2017 2984) 
5-7-5. - Fees. 
(A)  Upon approval of a license application, but prior to issuance, the collector shall furnish to the City Clerk an annual non-refundable license fee of $250.00, plus the following license fees to be paid annually for each vehicle used by the collector within the City: 
Solid waste collection vehicle ..... $250.00 
Recyclable materials collection vehicle ..... $ 10.00 
(B)  The renewal fee shall be the same as the current fee for a new license and shall be payable at the time of filing the application for renewal. 
(C)  The fee to license a new vehicle pursuant to a license amendment shall be the same as specified in paragraph (A) above. 
(D)  All fees collected pursuant to this Chapter shall be applied to the cost of administering this Chapter. 
(247 1959 2017) 
5-7-6. - Term of License and Renewal. 
(A)  All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on December 31 after the date of issuance, unless cancelled, or revoked, and may be renewed upon submission of a completed application for renewal and payment of the required fee. The application shall include a current description of the business recycling program and any efforts the applicant has made to increase customer recycling. Licenses are not transferable. 
(B)  The renewal application shall be reviewed by the City Manager, who shall have the power to grant or deny such license renewal and to impose reasonable limitations and restrictions on any license renewed. 
(247 1959 2017 2984) 
5-7-7. - License Denial, Cancellation, Suspension or Revocation. 
(A)  A license may be denied, cancelled, denied renewal, suspended or revoked for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter, for any reason set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title or on the grounds that the health, safety or welfare of the community may be endangered by the continued operation of the license. 
(B)  A license may be denied, cancelled, denied renewal, suspended or revoked by the City Manager. The licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the special permit and license board, after notice. The notice shall set forth the reasons for the proposed action, in writing, and shall be given by personal delivery to the licensee or mailed to the address contained on the license, postage prepaid, or as provided in Chapter 1 of this Title. Said notice shall be given no less than ten days prior to a hearing to be scheduled before the special permit and license board. 
(C)  A license may be summarily suspended for no more than 30 days by the City Manager when required for the immediate protection of the public health, safety and welfare. A hearing shall be scheduled as soon as may be reasonably possible. 
(D)  The Special Permit and License Board shall conduct a hearing on an appeal of the denial of a new license or the non-renewal, suspension or revocation of a license pursuant to Chapter 1 of Title V. The Special Permit and License Board shall deliver its decision in writing within 30 days. 
(E)  Decisions of the Special Permit and License Board may be appealed to the [district court] pursuant to Chapter 1 of this Title. The decision of the [district court] shall be deemed final for purposes of judicial review. 
(247 1959 2017 2574 2984) 
5-7-8. - Recycling Requirement. 
(A)  All collectors providing solid waste collection services to residential customers shall offer and provide curbside recycling collection services to all such customers who desire such services for such materials as are designated from time to time by the City Manager as provided in Section 5-7-9, W.M.C. 
(B)  Collection of recyclable materials shall be offered by a collector to all multifamily and commercial customers. 
(C)  Collectors providing only large collection bin services to customers for short-term projects, such as roll-off dumpsters for construction and demolition activities, may, but are not required to, offer recycling services to these customers for this activity. 
(D)  All licensed collectors of recyclable materials and solid waste operating within the City shall have the following duties and rights: 
(1)  Except for materials that customers have not properly prepared for recycling, collectors may not dispose of recyclable materials set out by recycling customers by any means that may result in the materials not being recycled or being disposed of in an improper manner. 
(2)  The collector shall establish such policies and procedures as are necessary to provide for the orderly collection of recyclable materials, including requirements regarding the preparation of materials for collection, the collection of recyclable materials and requirements for source separation. 
(3)  In the event that a collector elects to perform collection of solid waste or recyclable materials through subcontractors or agents, such agency relationship shall not relieve the collector of responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this Code and the rules promulgated hereunder. 
(4)  All recyclable materials placed for collection shall be owned by and be the responsibility of the customer until the materials are collected by the collector. The material then shall become the property and the responsibility of the collector. 
(E)  Frequency of collection: 
(1)  Curbside recycling collection services shall be provided to residential customers on at least a once-monthly basis and on the same day as the day of collection of solid waste from the customer. 
(2)  Collectors providing collection services to multi-family or commercial customers shall provide services for the collection of recyclable materials from such customers who desire such service on such frequency as is necessary to prevent overflow of the recycling containers. 
(247 1959 2017 2984 3657) 
5-7-9. - Designation of Recyclable Materials. 
(A)  The City Manager shall periodically, after consultation with representatives of the licensed collectors operating within the City and the environmental advisory board, determine which items shall be designated for recycling collection based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  Local, state and federal laws and regulations; 
(2)  Potential for waste stream reduction; 
(3)  Availability of markets; 
(4)  Market price; 
(5)  Community recycling concerns; 
(6)  Safety factors and risks of transportation; and 
(7)  Risks of commingling of liquid wastes. 
The list of designated recyclables shall be kept on file for public inspection in the City Clerk's office. 
(B)  If market factors or other circumstances arise during a calendar year that severely impact a collector's ability to comply with this Chapter, the collector may provide such information in writing to the city manager with a request that a particular material be removed from the list of materials designated for recycling. The collector requesting the change shall continue to collect the recyclable materials designated by the City Manager until the City Manager notifies all licensed collectors that a particular item has been removed from the list of designated recyclable materials. A collector may offer collection of recyclable materials not designated by the City Manager at any time, upon written notice to the City Manager and the City Clerk. 
(C)  All collectors shall be responsible for notifying their customers of the items designated for recycling. 
(D)  The city manager is authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectuate the implementation and enforcement of this Chapter. 
(247 1959 2017 2984) 
5-7-10. - Designated Collection Days. 
(A)  No collector shall operate in a residential area except on the days of the week designated by the City Manager for each area of the City. 
(B)  The City Manager may provide for exceptions, based on holidays, severe weather, or inadvertently missed customers. 
(247 1959 2017 2984) 
5-7-11. - Collection Vehicles. 
(A)  The licensee shall display its name on both sides of every vehicle operated in the conduct of its business in permanent, plain and legible figures and letters not less than three inches in height and in a color contrasting to that of the body of such vehicle, which shall be kept in such condition as to permit the same to be easily read at a distance of at least 60 feet. 
(247 1959 2017) 
5-7-12. - Records and Reports. 
(A)  Each collector licensed pursuant to this Chapter shall submit to the City Clerk as a part of the license application a written plan describing how the recycling collection services will be provided, including the prices, the manner of separation and collection, and the frequency of collection. Any changes to the plan shall be submitted to the City Clerk prior to implementation of the change. This information may be disseminated by the City for public information purposes. A collector may request in writing that sections of their plan be held in confidence as a trade secret or confidential commercial information. Such requests shall be honored by the City to the extent authorized by the Colorado Open Records Act, as determined by the City in its sole discretion. 
(B)  All collectors shall report to the City by March 31st of each year an annual recycling report for the previous year on forms to be provided by the City. A collector may request in writing that sections of the report be held in confidence as a trade secret or confidential commercial information. Such requests shall be honored by the city to the extent authorized by the Colorado Open Records Act, as determined by the City in its sole discretion. 
(C)  The environmental advisory board shall review a business' annual recycling report for compliance with the recycling requirements of this Chapter. The review and any recommendations of the board shall be submitted to the City Manager, who may consider the recommendations when deciding to approve or deny license applications, renewal, suspension or revocation pursuant to this Chapter. 
(247 1959 2017 2984 3657) 
5-7-13. - Disposal of Solid Waste. 
(A)  All persons holding licenses pursuant to this Chapter and engaged in the business of the collection of solid waste shall dispose of all such solid waste at any disposal site that is approved by the state. No solid waste shall be disposed of at any other location, either inside or outside of the City. 
(B)  No person, other than the customer or the collector of recyclable materials, shall take physical possession of any recyclable materials placed for collection. A separate offense shall be deemed committed at each address from which recyclable materials are taken in violation of this paragraph. 
(C)  No person shall operate any vehicle in such a manner as to deposit on, or litter, any public way with solid waste. 
(D)  All persons holding licenses pursuant to this Chapter are required to pick up solid waste properly prepared for disposal by the customer pursuant to any agreement between the collector and the customer. 
(247 1959 2017 2984) 
CHAPTER 8. - PAWNBROKERS 

5-8-1. - Legislative Intent. 
    In addition to the findings expressed in Section 5-1-1, W.M.C., the City Council finds that the local regulation of the pawn shop industry is necessary to protect the citizens of Westminster from potentially fraudulent criminal conduct in connection with the receipt, purchase, and sale of pawned property. 
(3563) 
5-8-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Applicant shall mean: (1) an individual, or (2) all general or limited partners of a partnership, or (3) all members of the board of directors or shareholders of a corporation, that applies for a license pursuant to this Chapter. 
    Contract for pawn shall mean a contract entered into between a pawnbroker and a customer pursuant to which money is advanced to the customer by the pawnbroker on the delivery of tangible personal property by the customer on the condition that the customer, for a fixed price and within a fixed period of time, to be no less than 30 days, has the option to cancel said contract. 
    Fixed price shall mean the amount agreed upon to cancel a contract for pawn during the option period. Said fixed price shall not exceed one-fifth of the original purchase price for each month, plus the original purchase price. 
    Fixed time shall mean that period of time, to be no less than 30 days, as set forth in a contract for pawn, for an option to cancel said contract. 
    Option shall mean the fixed time and the fixed price agreed upon by the customer and the pawnbroker in which a contract for pawn may be, but does not have to be, rescinded by the customer. 
    Pawnbroker shall mean a person regularly engaged in the business of making contracts for pawn and/or purchase transactions in the course of his business. 
    Purchase transaction shall mean the purchase by a pawnbroker in the course of his business of tangible personal property for resale, other than newly manufactured tangible personal property that has not previously been sold at retail, when such purchase does not constitute a contract for pawn. 
    Tangible personal property shall mean all personal property other than choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness, which property is deposited with or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in the course of his business in connection with a contract for pawn or purchase transaction. 
(1965 3563) 
5-8-3. - License Required. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a pawnbroker within the City of Westminster without first obtaining a license to conduct such business pursuant to this Chapter. 
(B)  All requirements specified in Article 56 of Title l2, C.R.S, are hereby incorporated by reference in this Chapter. In the event of a conflict between those requirements and the requirements set forth herein, the more restrictive requirement shall apply. 
(1965 3563) 
5-8-4. - License Application. 
(A)  The applicant for a license shall submit a verified application to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk, which shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone number, and description of the applicant, including date of birth. In the case of a corporation, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the corporation and the agent for service of process. 
(2)  The names and addresses of any other pawn shops owned or operated by the applicant in the State of Colorado. 
(3)  A statement of whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any federal, state or municipal law, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(4)  A brief statement or drawing of the nature and character of the signage or advertising to be used. 
(5)  The location of the proposed business. 
(6)  A copy of the applicant's lease or other evidence of the applicant's right to possession of the premises. 
(7)  Information regarding the zoning of the location of the premises. 
(8)  Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the applicant as may be determined by the Chief of Police to be necessary for the protection of the public welfare. 
(B)  The applicant for a license renewal shall submit a verified application to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk, which shall include any information listed in subsection (A), above, that has changed since the original application or the last renewal application. 
(C)  If the application is approved by the City Manager, upon posting the bond required by this Chapter and payment of the prescribed annual license fee by the applicant, the license shall be issued. 
(D)  All original applications shall be accompanied by a $1,000.00 non-refundable application fee to defray the cost of reviewing and evaluating the application. No application fee is refundable in the event of revocation or suspension of a license. The application fee may be refunded at the discretion of the City Manager, if an application for a license is denied. 
(1965 3563) 
5-8-5. - Application Review. 
(A)  Upon receipt of an application, the City Clerk shall forward it to the City Manager and the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall cause such investigation of the applicant to be made as the chief may deem necessary for the protection of the public and return his recommendations to the City Manager. The City Manager shall consider the following factors prior to approving or denying an application: 
(1)  Whether the investigation discloses that the applicant has been convicted of misdemeanors or felonies that were not disclosed on the application; 
(2)  If the applicant has disclosed convictions on the application, whether the nature of the offenses are relevant to the operation of a pawn shop. If such convictions exist, the City Manager may also consider that number of convictions and the length of time since the last conviction; 
(3)  Whether investigation of other pawn shops operated by the applicant indicates a failure to comply with the requirements of state law; 
(4)  Whether the investigation discloses other identifiable threats to public safety. 
(B)  If the application or license renewal is approved by the City Manager, upon posting the bond required by this Chapter and payment of the annual license fee by the applicant, the license will be issued. 
(C)  The initial application and annual license fee for pawn shops shall be $1,000.00. 
(D)  All licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire annually on December 31, unless cancelled, suspended or revoked, and shall be renewed annually upon application for renewal and payment of the annual license fee. The renewal application shall be reviewed by the City Manager, who shall have the power to grant or deny such license renewal and to impose reasonable limitations and restrictions on any license renewed. The City Manager shall evaluate the application under the criteria set forth for original applications. 
(1965 3563) 
5-8-6. - License Denial, Non-Renewal, Suspension, Cancellation, or Revocation. 
    A license may be denied, cancelled, denied renewal, suspended or revoked for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter, or for any reason set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title. 
(1965 2574 3563) 
5-8-7. - Bond Required. 
    Before any license shall be issued to an applicant pursuant to this Chapter, each applicant shall file with the City Clerk a cash bond, certified funds payable to the City, or a surety bond running to the City in the sum of $10,000.00. If a surety bond is provided, it shall be executed by the applicant as principal and at least one surety upon which service of process may be made in the State of Colorado. The bond shall be conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all the provisions of the laws of the City and the statutes of the State of Colorado regulating and concerning the applicant's business, and will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant for any violation of said laws or statutes, together with all judgments and costs that may be recovered against him by any person for damage growing out of any such business with the applicant. Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the City for the benefit of the aggrieved person. Such bond must be approved by the City Attorney, both as to form and as to the responsibility of the surety. 
(1965 3646) 
5-8-8. - License Administration. 
(A)  Every pawnbroker shall provide the Westminster Police Department, on a weekly basis, with two records, on a form to be provided or approved by the Police Department, of all tangible personal property accepted during the preceding week and one copy of the customer's declaration of ownership. The form shall contain the same information required to be recorded in the pawnbroker's register pursuant to Subsections 5-8-9(A) and (B), W.M.C. The Police Department shall designate the day of the week on which the records and declarations shall be submitted. 
(B)  The Police Department will issue a quarterly invoice to each licensee listing the charges for all forms used by the Police Department pursuant to the state statute regulating pawn shops. The pawnbroker shall pay the invoices within 30 days. 
(C)  In the event of a transfer of a pawn shop ownership: 
(1)  Prior to or within 30 days after the transfer of ownership of a pawn shop, or of the transfer of ownership of any of the capital stock of the corporation, the new owner of the stock or business shall file with the City Clerk a written report of the transfer on forms provided by the City Clerk. The report shall be accompanied by an investigation fee of $250.00. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the report of transfer, the City Clerk shall report the transfer to the City Manager. After sufficient investigation by the Police Department, the City Manager may approve or deny the transfer. Criteria for approval shall be the same as for an original application. The City Manager shall consider the character of the proposed new owner or owners and whether the new owner or owners comply with all requirements of the code and rules and regulations adopted pursuant to the code. If the new owner or owners are not approved, the license may be revoked. 
(1965 3563) 
5-8-9. - Conditions of Operation. 
(A)  A pawnbroker shall keep a numerical register in which he shall record the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and date of birth of the customer, and the driver's license number or other identification number from any other form of identification that is allowed for the sale of valuable articles pursuant to Section 18-16-103, C.R.S., or for the sale of secondhand property pursuant to Section 18-13-114, C.R.S.; 
(2)  The date, time, and place of the contract for pawn or purchase transaction; and 
(3)  An accurate and detailed account and description of each item of tangible personal property, including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying marks on such property. 
(B)  The pawnbroker shall also obtain a written declaration of the customer's ownership, which shall state that the tangible personal property is totally owned by the customer, or shall have attached to such declaration a power of sale from the partial owner to the customer, how long the customer has owned the property, whether the customer or someone else found the property, and, if the property was found, the details of the finding. 
(C)  The pawnbroker shall require the customer to sign his name in the numerical register or other tangible or electronic record and on the declaration of ownership, and the pawnbroker shall give the customer a copy of the contract for pawn or a receipt of the purchase transaction. 
(D)  The pawnbroker shall require the customer to place an indelible print of the customer's index finger on the numerical register or other tangible record of the transaction. 
(E)  The pawnbroker shall make the numerical register or other tangible or electronic record available to the Westminster Police Department for inspection at any reasonable time. 
(F)  The pawnbroker shall keep each register or other tangible or electronic record for at least three years after the date of the last transaction entered in the register. 
(G)  A pawnbroker shall hold all contracted goods within his jurisdiction for a period of ten days following the maturity date of the contract for pawn, during which time such goods shall be held separate and apart from any other tangible personal property and shall not be changed in form or altered in any way. 
(H)  A pawnbroker shall hold all property purchased by him through a purchase transaction for 30 days following the date of purchase, during which time such property shall be held separate and apart from any other tangible personal property and shall not be changed in form or altered in any way. 
(1965 3563) 
5-8-10. - Prohibited Acts. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker: 
(1)  To enter into a contract for pawn or purchase transaction with any individual under the age of 18 years; 
(2)  To permit any customer to become obligated on the same day in any way under more than one contract for pawn agreement with the pawnbroker that would result in the pawnbroker obtaining a greater amount of money than would be permitted if the pawnbroker and customer had entered into only one contract for pawn covering the same tangible personal property; or 
(3)  To violate the terms of the contract for pawn. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for a customer to knowingly give false information with respect to the information required by Subsections 5-8-9(A), (B), or (C), W.M.C. 
(1965 3563) 
CHAPTER 9. - AMUSEMENT CENTERS 

5-9-1. - License Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct any place of amusement or recreation offering to the public for a fee the use of any pool or billiard table or any other amusement game or device, without first obtaining a license therefor pursuant to this Chapter. Licenses shall not be transferable and, upon a change of owner or change of location, a new license must be obtained. 
(1959 3016 3563) 
5-9-2. - Exemptions. 
    When operating a total of 12 or fewer amusement tables, games or devices referred to in this Chapter, any premise used principally for the conduct of another business, including, but not limited to, a grocery store, convenience store, drugstore, bowling alley or tavern, shall not be required to obtain an amusement center license in addition to a business license, but shall continue to be subject to the remaining provisions of this Chapter, unless otherwise noted here. 
(3563) 
5-9-3. - License Application and Review. 
    Conditions for applications for an original license or a renewal are: 
(A)  The applicant shall submit a verified application to the City Clerk, on forms provided by the City Clerk, and accompanied by the tax required by this Chapter. 
(B)  The application shall be reviewed by the City Manager, who shall have the power to grant or deny such license, to request an investigation by the Police Department, and to impose reasonable limitations and restrictions on any license so granted. The City Manager shall evaluate the application under the criteria set forth below and based upon the results of an investigation by the Police Department, if any: 
(1)  The character of the applicant; 
(2)  The applicant's prior experience and qualifications to operate such a business; 
(3)  Traffic volume and adequacy of parking and access; 
(4)  Compliance of the facility with all applicable zoning and building regulations; and 
(5)  Police activity in comparable businesses. 
(1959 2229 2707 3016 3563) 
5-9-4. - Fees and Taxes. 
(A)  There shall be no application fee for a new or renewal license. 
(B)  The licensee shall annually remit an excise tax of $40.00 per pool or billiard table or coin-operated amusement game or device, payable at the time of filing an application for an original or renewal license or when a new table or game or device is added to the premises. If a license is obtained or a pool or billiard table or coin-operated amusement game or device is added by the licensee after June 30 of a particular year, the tax shall be $20.00 each. 
(1959 2707 3016 3563) 
5-9-5. - Renewal. 
(A)  All licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire December 31st of the year for which issued, unless cancelled, suspended or revoked, and shall be renewed annually upon application for renewal and payment of the required taxes. 
(B)  The renewal application shall be reviewed by the City Manager, who shall have the power to grant or deny such license renewal and to impose reasonable limitations and restrictions on any license renewed. The City Manager shall evaluate the application under the criteria set forth for original applications. 
(C)  Failure to pay required taxes shall be grounds to deny renewal, and no renewal license shall be issued until such taxes are paid. 
(1959 2707 3016 3563) 
5-9-6. - License Denial, Cancellation, Non-Renewal, Suspension or Revocation. 
(A)  Upon his own motion, or upon complaint by the Chief of Police, the City Manager may cancel, suspend or revoke any license at any time for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter, or for any reason set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title. 
(B)  A license may be cancelled, denied renewal, suspended or revoked after the licensee has been given notice. The notice shall set forth the reasons for the proposed action, in writing, and shall be given by personal delivery to the applicant or mailed to the address contained in the license, postage prepaid, or as provided in Chapter 1 of this Title, and shall inform the licensee that he may request, in writing to the City Clerk, a hearing before the special permit and license board pursuant to subsection (E), below. Said notice shall be given no less than ten days prior to a hearing to be scheduled before the special permit and license board. 
(C)  An application for a new license may be denied by the City Manager, upon the grounds listed in Subsection 5-9-3(B), above, or Section 5-1-6, W.M.C. The applicant may appeal a denial to the special permit and license board, unless the reason for the denial is an incomplete application, nonconformance with the zoning or building code, or failure to pay any required fees or taxes. The reason for the denial of the application shall be provided to the applicant in writing. 
(D)  A license may be summarily suspended for no more than 30 days by the City Manager when required for the immediate protection of the public health, safety and welfare. A hearing shall be scheduled as soon as may be reasonably possible. 
(E)  The special permit and license board shall conduct a hearing on an appeal of the denial of a new license, the cancellation, denial of renewal, suspension or revocation of a license pursuant to the procedures established for hearings in Chapter 1 of this Title. The special permit and license board shall deliver its decision in writing within 30 days. 
(F)  Decisions of the special permit and license board are final, subject only to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(G)  Any premises licensed pursuant to this Chapter, including the parking lots and streets and sidewalks adjacent to the premises that become the location of frequent or repeated violations of the City's ordinances, including, but not limited to, disturbances, assaults, thefts, malicious mischief and disorderly conduct, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, which shall be abated pursuant to the provisions specified in Chapter 4 of Title VIII. 
(1959 2229 2574 3016 3563) 
5-9-7. - Hours of Operation; Age Limitation. 
(A)  The licensee shall observe the following hours of operation: 
(1)  Except for premises licensed for the sale of fermented malt beverages, malt, vinous or spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises, premises licensed pursuant to this Chapter shall be open to the public not earlier than 10:00 a.m. and not later than 11:00 p.m. on Sundays through Thursdays and on Fridays and Saturdays shall be open to the public no earlier than 10:00 a.m. and not later than midnight (12:00 a.m.). An adult 21 years of age or older shall be present on and responsible for management of the premises during all hours of operation. 
(2)  Private events. Licensed amusement centers may conduct private events outside the hours of operation stated herein, subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  The center may not be licensed for the sale of fermented malt beverages, malt, vinous or spirituous liquor, nor may any of the same be sold, served, or consumed on the premises. 
(b)  If minors are in attendance, there must be one adult supervisor for every eight minors. 
(c)  Minors must remain in the building and must not be allowed to leave and re-enter during the event. 
(d)  Participants must not be allowed to congregate or loiter in the parking lot or nearby areas and must comply with the regulation of nighttime juvenile loitering contained in Section 6-3-11, W.M.C. 
(e)  The center must not allow any form of entertainment other than those amusement devices for which it is licensed. 
(f)  The center must report the event to the City Clerk in writing, with a copy to the Police Department, at least 72 hours in advance. 
    Private event means an event for which the center has closed the premises to the general public. 
(B)  Unless the licensee of the premises maintains a full-time security guard, or has 12 or fewer amusement tables, games or devices, it shall be unlawful for a licensee or any other person in charge of the licensed premises to permit any pool or billiard table or coin-operated amusement games or devices to be used by any person under the age of 16 years, or to allow any such persons to congregate or remain upon the licensed premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. Such security guard shall be in addition to the adult manager of the premises. This subsection shall not apply to premises licensed for the sale of fermented malt beverages, malt, vinous or spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises. 
(C)  When operating a total of 12 or fewer amusement tables, games or devices referred to in this Chapter, premises used principally for the conduct of another business, including, but not limited to, grocery store, convenience store, drugstore, bowling alley or tavern, shall not be subject to the provisions of this Section. 
(1959 3016 3563) 
5-9-8. - Security Guards. 
(A)  The owner of any premises licensed pursuant to this Chapter shall maintain security guards. The number of security guards required shall be calculated as follows: 
(1)  Premises Licensed for the Sale of Fermented Malt Beverages, or Malt, Vinous or Spirituous Liquor for Consumption on the Premises: For 13 to 50 tables or machines, one guard on duty during all hours of operation; for more than 50 tables or machines, one or more additional guards may be required for such hours as the City Manager may decide based on, but not limited to, the number of machines, the location and design of the premises, the number of occupants, peak hours of operation, and staffing levels. 
(2)  All Other Premises: For 13 to 50 tables or machines, one guard on duty during all hours of operation; for more than 50 tables or machines, one or more additional guards may be required for such hours as the City Manager may decide based on, but not limited to, the number of machines, the location and design of the premises, the number of occupants, peak hours of operation, and staffing levels. 
(B)  For premises licensed for more than 50 machines or tables, any requirements for security guards in excess of one security guard, imposed pursuant to subsection (A) of this Section, shall be stated on the license. These conditions shall be reviewed annually by the City Manager upon application for renewal of the license or at any time at the request of the City Council or the chief of police, based on a finding that security measures are insufficient to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The City Manager may adjust these conditions, based on, but not limited to, the following factors: The number of machines, the location and design of the premises, the number of occupants, peak hours of operation, and staffing levels. The City Manager's decision regarding additional security shall be mailed to the licensee. The licensee may request a hearing on the matter before the special permit and license board within ten days after the letter is mailed to the licensee. Failure to timely request a hearing shall be deemed a waiver of a hearing. 
(1959 3016 3563 3646) 
5-9-9. - Prohibited Acts. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or his agent knowingly to do, to encourage, to participate, or to permit any of the following acts on the premises of any place licensed pursuant to this Chapter or on any parking lot, street or sidewalk adjacent to the premises: 
(1)  Gamble or to permit gambling upon any pool or billiard table or coin-operated amusement game or device. The licensee is hereby specifically charged with knowledge of and made liable for the use of all tables, games and devices on the premises in any manner constituting a violation of this Section. 
(2)  Use, sell, or distribute any illegal or dangerous drug, chemical substance, or narcotic. Any premise licensed under the Colorado Beer Code or Colorado Liquor Code shall conform to said code and shall not allow the use, sale or distribution of beer or alcohol to any minor. 
(3)  Create any disturbance, unlawful or disorderly act, or activity offensive to the senses of the average citizen, or to the residents of the neighborhood to be committed by any person or group of persons upon the premises. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Any licensee and its employees shall immediately report to the Police Department any unlawful or disorderly act, conduct or disturbance committed on the premises. Failure to comply with the requirements of this Section may be considered by the City Manager in any action relating to revocation, suspension or non-renewal of a license. Repeated failure to comply with the requirements of this Section shall constitute prima facie grounds for the suspension, revocation or non-renewal of a license. 
(2)  Each licensee shall post and keep at all times visible to the public in a conspicuous place on the premises a sign to be provided by the City Clerk's office, which shall be in the following form: 
"WARNING: CITY OF WESTMINSTER POLICE MUST BE NOTIFIED OF ALL DISTURBANCES IN THIS ESTABLISHMENT AND ON THE GROUNDS AND PARKING LOT THAT ARE A PART OF THIS ESTABLISHMENT." 
(C)  It shall not be a defense to a prosecution under this Section that the licensee was not personally present on the premises at the time such unlawful or disorderly act, conduct or disturbance was permitted, encouraged or participated in; provided, however, that an agent, servant or employee of the licensee shall not be personally responsible hereunder when absent from the premises and not on duty. 
(1959 2001 3016 3563) 
CHAPTER 10. - MEDICAL AND RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA 

5-10-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Consumer means a person 21 years of age or older who purchases marijuana or marijuana products for personal use by persons 21 years of age or older, but not for resale to others. 
    Marijuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa L., as further defined in Title VI, Chapter 12, of this Code. 
    Marijuana cultivation facility means an entity licensed to cultivate, prepare, and package marijuana and sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers. 
    Marijuana establishment means a marijuana cultivation facility, marijuana testing facility, marijuana product manufacturing facility, or retail marijuana store. 
    Marijuana product manufacturing facility means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana; manufacture, prepare and package marijuana products; and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers. 
    Marijuana products means concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments, and tinctures. 
    Marijuana testing facility means an entity licensed to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana. 
    Medical marijuana means marijuana that is grown and sold for a purpose authorized by Article XVIII, Section 14, of the Colorado Constitution. 
    Medical marijuana center, medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer, and optional premises cultivation operation shall have the same meanings as set forth in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Section 12-43.3-101, et seq., C.R.S., as the same may, from time to time, be amended. 
    Patient and primary caregiver shall have the same meanings as set forth in Article XVIII, Section 14, of the Colorado Constitution. 
    Person means a natural person, partnership, association, company, corporation, limited liability company, or organization, or a manager, agent, owner, director, servant, officer, or employee thereof. 
    Retail marijuana store means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities and marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers. 
(3534 3666) 
5-10-2. - Findings. 
    The City Council makes the following findings: 
(A)  The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Section 12-43-3-101, et seq., C.R.S., clarifies Colorado law regarding the scope and extent of Article XVIII, Section 14, of the Colorado Constitution. 
(B)  Article XVIII, Section 16, of the Colorado Constitution addresses personal recreational use of marijuana and allows municipalities to prohibit the operation of marijuana establishments through the enactment of an ordinance. 
(C)  As a matter of the City's local land use and zoning authority as a home rule municipality pursuant to Article XX, Section 6 of the Colorado Constitution, and consistent with the authorization provided by Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Section 12-43.3-101, et seq., C.R.S. and after evaluating, inter alia, the measures' conflict with federal law and the potential secondary impacts associated with the retail sale, distribution, cultivation and dispensing of medical and recreational marijuana through marijuana establishments, medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation operations, and medical marijuana-infused products manufacturers' licenses, the City finds and determines that such land uses have an unacceptable adverse effect on the health, safety and welfare of the City and the inhabitants thereof. 
(D)  This ordinance is necessary to protect and is enacted in furtherance of the public health, safety and welfare of the City. 
(E)  This Chapter is intended to apply and shall apply to all property, businesses, and business enterprises operating within the City, whether stationary, mobile, or virtual. 
(3666) 
5-10-3. - Uses Prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated or permit to be operated a medical marijuana center, an optional premises cultivation operation, or a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility, or a marijuana establishment in the City. 
(3666) 
5-10-4. - Prohibited Land Uses Not Affected. 
    This ordinance is not intended to repeal, modify or negate any provision of Subsection 11-1-3(6), W.M.C., regarding prohibited land uses. 
5-10-5. - Severability. 
    If any clause, sentence, paragraph, or part of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall, for any reason, be adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction invalid, such judgment shall not affect application to other persons or circumstances. 
5-10-6. - Personal Recreational Use. 
    Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit, regulate or otherwise impair the personal recreational use of marijuana by persons 21 years of age or older, as defined by Article XVIII, Section 16, of the Colorado Constitution, provided that such personal use does not involve the sale of marijuana or the operation of a marijuana establishment within the City. 
(3666) 
5-10-7. - Penalty; Nuisance Declared. 
(A)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter. Any such violation is hereby designated a criminal offense, and any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine or imprisonment or both pursuant to Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. Each day that a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter continues to exist shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. 
(B)  The conduct of any activity or business in violation of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated pursuant to the provisions for the abatement of nuisance provided for in Chapter 4 of Title VIII of this Code. 
(3666) 
CHAPTER 11. - MOBILE HOME PARKS 

5-11-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Access road shall mean that area privately owned and maintained and set aside within a mobile home park for an interior road system, providing principal means of ingress to individual mobile home spaces and egress to street. 
    Independent mobile home shall mean a mobile home that has a toilet and a bathtub or shower. 
    Inspector shall mean the building inspector of the City of Westminster or his authorized representative. 
    Mobile home shall mean any vehicle used, or so constructed as to permit it's being used, as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and duly licensable as such and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons within the same family. 
    Mobile home park shall mean a parcel of land not less than 15 acres under single ownership that has been planned and approved for the placement of mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, for transient and nontransient use, sometimes termed a trailer camp. 
    Mobile home space shall mean a plot of ground within a mobile home park designated for the accommodation of one mobile home. 
    Patio shall mean a paved area adjacent to the mobile home parking space, and accessible from the main entrance to the parked mobile home. 
    Permanent addition shall mean any structural extension from any portion of a mobile home, not including temporary canvas awning and skirting. 
    Permit shall mean a written permit issued by the City of Westminster Building Inspector to construct or alter the mobile home park under these rules and regulations. 
    Street or Highway shall mean a public thoroughfare that affords principal means of access to abutting property. 
(487) 
5-11-2. - Permits. 
    No person shall alter, install or remove any structural improvement in any mobile home park without first securing a building permit from the inspector authorizing such alterations, installation or removal. 
(487) 
5-11-3. - Application. 
    An application for a permit authorizing any structural alteration, installation or removal in a mobile home park shall set forth the following information, including a plat thereof. 
(A)  The location, area and dimensions of the tract of land to be occupied by the park. 
(B)  The number, location and size of all mobile home spaces. 
(C)  The location and width of roadways and walkways. 
(D)  The location of service buildings, recreation facilities and any other proposed structures. 
(E)  Topography of the proposed park at two-foot contour intervals. 
(F)  Fencing, landscaping and screen planting. 
(G)  Lighting of roadways, driveways and pedestrian walks. 
(H)  The location, size and type of water and sewer and gas lines; and traps, vents and risers for water and sewer and gas. 
(I)  The location, plans and specifications for any permanent structure to be used as an owner's or caretaker's residence. 
(J)  Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park. 
(487) 
5-11-4. - Inspection of Mobile Parks. 
    The inspector shall make regular monthly inspections of all mobile home parks located within the City and shall enforce compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(A)  Authority: The inspector shall have the authority to make inspections of mobile home parks at reasonable times for the purpose of determining whether this Chapter is being complied with and shall have authority to inspect the register of occupants required herein. 
(B)  Access: It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse access to a mobile home park to the inspector for the purpose of inspection. 
(487) 
5-11-5. - Location, Space and General Layout. 
    The mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained site and shall be so located that its drainage will not endanger any water supply. All such mobile home parks shall be in areas free from swamps or other potential breeding places for insects or rodents. 
(A)  Area: The area of the mobile home park shall be at [least] 15 acres and large enough to accommodate: 
(1)  The designated number of mobile home spaces; 
(2)  Necessary streets and roadways; 
(3)  Parking areas for motor vehicles; and 
(4)  Service areas. 
(B)  Mobile Home Space: Each mobile home shall be at least 35 feet wide, and shall abut on a driveway or other clear area with unobstructed access to a public street. Such spaces shall be clearly defined, and mobile homes shall be parked in such spaces so that no mobile home will be less than five feet from the side and rear boundaries of the mobile home space, and no mobile home shall be less than ten feet from the exterior boundary of the mobile home park. No mobile home shall be parked less than 25 feet from any front property line abutting a street or highway or walkway. Areas between mobile home spaces and public right-of-way not used for roadway purposes shall be grassed and/or landscaped and kept free from weeds, rubbish or trash. No mobile home shall be allowed to remain in a mobile home park except on a mobile home space. 
(C)  Access Roads: Access roads must be graded for drainage, surfaced with concrete or asphaltic concrete, and maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash, debris and [snow], all to be done in accordance with City requirements. Each access road shall be continuous and shall connect with other circulation roads. Minimum width for access roads shall be 36 feet. Curves on all access roads shall have a minimum inside radius of not less than 20 feet. All such roads shall be kept clear of all obstructions to allow movement of vehicles at any time. 
(D)  Off-Street Parking: Areas not less than ten feet by 25 feet shall be provided for the parking of motor vehicles in addition to each required mobile home space to accommodate at least the number of vehicles equal to the number of mobile home spaces provided. Such parking spaces may be located within the mobile home space to be served, but in no case shall be more than 200 feet from the mobile home space to be served. Such parking areas shall be surfaced as required for access roads. 
(E)  Service Facilities: Every mobile home space shall be provided with a covered vault or building constructed according to [the] City Building Code with a minimum of 192 cubic feet of volume for the storage of personal belongings. This requirement may be met by a building providing a like amount of space for each mobile home space. 
(F)  Not more than ten mobile home spaces shall be provided for each gross acre within the mobile home park. 
(G)  Recreation Facilities: Space shall be provided for recreational facilities in an amount not less than 700 square feet for each mobile home space. 
(487 3646) 
5-11-6. - Locations and Construction of Service Buildings. 
    Service buildings shall: 
(A)  Be located 15 feet or more from any mobile home space. 
(B)  Be of fire resistant construction in conformity with all codes and ordinances of the City of Westminster. 
(487) 
5-11-7. - Water Supply. 
    The water supply for the mobile home park shall be a system that is owned and operated by a local government authority or a public utility company franchised in the City. The water system shall be connected by pipes to all service buildings and all mobile home spaces. Individual water service connections that are provided for direct use by mobile homes shall be so constructed that they will not be damaged by the parking of such mobile homes. Such connections for mobile home spaces shall be provided with individual valves below frost depth, not less than 18 inches and with valve boxes to grade. 
(487) 
5-11-8. - Sewage Disposal. 
(A)  All plumbing in the mobile home park shall comply with the plumbing laws and health regulations of the City of Westminster, of the Counties of Adams and Jefferson, and of the State of Colorado. Sewage disposal shall be provided by a local government authority or a franchised public utility company. 
(B)  All Facilities Connected: A system for sanitary sewage shall be provided in all mobile home parks and all wastes and sewer lines discharging from buildings and mobile homes shall be connected thereto. 
(C)  Connection: Each mobile home space shall be provided with at least a three-inch sewer connection, trapped below frost line, with the inlet of the line to be not less than one inch above the surface of the ground. The sewer connection shall be provided with suitable fittings so that a watertight connection and proper vent can be made between the mobile home drain and the sewer connection. Such mobile home connections shall be so constructed that they can be closed airtight when not linked to a mobile home, and shall be trapped in such a manner as to maintain them in an odor-free condition. 
(487) 
5-11-9. - Refuse Disposal. 
(A)  System Required: The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the park shall be so managed as to avoid health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident hazards or air pollution. 
(B)  Containers: Refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, rodent-proof containers, which shall be located within the mobile home park. Such containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to prevent any refuse from overflowing. Garbage shall be deposited in separate watertight containers with tight fitting lids. All receptacles shall be designated as to type of use. Holders shall be provided for all refuse and garbage containers. Such container holders shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning around them. No dish or wastewater of any kind shall be thrown or discharged upon the ground of any mobile home park. 
(C)  Incinerators: Incinerators for use by individual mobile homes and located on the individual mobile home sites are prohibited. At least one incinerator for the purpose of burning combustible trash shall be provided by the mobile home park operator, unless such refuse is collected regularly and no burning is allowed. Such incinerators must be constructed of a size to provide a minimum of one-half cubic foot per mobile home up to and including ten mobile homes and one cubic foot per mobile home space in excess of ten spaces. The incinerators shall be constructed of a fire resistant material, grated not less than 12 inches above the ground, provided with a clean-out space beneath the grate, equipped with an access door and with a vent stack extending at least 12 feet above the ground, capped with a spark arrester of three-fourths inch mesh, or less. Incinerators shall be fired only when attended by some person specifically authorized by the owner or operator of the mobile home park. 
(487) 
5-11-10. - Electricity. 
(A)  Installation to Each Space: An electrical outlet supplying 240 volts 100 amperes of service shall be provided for each mobile home space. The installation shall comply with all state and local electrical codes and ordinances. Such electrical outlets shall be weatherproof. No power line shall be permitted to lie on the ground or to be suspended less than 18 feet above the ground. 
(B)  Area Lights: Street and yard lights shall be provided in such number and intensity as to insure safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. A light shall be located at each outside entrance of the service buildings, which shall be kept lighted during the hours of darkness. 
(487) 
5-11-11. - Fuel. 
    Natural gas or electricity shall be made available for cooking and heating purposes in all mobile homes within the [mobile home park]. All gas and electrical installations shall be made in accordance with applicable city and state codes. 
(487) 
5-11-12. - Fire Protection. 
(A)  Littering Prohibited: Mobile home areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials. 
(B)  Fire Extinguishers: Hand fire extinguishers of a type approved by the Chief of the Westminster Fire Department shall be maintained in effective working order and located in convenient places in the ratio of one to each eight units or mobile home spaces. 
(487) 
5-11-13. - Alterations and Additions; Restrictions of Animals and Pets; Signs. 
(A)  Conformity: No alterations or additions shall be made to or within any mobile home park unless in conformity to this Chapter. No permanent additions of any kind, not including temporary canvas awning and skirting, shall be built onto, or become a part of, any mobile home. 
(B)  Wheels Not to be Removed: The wheels of the mobile home shall not be removed, except temporarily when necessary for repairs. Jacks or stabilizers may be placed under the frame of the mobile home to prevent movement on the springs while the mobile home is parked and occupied. 
(C)  Owner to Control Pets: No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other pet animal shall permit it to run at large, or to commit any nuisance within the limits of any mobile home park. 
(D)  Signs: Each mobile home park shall provide a sign at each entrance thereto, to include the name of the park and the street address in letters of a minimum of six inches in height. Each mobile home space shall be numbered uniformly with reflectorized numbers of a minimum height of four inches. 
(487) 
5-11-14. - Reserved. 
("Inspection fee": Repealed by Ordinance 1160) 
5-11-15. - Management. 
(A)  The owner or operator of any mobile home park shall arrange for the management and supervision of such mobile home park so as to enforce or cause compliance with the provisions of these rules and regulations. 
(B)  The owner, operator, or attendant of every mobile home park shall assume full responsibility for maintaining in good repair and condition all facilities of the mobile home park as required herein. 
(C)  In every mobile home park there shall be a designated office building in which shall be located the office of the person in charge of said park. A copy of all required City and state licenses and permits and of this Chapter shall be posted therein and the park register shall at all times be kept in said office. 
(D)  It shall be the duty of the attendant or person in charge, together with the owner or operator, to: 
(1)  Keep at all times a register of all guests (which shall be open at all times to inspection by state, county and federal officers and officers of the City of Westminster), showing for all tenants: 
(a)  Dates of entrance and departure. 
(b)  License numbers of all mobile homes and towing vehicles or automobiles. 
(c)  States issuing such licenses. 
(2)  Maintain the park in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times. 
(3)  See that the provisions of this Chapter are complied with and enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any violations of law that may come to his attention. 
(4)  Report to local health authorities all cases known to the owner to be infected with any communicable disease. 
(5)  Pay promptly to the City of Westminster the inspection fee as specified in Section 5-11-4, W.M.C., and all license fees required by the City ordinances or any other laws. 
(6)  Prohibit the use of any mobile home by a greater number of occupants than that which it is designed to accommodate. 
(487) 
5-11-16. - General. 
(A)  No mobile home shall be parked or permitted to stand upon any public street or alley in the City of Westminster for longer than a 24-hour period. If so parked, it shall be parallel with the curb and shall not extend outward into the street a distance in excess of ten feet, six inches measured at right angles with the curb. 
(B)  No mobile home shall be maintained upon any private or public property in the City of Westminster when the same is used for living purposes, unless the property is registered as a mobile home park and is located within an eligible zoning district, nor shall any mobile home be stored in any required front or side yard as defined by the zoning ordinance of the City of Westminster. 
(487) 
CHAPTER 12. - RENTAL PROPERTY LICENSE AND REGISTRATION 

5-12-1. - Application of Chapter. 
    Effective January 1, 2011, and for the reasons set forth in title IX, chapter 12, of the Westminster Municipal Code, it shall be unlawful for any owner in the city to do either of the following: 
(A)  Lease for occupancy any rental property or portion thereof without first obtaining a rental property license pursuant to this Chapter; or 
(B)  Lease for occupancy any rental dwelling or portion thereof without first registering the rental dwelling pursuant to this Chapter. 
(3560) 
5-12-2. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Chapter and unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words, terms and phrases shall have the same meaning assigned to them by Title XI, Chapter 12, of the Westminster Municipal Code, the "Rental Property Maintenance Code." 
5-12-3. - License Required; Rental Property. 
(A)  Every owner of rental property shall file with the City Manager, acting by and through the building division, an application for a rental property license. 
(B)  A single license may be issued for the entire rental property and all units therein. 
(C)  A restricted license may be issued or restrictions placed on an existing license for a rental property if there is a portion of the property or certain units that do not comply with the provisions of this Chapter. Restricted licenses shall clearly identify the portion or portions of the rental property or units not in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, and those portions shall not be rented or occupied until the City, upon reinspection pursuant to Title XI, Chapter 12, of the Westminster Municipal Code, has removed such restriction from the license. 
(D)  Applications for a license shall be required, and denial, non-renewal, suspension, or revocation of a license shall proceed according to this Chapter. Licensees shall have a duty to report changes as set forth in this Chapter. 
(3646) 
5-12-4. - Registration Required; Rental Dwellings. 
(A)  Every owner of a rental dwelling(s) shall register the rental dwelling(s) with the City Manager, acting by and through the building division, according to the application process for licensing outlined in Section 5-12-5, W.M.C., below. 
(B)  The procedures set forth in Subsections 5-12-5(A) and (B), Section 5-12-7, and Section 5-12-8, W.M.C., shall apply to registration. However, registration of rental dwellings is performed without the imposition of a fee and no renewal is required. 
(3646) 
5-12-5. - License and Registration Application; Term of License; Renewal. 
(A)  Application: Applications for a rental property license or a rental dwelling registration shall be submitted in writing on forms furnished by the building division and shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The full name, mailing address, telephone numbers and birth date for the property owner, if the property owner is an individual. 
(2)  The full names, mailing addresses, telephone numbers and birth dates for the property owner(s) if the property is owned by more than one individual. 
(3)  The full name, mailing address and birth date of at least one officer, manager or director, if the property owner is a business entity. 
(4)  An affirmation that the application is complete and contains no false, misleading or fraudulent statements. 
(5)  An affirmation that the applicant is in good standing for any other permits or licenses granted by the City of Westminster. 
(6)  An affirmation that each unit of the rental property currently complies with the requirements set forth in the Rental Property Maintenance Code, Title XI, Chapter 12, of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(7)  The address of all the unit(s), including individual unit numbers. 
(8)  The number and type of units (one bedroom, two bedrooms, etc.) within the property. 
(9)  The age of the property, calculated from the date of issuance of the building's certificate of occupancy. 
(10)  For every rental property or rental dwelling, an owner or agent shall reside or operate within 50 miles of the property. If an owner does not reside or operate within a 50-mile radius of the property, the owner shall appoint an agent meeting these requirements. 
(11)  A site plan for or description of the property showing existing site improvements including, but not limited to, structures, parking areas, and landscaping, and specifying the materials used for each improvement. 
(12)  Disclosure of how many units within the property, if any, constitute qualified income restricted property and proof, satisfactory to the City, of such status. 
(B)  Notices given to an agent designated by an owner pursuant to this Chapter shall be sufficient to satisfy any requirement of notice to the owner. 
(C)  Term: License terms for rental properties shall be as follows: 
(1)  Rental properties less than six years old shall have a license term of up to the time they turn six years old. 
(2)  Rental properties between six and 20 years old shall have a license term of every four years. 
(3)  Rental properties older than 20 years old shall have a license term of every two years. 
(4)  The term of the initial license shall be determined by the age of the rental property and the existing city inspection schedule, as set forth in Title XI, Chapter 12, of the Westminster Municipal Code. License renewal shall take place at the time of the next regularly scheduled inspection. 
(D)  The owner or agent shall maintain the license on site and produce it upon request. Posting of the license at the rental property is not required. 
(E)  Renewal: Approximately 60 days prior to the license expiration, the building division shall send the owner a notice of renewal. Applications for renewal licenses shall proceed as follows: 
(1)  Submit a license application as required by Section 5-12-5, W.M.C. 
(2)  Pay inspection fees as required by Section 5-12-6, W.M.C. 
(3)  Schedule the rental property inspection with the building division. 
(4)  Upon payment of the inspection fee, completion of the inspection and possible subsequent reinspections, and with the property in full compliance, a license shall be renewed for the term identified in Subsection 5-12-5(C), W.M.C., unless the building division reduces or increases the term of a license as permitted by Title XI, Chapter 12, of the Westminster Municipal Code. No scheduled inspection shall be extended more than two years for any property and no inspection schedule shall exceed six years between inspections. 
(5)  Renewal of a license may be denied pursuant to Section 5-12-8, W.M.C. 
5-12-6. - Application Review. 
(A)  Applications for rental property license and for rental dwelling registration shall be filed with the building division for review and approval or denial by the City Manager or authorized representative. 
(B)  Fees: Applicants for a new rental property license shall pay a licensing fee of $50.00 upon submission of a license application and shall pay a rental inspection fee of $40.00 per unit, unless the unit is a qualified income restricted property, as addressed below, prior to the next regularly scheduled inspection, which fee amounts may be amended by subsequent resolution of City Council. Registration of rental dwellings is performed without the imposition of a fee and no renewal is required. 
(1)  The rental inspection fee shall be $20.00 per unit of qualified income restricted property, as that term is defined in Section 11-12-3, W.M.C., prior to the next regularly scheduled inspection, which fee amount may be amended by subsequent resolution of City Council. 
(2)  The burden of establishing that a unit is a qualified income restricted property rests on the owner. 
(C)  Standards for Review and Approval: A license or registration application may be denied by the building division for any of the reasons set forth in Section 5-1-6, W.M.C. 
(D)  Appeal Right: The denial of license or registration application may be appealed pursuant to the procedures established in Chapter 1 of this Title V. 
(E)  Terms and Conditions: As a condition of licensing and registration, an owner of rental property or of a rental dwelling shall cooperate in the inspection of the property according to the procedure outlined in Title XI, Chapter 12, of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(F)  Effective Date: A rental property license or rental dwelling registration shall be effective as of the date indicated in the notice provided by the City. 
5-12-7. - License and Registration Administration. 
(A)  It shall be the duty of each owner of a rental property or a rental dwelling to provide the building division with notice of changes as follows: 
(1)  If an owner or agent legally changes the use of a structure by adding units, the owner or agent shall provide notice of the change to the building division no later than 60 days following issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the new units and before any new units are occupied. At the time of giving notice, there shall be no additional fee assessed for the units that were added to the structure; however, when the license is next renewed, the inspection fee will include the additional units. 
(2)  If an owner reduces the number of units within the rental property or a rental dwelling, the owner or agent shall provide notice of the change to the building division no later than 60 days following completion of the change. The owner or agent shall not be entitled to a refund of any fee previously paid. 
(3)  For newly constructed property, inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and the associated fees are not required prior to issuance of the initial license, if a license application is submitted no later than 60 days following issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the rental property. 
(4)  The building division must be promptly notified, in writing, within 30 days of any changes to the information provided on the license or registration application; except that the building division shall be notified in writing within 15 days after the change of an agent for a property and shall provide the name and mailing address of the new agent. 
(B)  A license or registration is non-transferable. Within 30 days of the transfer of ownership of a rental property or a rental dwelling, the new owner shall submit a new license or registration application. 
(C)  Violation and Penalty: It shall be unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this Chapter or to obstruct an inspection being conducted pursuant to Title XI, Chapter 12, of the Westminster Municipal Code. Violators shall be subject to the penalties provided by Section 1-8-1, W.M.C., and the procedures set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title V. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such person is in violation of this Chapter. 
5-12-8. - License Cancellation, Suspension, Non-Renewal, or Revocation. 
(A)  A license or registration may be cancelled, suspended, revoked or non-renewed as set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title V, and any such adverse action may be appealed pursuant to the procedures established in Chapter 1 of this Title V. 
(B)  In rental properties containing multiple units, upon issuance of a restricted license according to Subsection 5-12-3(C), W.M.C., a revocation, suspension, denial or non-renewal may apply to any portion or portions of the property. 
(C)  In addition to the process set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title V, a license or registration may be summarily suspended for no more than 30 days by the building division when required for the immediate protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Notice of the summary suspension shall be given in the manner set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title V, and a hearing thereon before the special permit and license board shall be provided as soon as reasonably possible thereafter. 
(D)  All hearings before the special permit and license board shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures established for hearings in Chapter 1 of this Title V. 
5-12-9. - Rules and Regulations. 
    The City Manager or authorized representative is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations necessary for the implementation of this Chapter. 
CHAPTER 13. - SECURITY GUARD BUSINESSES 

5-13-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the content clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Security guard shall mean any person employed by a security guard business, as defined in this Section, who is directly engaged in providing protection for the clients of such business, or any person employed by another type of business for the purpose of providing protection to persons or property or to preserve the peace in the conduct of such business, which protection or preservation of the peace is incidental to the primary purpose of such business. 
    Security guard business shall mean any business whose primary purpose is to provide protection to persons or property or to preserve the peace in the conduct of a business. The term "security guard business" shall not include a business or operation where security is merely incidental to the primary purpose of the business. 
(1959 3563) 
5-13-2. - License Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or conduct a security guard business without first obtaining a license pursuant to this Chapter. 
(1959 2041 3563) 
5-13-3. - Exemptions. 
(A)  Security guards employed by any common carrier engaged in interstate commerce, maintenance workers, custodians, janitors, and repair persons are exempted from the provisions of this Chapter. 
(B)  A business may hire a security guard without being licensed as a security guard business if: 
(1)  The need for a security guard is incidental to the primary purpose of the business; 
(2)  The security guard wears a uniform that plainly identifies the business as the employer of the security guard; and 
(3)  The security guard complies with all provisions of this Chapter, except the requirement of obtaining a license as a security guard business. 
(1959 2041) 
5-13-4. - License Application. 
(A)  Applicants for a security guard business license shall file a verified application with the City Clerk on forms to be provided by the City Clerk for that purpose that shall contain at least the information specified in this Section. 
(B)  An applicant for a security guard business license shall provide: 
(1)  The name of the licensee; 
(2)  The business address; 
(3)  A description of the nature and type of business to be conducted, and the services to be offered, by the security guard business; 
(4)  A color photograph depicting the uniform and badge to be worn by security guards employed by the security guard business; and 
(5)  Any other pertinent information requested by the City Clerk. 
(C)  If the applicant for a security guard business license is other than a sole proprietor, the information required under subsection (B) of this Section must be supplied by each owner, officer or director of the business applying for the license. 
(D)  A license for a security guard business is not transferable. 
(1959 2041 3563) 
5-13-5. - Application Review. 
(A)  Upon receipt of an application filed pursuant to this Chapter, the City Manager or his designee shall review the application, refer the application to the Chief of Police for review, and within 30 days shall either issue or deny the license. The 30 day period shall not begin to run until all information required under this Chapter has been submitted. 
(B)  Any of the following circumstances may be considered cause for denial of a license: 
(1)  The applicant is under 21 years of age; 
(2)  The applicant was convicted of a felony within ten years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(3)  The applicant was convicted of a misdemeanor or ordinance violation involving moral turpitude or violence within five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(4)  The applicant has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter; 
(5)  The applicant's character and reputation is not satisfactory to the City Manager; 
(6)  The applicant does not have the basic skills to speak and to comprehend the spoken English language as determined by the City Manager or his designee; 
(7)  The required fees have not been paid; 
(8)  The application is incomplete or contains false, misleading or fraudulent statements; 
(9)  Nonconformance of the business, premises, building or land use with this Code; or 
(10)  Any reason stated in Chapter 1 of this Title. 
(C)  Upon review and approval by the City Manager or his designee, and payment of the required fee, the security guard business license shall be issued. The application fee paid for any license shall be nonrefundable. 
(D)  The grounds specified for denial in this Section shall apply to individual applicants, as well as directors, officers or general partners of any applicant. 
(E)  An application for a security guard business license shall be accompanied by an investigation fee of $30.00. 
(F)  The annual fee for a security guard business license shall be $60.00. 
(G)  All security guard business licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire on December 31st of the year in which the license was issued, unless cancelled, suspended or revoked, and shall be renewed annually upon application for renewal and payment of the required fees. Renewal may be denied as provided below. 
(1959 2041 2574 3563) 
5-13-6. - License Denial, Suspension, Cancellation, Non-Renewal, or Revocation. 
    A license may be denied, cancelled, denied renewal, suspended or revoked for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter, or for any reason set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title. 
(1959 2041 2574 3563) 
5-13-7. - Insurance Required. 
(A)  Before any license shall be issued an applicant for a license for a security guard business, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk a certificate of insurance indicating current insurance coverage as follows: 
Comprehensive general liability: 
(1)  Bodily injury ..... $500,000.00 
(each person) 
$1,000,000.00 
(each occurrence) 
(2)  Property damage ..... $500,000.00 
(each person) 
$1,000,000.00 
(each occurrence) 
(B)  Such certificate of insurance must name the City of Westminster as an additional insured for activities conducted by the licensee within the City, and must be approved by the risk manager, both as to form and as to the responsibility of the surety. The certificate of insurance shall also provide that coverage shall not be cancelled without at least 30 days' notice to the City. Cancellation shall result in automatic suspension of the security guard business license. 
(1959 2041 3563) 
5-13-8. - Badges, Uniforms and Equipment. 
(A)  The City Manager or his designee may, in his discretion, require that any licensee or employee of a security guard business wear an identification badge or uniform, but no badge or uniform shall be worn by any licensee or employee that is a colorable imitation of badges or uniforms or could be confused with those worn by officers of the Westminster Police Department, Adams County Sheriff's Office, Jefferson County Sheriff's Office, or the Colorado State Patrol. 
(B)  No vehicle used in a security guard business or by a security guard while on duty shall be used or identified in any way that may be confused with those used by the Westminster Police Department, Adams County Sheriff's Office, Jefferson County Sheriff's Office, or the Colorado State Patrol, nor shall any vehicle be equipped with a siren or emergency lights in violation of local or state law. 
(C)  The words "police" or "officer" or other similar words that might be confused with or represent a municipal, county, state or federal law enforcement agency shall not be used in any advertisement upon any premises within the limits of the City, nor on any clothing, vehicles or equipment used by the licensee. 
(D)  The City Manager or his designee may issue an order denying use of any item that is in violation of the provisions of this Section. 
(1959 2041 3563) 
5-13-9. - Change of Location or Personnel. 
(A)  Any licensee changing its place of business shall immediately notify the City Clerk of such fact, together with the new place of business, but a change of location shall not be deemed a transfer of a license or require payment of a new fee. 
(B)  Each security guard business required to be licensed pursuant to this Chapter shall maintain a current record of all employees and of their assignments. These records shall be open to the City Manager or his designee for inspection at any time during regular business hours. 
(1959 2041 3563) 
5-13-10. - Rules and Regulations. 
    The City Manager or his designee may issue and promulgate from time to time rules and regulations to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the City in relation to security guard businesses. Such rules may include duties of the licensees, manner of conduct, reports to be furnished and any other regulations deemed necessary by the Chief of Police. 
(1959 2041 3563) 
5-13-11. - Prohibited Acts. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or an employee of a licensee: 
(1)  To arrest any person, except when that person commits a criminal offense in the presence of the person making the arrest; 
(2)  To fail to release an arrestee immediately to the Westminster Police Department; 
(3)  To fire a firearm in the performance of his duties, except when necessary to protect himself or another from great bodily harm; 
(4)  To hinder or interfere with any action or investigation under the jurisdiction of the Westminster Police Department; 
(5)  To fail to report to the Westminster Police Department any violations of city, state or federal laws of which he has knowledge; 
(6)  To represent himself to be an officer of the Westminster Police Department or any municipal, county, state or federal law enforcement agency; 
(7)  To fail to identify himself or take any action that would obscure his presence from a police officer inspecting an area where the licensee is assigned; 
(8)  To wear a badge or uniform or use any vehicle or equipment not authorized for use under Section 5-13-8, W.M.C.; 
(9)  To interfere with the performance of any police officer or city official in the performance of their official duties; 
(10)  To advertise, represent or identify himself as a police officer or use any acronym or initials that could cause him to be mistaken to be a member of a federal, state or municipal law enforcement agency. 
(B)  No licensee or an employee of a licensee shall have any greater authority to arrest than would another private citizen. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to mean that a licensee may conduct criminal investigations, make arrests or reports of criminal activity, use deadly force, or take any other action on behalf of, under color of laws of, or under the authority of the City of Westminster. 
(1959 2041 3563) 
CHAPTER 14. - FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGE AND ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSE AND SPECIAL EVENTS PERMIT 

5-14-1. - Definitions. 
    Those terms that are defined in the Colorado Beer Code and the Colorado Liquor Code, Sections 44-6-101 et seq., and C.R.S. § 44-3-101 et seq. shall have the same meaning when used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires. 
(1959; Ord. No. 3970 , § 1, 2-25-2019) 
5-14-2. - Creation of Local Licensing Authority. 
    A Local Licensing Authority is hereby created. The Local Licensing Authority shall be the special permit and license board as established in Section 2-5-1, W.M.C. The terms "licensing authority," "authority," or "board," as used in this Chapter, shall mean the body hereby created as the Local Licensing Authority, and such terms shall be interchangeable. The authority shall have and is vested with all powers and authority possible to have pursuant to C.R.S. Articles 3, 4, and 5 of Title 44. 
(2037; Ord. No. 3970 , § 1, 2-25-2019) 
5-14-3. - License Required; State Statutes. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell fermented malt beverages or alcoholic beverages within the City of Westminster without first obtaining a license pursuant to this Chapter. 
(B)  The Colorado General Assembly has declared that the licensing and regulation of the sale of fermented malt beverages and alcoholic beverages is a matter of statewide concern. All licensing requirements and regulations specified in C.R.S. Articles 3, 4, and 5 of Title 44, shall be enforced in the local licensing process and shall control in the event that inconsistent requirements are set forth in this Chapter. 
(1959; Ord. No. 3970 , § 1, 2-25-2019) 
5-14-4. - License Applications. 
(A)  The following licenses and permits may be issued by the licensing authority in accordance with the provisions of the Colorado Beer Code and the Colorado Liquor Code: 
(1)  Fermented Malt Beverage Licenses: 
(a)  Sales for consumption off the premises of the licensee; 
(b)  Sales for consumption on the premises of the licensee. 
(2)  Malt, Vinous and Spirituous Liquor Licenses: 
(a)  Retail liquor store; 
(b)  Liquor-licensed drugstore; 
(c)  Beer and wine; 
(d)  Hotel and restaurant; 
(e)  Tavern; 
(f)  Brew pub; 
(g)  Club; 
(h)  Arts; 
(i)  Racetrack; 
(j)  Optional premises; 
(k)  Optional premises permit for a hotel and restaurant license; 
(l)  Vintner's restaurant; 
(m)  Distillery pub; and 
(n)  Lodging and entertainment. 
(3)  Other Licenses and Permits: 
(a)  Bed and breakfast permit; 
(b)  Art gallery permit; 
(c)  Special event permit; 
(d)  Transfer of ownership; and 
(e)  Consent to changing, altering or modifying any licensed premises. 
(4)  Administrative Approvals. The City Clerk is authorized to administratively approve the following applications in accordance with the provisions of the Colorado Beer Code and the Colorado Liquor Code: 
(a)  Temporary permit pending the approval of applications for transfers of ownership; 
(b)  Transfer of ownership, unless the City Clerk determines in the clerk's discretion that there is probable cause to believe that grounds exist for denying the transfer under C.R.S. § 44-3-303, as the same may from time to time be amended or recodified; 
(c)  Waiver, for good cause, of the time requirement for the filing of an application for renewal of an existing license; 
(d)  Renewal of an existing license, unless the City Clerk determines in her reasonable discretion that there is probable cause to believe that grounds exist for denying the application for renewal under C.R.S. § 44-3-307, as the same may from time to time be amended or recodified; and 
(e)  Consent to changing, altering or modifying any licensed premises, unless the City Clerk determines in the clerk's discretion that the premises, as changed, altered or modified, will not meet all of the pertinent requirements of the Colorado Liquor or Beer Codes and the regulations promulgated thereunder, including, but not limited to, those requirements set forth in C.C.R. 203-2, Regulation 47-302, as the same may from time to time be amended or recodified. 
(B)  The applicant shall submit a verified application to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk. The application shall include complete plans and specifications for the interior of the premises to be licensed, a copy of the lease or other evidence of the applicant's right to possession of the premises, information concerning the zoning of the location of the premises, the fees required by this Chapter, and any other information that is required by state statute. Applications shall not be considered complete until all required information has been received by the City Clerk. 
(C)  The City Clerk shall schedule the application for a public hearing before the Licensing Authority not less than 30 days from the date of the application. Notice of such hearing shall be sent (electronically or via regular mail) to the applicant by the City Clerk not less than 15 days before the hearing date. Notice of such public hearing shall also be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the community once, not less than ten days prior to the hearing date, and by posting a notice of hearing upon the premises for at least ten days prior to the hearing. Publication and posting shall be done by the City Clerk. 
(D)  The City Clerk shall propose the boundaries of the neighborhood in writing to the licensing authority with a copy to the applicant. If a majority of the authority or the applicant disputes the proposed neighborhood boundaries, the issue shall be considered by the board at a public meeting. A dispute of the boundaries by the applicant must be filed within ten days of the letter notifying the applicant of the boundaries established. 
(E)  Prior to the hearing, the City or its designee shall circulate petitions to determine the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood and the desires of the inhabitants regarding the application for a license. The petition form shall be approved by the City. 
(F)  At least five days prior to the date of the public hearing, the City Clerk shall send the results of the petitioning and investigation of the application to the applicant and make them available to other interested parties. 
(G)  (1)  Following the conclusion of the public hearing, the authority shall render its decision no later than 30 days thereafter; however, the authority may continue the hearing from time to time as may be required to gather necessary facts and evidence and to permit witnesses to testify. The City Clerk shall send a written copy of the finding and decision of the authority to the applicant at the address shown on the application and to any other party in interest upon request within 30 days of the decision. 
(2)  All decisions of the licensing authority are final, subject only to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(H)  In determining whether to grant or deny the license, the authority shall consider all factors allowed pursuant to state statutes, including the following: 
(1)  For licenses to sell fermented malt beverages: 
(a)  Whether the applicant, if a corporation, is incorporated pursuant to the laws of the State of Colorado or duly qualified to do business in the State of Colorado; 
(b)  The character and reputation of the applicant; and 
(c)  The reasonable requirements of the neighborhood and the desires of the adult inhabitants, as evidenced by petitions, remonstrances or otherwise. 
(2)  For licenses to sell alcoholic beverages: 
(a)  The reasonable requirements of the neighborhood, and the desires of the neighborhood, and the desires of the adult inhabitants, as evidenced by petitions, remonstrances or otherwise, except that the requirements of the neighborhood shall not be considered for a club license; 
(b)  With respect to a second or additional hotel and restaurant license for the same licensee, the effect on competition of the granting or disapproving of additional licenses to such licensee; 
(c)  For a liquor licensed drug store, retail liquor store, and for all licenses allowing for on-premise consumption, who will manage the premises; and 
(d)  The character of the applicant and his eligibility to hold a license. 
(1611 1959 2037 2502 3325 3483; Ord. No. 3848, §§ 1-3, 9-26-2016 ; Ord. No. 3970 , § 1, 2-25-2019) 
5-14-5. - Fees. 
(A)  Each application for a license or transfer of a license shall be accompanied by the following application fees: 
(1)  For a new license, $1,000.00. 
(2)  For a transfer of location or ownership, $750.00. 
(3)  For renewal of a license, $100.00. 
(4)  For a manager registration, $75.00. 
(5)  For a late renewal application fee where the license has expired, $500.00. 
(6)  For a temporary permit to continue selling pending a transfer of the permanent license, $100.00. 
(7)  Change of corporate structure or transfer of stock, $100.00 per person investigated by the City of Westminster. 
(8)  Special events permit, $100.00. 
(9)  Art gallery permit, $103.75. 
(B)  The local license fees prescribed by C.R.S. §§ 44-4-107 and 44-3-505, as amended, shall be paid to the City annually in advance by the licensee. Such fees shall not be rebated or discounted on a proportionate basis for any license in existence or issued for less than a year. These fees shall be in addition to any license fees required to be paid directly to the state. 
(Ord. No. 3970 , § 1, 2-25-2019) 
5-14-6. - Renewal. 
(A)  All licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance, unless revoked or suspended. All licenses granted pursuant to this Chapter are separate and distinct. 
(B)  An application for renewal of an existing license shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than 45 days prior to the date of expiration. The application shall be on forms supplied by the State of Colorado and shall be accompanied by the fee required by this Chapter. The City Clerk shall review the application and any citizen complaints and investigative reports from the police department or other agencies. If the application is complete, all applicable fees are paid, and the investigation shows no substantial violations, the City Clerk shall approve the renewal. The licensing authority shall issue a regulation defining those violations that are substantial violations, or if the City Clerk determines in the clerk's sole discretion that grounds exist for a possible non-renewal, the matter shall be referred to the licensing authority. The authority shall consider the matter at a public meeting and may renew the license or schedule the matter for a public hearing. If a public hearing is scheduled, publication, posting and notice requirements shall be the same as for a hearing on an original application. 
(C)  The licensing authority may, for good cause, waive the time requirements set forth in this Section. Temporary licenses are available pursuant to the provisions of state law and may be issued by the City Clerk. 
(D)  A license may be refused renewal for any reason provided by state law. 
(1959 2037) 
5-14-7. - License Denial, Suspension or Revocation. 
(A)  A license may be denied, suspended for up to six months, or revoked for any reason provided by state law, which shall include any violation by the licensee or by any of its agents, servants, or employees of the provisions of applicable state law or this Code, or of any of the terms, conditions, or provisions of its license. Conviction of a violation shall be grounds for, but shall not be required prior to, any such action against a licensee. Such action may be taken by the licensing authority on its own motion or pursuant to the receipt of a complaint. 
(B)  A license shall be denied, suspended or revoked only after investigation and notice to the licensee, and after a public hearing has been held. Publication, posting and notice requirements shall be the same as for a hearing on an original application. Notice to the licensee shall be given by mailing the same in writing by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the licensee at the address contained in the license. 
(C)  Any license may be temporarily suspended without notice pending any prosecution, investigation, or public hearing. A summary suspension may be imposed for a period not exceeding 15 days. 
(D)  Whenever any license is suspended or revoked, no part of the fee paid for the license shall be returned or refunded to the holder of such license. 
(E)  An applicant may appeal a denial or a licensee may appeal a suspension or revocation of a license to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(F)  If the authority suspends a retail license, the licensee may, before the operative date of the suspension, petition for permission to pay a fine in lieu of having its license suspended for all or part of the suspension period. The authority may grant the petition if the criteria and conditions of C.R.S. § 44-3-601(3)(a) are met. 
(1959 2037 2229 3325; Ord. No. 3970 , § 1, 2-25-2019) 
5-14-8. - Transfers. 
(A)  Change in Corporate Structure or Transfer of Stock: 
(1)  Corporate licensees subject to the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, shall submit the names and addresses of all persons owning ten percent or more of the outstanding or issued capital stock, not more than ten days after such ownership occurs, and shall submit the names and address of all corporate officers and directors within ten days after their appointment, accompanied by the fee established in Section 5-14-5, W.M.C. 
(2)  Any transfer of the capital stock, and any change in officers or directors of the corporation, of any corporation that is not subject to the reporting requirements of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, shall be reported to the city clerk prior to such transfer or change, accompanied by the fee established in Section 5-14-5, W.M.C. After sufficient investigation by the police department, the City Clerk may approve the transfer or change or, in the clerk's sole discretion, refer the matter to the licensing authority. The authority shall consider the matter at a public meeting and may approve the transfer or change or may schedule a public hearing. 
(3)  At the hearing, all interested parties may appear and be heard; provided, however, that the licensing authority shall consider only the character of the transferee and whether the transferee complies with all requirements of the code and state statutes. 
(B)  Transfer of Ownership: 
(1)  Prior to any transfer of ownership, an application shall be submitted to the City Clerk, accompanied by the fee required in Section 5-14-5, W.M.C. After sufficient investigation by the police department, the City Clerk may approve the transfer or, in the clerk's sole discretion, refer the matter to the licensing authority. The authority shall consider the matter at a public meeting and may approve the transfer or may schedule a public hearing. If a public hearing is scheduled, publication, posting and notice requirements shall be the same as are required for a hearing on an original application. 
(2)  At the hearing, all interested parties may appear and be heard; provided, however, that the licensing authority shall consider only the character of the new owner and whether the new owner complies with all requirements of the code and state statutes. 
(3)  This subsection shall apply to all licensees, whether ownership is by an individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity, except that changes of ownership of stock in a corporation shall be governed by subsection (A) above. 
(C)  Transfer of Location: A licensee wishing to transfer the location of its business shall file with the City Clerk a written request for the transfer on forms provided by the City, accompanied by the fee established in Section 5-14-5, W.M.C. After sufficient investigation by the police department and other city agencies, the City Clerk may approve the transfer or, in the clerk's sole discretion, refer the matter to the licensing authority. The authority shall consider the matter at a public meeting and may approve the transfer or may schedule a public hearing. If a public hearing is scheduled, publication, posting and notice requirements shall be the same as are required for a hearing on an original application. The licensing authority shall consider the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood and the desires of the inhabitants with respect to the new location. Petitioning shall be at the discretion of the licensing authority. 
(D)  Manager's Registration: 
(1)  Hotel and restaurant, lodging and entertainment, and tavern licensees employing a manager shall report the name of such manager to the City Clerk, accompanied by the fee established in Section 5-14-5, W.M.C. Any such licensee who wishes to change the manager shall request that such change be approved prior to the manager assuming his duties. After sufficient investigation by the Police Department, the City Clerk may approve the change or, in the Clerk's sole discretion, refer the matter to the Licensing Authority. The Authority shall consider the matter at a public meeting and may approve the change or may schedule a public hearing. If a public hearing is scheduled, publication, posting and notice requirements shall be the same as are required for a hearing on an original application. 
(2)  At the hearing, all interested parties may appear and be heard provided; however, that the licensing authority shall consider only the character of the new manager and whether the new manager complies with all requirements of the code and state statutes. 
(1959 2037 2229; Ord. No. 3848, § 4, 9-26-2016 ) 
5-14-9. - Changing, Altering or Modifying Licensed Premises. 
(A)  After issuance of a license, the licensee shall make no physical change, alteration or modification of the licensed premises that materially or substantially alters the licensed premises or the usage of the licensed premises from the plans and specifications submitted at the time of obtaining the original license without the prior written consent of the licensing authority. 
(B)  The following procedure shall be utilized to obtain consent for a change, alteration or modification of the licensed premises: 
(1)  The licensee shall submit an application for authorization to change, alter or modify licensed premises to the City Clerk on forms supplied by the City Clerk, accompanied by the fee established in Section 5-14-5, W.M.C. The application shall include documentation showing the proposed changes to the drawings and specifications and a description of how the proposed changes will alter the licensed premises or the usage of the licensed premises. 
(2)  If, after investigation, the City Clerk determines that the change, alteration or modification is not substantial or will not substantially change the nature of the licensee's business, the City Clerk may approve the proposed change, or, in the clerk's sole discretion, refer the matter to the licensing authority. The authority shall consider the matter at a public meeting and may approve the change or may schedule a public hearing. If a public hearing is scheduled, posting, publication, and notice requirements shall be the same as are required for a hearing on an original application. Criteria for approval shall be as for an original application. Petitioning shall be at the discretion of the licensing authority. 
(1959 2037; Ord. No. 3970 , § 1, 2-25-2019) 
5-14-10. - Special Event Permit. 
(A)  Definition: A special event permit is a special license that authorizes a qualified organization or political candidate to sell, by the drink only, malt beverages or malt, spirituous or vinous liquors. A qualified organization is an organization that has been incorporated under the laws of this state for purposes of social, fraternal, patriotic, political, or athletic nature, and not for pecuniary gain; a regularly chartered branch, lodge or chapter of a national organization or society organized for such purposes that is not for profit; a regularly established religious or philanthropic institution; or a municipality owning arts facilities at which productions or performances of an artistic nature are presented. 
(B)  Application Procedure: 
(1)  At least 30 days prior to the event, the applicant shall file a verified application for a special event permit with the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk. The application shall include a fee in the amount specified in Section 5-14-5, W.M.C. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the completed application, the City Clerk shall review the application according to the standards established below. The City Clerk shall also post the property, giving notice of the application and providing information for filing a protest, including the deadline for filing the protest. The property shall be posted at least ten days prior to any further action by the City Clerk. 
(3)  Any protest shall be filed with the City Clerk in writing no later than the date established in the notice. 
(4)  If no protest is received and the City Clerk's review finds no disqualifying factors, the City Clerk shall issue the permit. 
(5)  If a protest has been filed, or disqualifying factors have been identified, or at the discretion of the City Clerk, a public hearing before the board shall be scheduled. Notice of the public hearing shall be posted on the property no less than ten days prior to the hearing. The City Clerk shall notify the applicant and any person who has filed a protest. 
(6)  Upon approval of the application and within ten days after issuing the permit, the City Clerk shall submit the approved application to the state licensing authority in the form required by state law. 
(7)  The licensing authority may require an applicant to post a performance bond to assure compliance with the provisions of this Code or state statute. 
(C)  Standards for Approval by City Clerk: 
(1)  The applicant has, for a period of three years, conducted a substantially similar event with no violations of the Liquor Code or Beer Code; or the event has been sponsored by the City with no such violations in the previous three years; and 
(2)  Any investigation by the police department reveals no evidence of substantial problems with crowd control, assaults or fighting or similar misconduct, or any other history of problems associated with the event. 
(3)  If the application does not meet the above standards, the application shall be scheduled for decision by the board. 
(D)  Grounds for Issuance: 
(1)  A special event permit may be issued only upon a satisfactory showing by an organization or a qualified political candidate that: 
(a)  Existing licensed facilities are inadequate for the purposes of serving members or guests of the organization or political candidate, and that additional facilities are necessary by reason of the nature of the special event being scheduled; or 
(b)  The organization or political candidate is temporarily occupying premises other than the regular premises of such organization or candidate during such special events as civic celebrations or county fairs, and that members of the general public will be served during such special events. 
(2)  The City Clerk and the licensing authority shall also consider the eligibility of the applicant and whether the issuance would be injurious to the public welfare by reason of the nature of the special event, its location within the community, or the failure of the applicant in a past special event to conduct such event in compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
(1959 2037 2570 3609) 
5-14-11. - Optional Premises Licenses and Permits. 
(A)  An annually renewable optional premises license for the sale or service of alcoholic beverages may be issued by the local licensing authority for one or more optional premises within an outdoor sports and recreational facility that charges a fee for the use of such facility. 
(1)  An application for an optional premises license shall be accompanied by the fees required by this Title. 
(2)  An optional premises license shall allow the licensee to sell and serve alcoholic beverages by the drink only to customers for consumption on the optional premises and for storage of alcohol beverages in a secure area on or off the optional premises for future use on the optional premises. 
(3)  An optional premises license application shall be reviewed and approved or denied according to Section 5-14-4, W.M.C., herein, and all other provisions of this Title shall apply. 
(B)  An annually renewable optional premises permit for a hotel and restaurant license may be issued by the local licensing authority for an outdoor sports and recreational facility that charges a fee for the use of such facility, if such facility is part of an existing or a new hotel and restaurant license, and the optional premises is on or adjacent to the hotel and restaurant premises. Any optional premise permit shall allow the licensee to sell or serve alcoholic beverages only on the optional premises specified in the permit. 
(1)  An application for an optional premises permit for a hotel and restaurant license shall be made by the applicant for a hotel and restaurant license or by the hotel and restaurant licensee. 
(2)  Meals shall be served whenever and wherever alcoholic beverages are sold, served or consumed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. weekdays, and 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Sundays and Christmas. No alcoholic beverages may be sold, served or consumed outside the designated areas. 
(3)  An application for a new hotel and restaurant license with optional premises permit shall be processed in the same manner as any other hotel and restaurant license application. If an application to permit an optional premise is filed in connection with an existing hotel and restaurant license, the application shall be processed in the same manner as an application to modify or expand licensed premises. No local fee shall be required in connection with an application for an optional premises permit for an existing hotel and restaurant license. 
(4)  In addition to or in lieu of any enforcement actions the authority takes against the hotel and restaurant license for violations of this Code or the Colorado Liquor Code and regulations adopted pursuant to such codes, the authority may decline to renew the optional premises permit for good cause shown, subject to judicial review. In addition, the authority may suspend or revoke the optional premises permit in accordance with the procedures specified in Colorado Liquor Code Regulation 47-600, as the same may be amended from time to time, and upon consideration of the criteria specified in this Title. 
(5)  Nothing contained in this Section shall preclude the local licensing authority, in its discretion, from denying an application for an optional premises permit or imposing conditions, restrictions or limitations on any optional premises permit, in order to serve the public health, safety and welfare. Any such conditions may be imposed when the permit is initially issued or should any specific event or use of the optional premises so warrant. 
(C)  Unless otherwise permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at an outdoor sports and recreational facility without having first obtained a valid optional premises license or optional premises permit or in violation of any provision, restriction or limitation of such a license or permit. 
(D)  Definitions: The following terms shall be defined as provided below. Terms not defined in this Subsection (D) shall be defined consistent with state law. 
    Ancillary facility shall mean a permanent, temporary or moveable structure or vehicle located on optional premises and used to dispense alcoholic beverages. 
    Athletic field shall mean a prepared surface outdoors for use while playing or participating in an organized sport. 
    Outdoor sports and recreational facility shall mean a facility that consists of an athletic field, golf course, tennis court, or some combination thereof. 
(E)  No one licensee or permitee shall have more than five optional premises within an outdoor sports and recreational facility. No optional premise may include a parking lot. 
(F)  Application for an optional premises license or an optional premises permit as part of a hotel and restaurant license shall be made to the City Clerk, upon forms to be furnished by the City Clerk for that purpose, which forms shall require the following information in addition to any information required by the state licensing authority and this Title: 
(1)  A detailed diagram of the outdoor sports and recreational facility indicating: 
(a)  The location of the outdoor sports and recreational facility; 
(b)  The location of all proposed optional premises; 
(c)  The proposed locations of the ancillary facilities that are proposed to be used for the sale or service of alcoholic beverages; 
(d)  The seating, if any; 
(e)  Restroom facilities, if any; 
(f)  Restrictions, if any, to access to the optional premises; and 
(g)  Location of secured area or areas for use in storing malt, vinous and spirituous liquors for future use on the optional premises. 
(2)  A written statement setting forth what will be done to secure the optional premises and storage area or areas and the reason the licensing authority should grant the license or permit; and 
(3)  Such other information as reasonably may be required to satisfy the local licensing authority that control of the optional premises will be assured, and that the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood and outdoor sports and recreational facility users will not be adversely affected should the license or permit be issued. 
(G)  If the applicant does not own the proposed optional premises, it shall submit to the City Clerk a written statement by the owner of the premises approving the application sought. 
(H)  The applicant shall provide the City Clerk with evidence that the state licensing authority has approved the location proposed to be optional premises, as required by the Colorado Liquor Code. 
(I)  It shall be unlawful for any alcoholic beverages to be served on a licensed or permitted optional premises without the licensee or permitee having first provided written notice to the City Clerk and the state licensing authority no less than 48 hours prior to such service of alcoholic beverages. Such notice shall contain specific days and hours on which the optional premises are to be used for the sale or service of alcoholic beverages. Nothing contained in this Section shall preclude written notice, submitted within the time limits set out above, from specifying that an optional premise may be utilized for a continuous or extended period of time. However, should any special or unusual event be anticipated to occur during any extended period of time, no less than 48 hours written notice should be given to the City's Chief of Police, or his designee, who shall have the authority, on behalf of the local licensing authority, to impose any conditions reasonably related towards serving the public health, safety and welfare. The licensee or permitee may file more than one notice during a calendar year. 
(1959 3609 3679; Ord. No. 3970 , § 1, 2-25-2019) 
5-14-12. - Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this Chapter. A violation of this Chapter shall be a criminal offense. Violators shall be subject to the penalties provided by Section 1-8-1, W.M.C., including imprisonment, and may also be subject to civil remedies provided by Chapter 4 of Title VIII of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such person is in violation of this Chapter. 
(1959 2000 2037) 
5-14-13. - Distance Requirement Eliminated. 
    The distance restriction imposed by C.R.S. § 44-3-313(1)(d) for the classes of licenses authorized pursuant to C.R.S. § 44-3-401 is hereby eliminated. 
(2229 2395 3325 3427; Ord. No. 3970 , § 1, 2-25-2019) 
5-14-14. - Reserved. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 3427.) 
5-14-15. - Liquor Tastings. 
(A)  Authorization: Licensed retail liquor stores and liquor-licensed drugstores are hereby authorized to conduct tastings in compliance with C.R.S. § 44-3-301 as "tastings," as defined therein. 
(B)  Application; Fee: An applicant for a tasting permit must complete an application on a form to be provided by the City Clerk and accompany the application with a $50.00 fee. 
(C)  Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a tasting without a tasting permit issued by the City or to conduct such tasting in any manner not in compliance with the rules and regulations in C.R.S. § 44-3-301 or this Section. Failure to comply with said sections shall be considered a violation of the Colorado Beer and Liquor Codes and may be sanctioned as any other violation of the Codes. 
(D)  Term; Renewal: Tasting permits shall be valid for one year and shall be issued concurrent with the renewal of the retail liquor store license. Renewal shall be administratively accomplished by the City Clerk, provided that a renewal fee of $50.00 is paid and the permitee has no violations of C.R.S. § 44-3-301 in which case the renewal application shall be considered by the Special Permit and License Board. 
(E)  The permitee shall provide the City Clerk with a schedule of dates and times the tastings will be conducted. Such notice shall be at least 72 hours prior to the tasting. 
(3147; Ord. No. 3970 , § 1, 2-25-2019) 
5-14-16. - Removal of Vinous Liquor from Licensed Premises. 
(A)  Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter to the contrary, a licensee described in Subsection (B) of this Section may permit a customer of the licensee to reseal and remove from the licensed premises one opened container of partially consumed vinous liquor purchased on the premises, so long as the originally sealed container did not contain more than 750 milliliters of vinous liquor. 
(B)  The provisions of this Section shall apply to a licensee: 
(1)  That is duly licensed as a manufacturer's licensee under C.R.S. § 44-3-402 a limited winery licensee under C.R.S. § 44-3-403 a beer and wine licensee, a hotel and restaurant licensee, a tavern licensee, a brew pub licensee, a vintner's restaurant licensee, a club licensee, or distillery pub licensee under Section 5-14-4, W.M.C.; and 
(2)  That has meals, as defined in C.R.S. § 44-3-103(20) available for consumption on the licensed premises. 
(3325; Ord. No. 3848, § 5, 9-26-2016 ; Ord. No. 3970 , § 1, 2-25-2019) 
CHAPTER 15. - MASSAGE PARLORS 

5-15-1. - Legislative Declaration. 
    The City Council hereby declares that the operation of massage parlors in this City affects the public health, safety, and welfare and that City regulation of such operation is in the public interest. 
(1959) 
5-15-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the content clearly indicates otherwise: 
    License shall mean a grant of a licensee to operate a massage parlor. 
    Licensed premises shall mean the premises specified in an approved application for a license under this Chapter that are owned or in the possession of the licensee and within which such licensee is authorized to carry on the practice of massage. 
    Location shall mean a specific parcel of land that may be identified by an address or by other descriptive means. 
    Massage therapy shall mean a method of treating the body for remedial or hygienic purposes by a massage therapist, including, but not limited to, rubbing, stroking, kneading, or tapping with the hand or an instrument or both. 
    Massage parlor shall mean a parlor providing massage, but it does not include training rooms of public and private schools accredited by the state board of education or approved by the division charged with the responsibility of approving private occupational schools, training rooms of recognized professional or amateur athletic teams, and licensed health care facilities. A facility that is operated for the purpose of massage therapy performed by a massage therapist is not a massage parlor. 
    Massage therapist shall mean an individual registered by the State of Colorado to engage in the practice of massage therapy pursuant to Title 12, Article 35.5, C.R.S. 
    Other massage services shall mean any services that are offered or performed for compensation, and that are advertised or represented as massage or that involve the touching of the body with the purpose of inducing any type of pleasurable or erotic experience by a person who is not licensed pursuant to this Chapter as a massage therapist. 
    Party in interest shall mean the applicant, a resident of the neighborhood under consideration, or the owner or manager of a business located in the neighborhood under consideration. 
    Person shall mean a natural person, partnership, association, company, corporation, organization, or managing agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of them. 
    Premises shall mean a distinct and definite location that may include a building, a part of a building, a room, or any other definite area contiguous to the building, part of a building or room. 
(1938 1959 2189 3443 3563) 
5-15-3. - License Required; State Statutes. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage parlor within the City of Westminster without first obtaining a license therefor pursuant to this Chapter. 
(B)  The Colorado General Assembly has declared that the licensing and regulation of massage parlors is a matter of statewide concern. All licensing requirements and regulations specified in Article 48.5 of Title 12, C.R.S., shall be complied with in the local licensing process and shall control, in the event that inconsistent requirements are set forth in this Chapter. 
(C)  The following classes of persons and establishments are exempt from this Chapter: 
(1)  Physicians, osteopaths, physical therapists, chiropractors licensed to practice in this state. 
(2)  Registered nurses and licensed practical nurses who are licensed to practice in this state while performing massage therapy services in their usual nursing duties. 
(3)  Barbers and cosmetologists duly licensed under the laws of this state in the course of practice of their usual and ordinary licensed profession, as defined by state statute. 
(4)  Massage therapy practiced at the athletic department of any accredited school, college, university or seminary or in connection with the conduct of professional athletics. 
(5)  Hospitals, clinics, nursing and convalescent homes and other similar institutions where massage therapy may be used and that are dedicated to medical or nursing practices licensed under state statutes. 
(6)  Massage therapy practiced in an institution of learning established for such instruction under Article 59, Title 12, C.R.S. 
(1959 2189 3443) 
5-15-4. - License Application. 
(A)  The applicant for a license to operate a massage parlor shall submit a verified application to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk. The application to operate a massage parlor shall include complete plans and specifications for the interior of the premises to be licensed, a copy of the lease or other evidence of the applicant's right to possession of the premises, information regarding the zoning of the location of the premises, and any other information that is required by state statute. 
(B)  The application for a license to operate a massage parlor shall be reviewed by the City Manager, who, within ten days after receipt of the application and after such additional investigation as he may deem necessary, shall schedule a public hearing before the special permit and license board not less than 30 days from the date of the application. 
(C)  Notice of a hearing on an application for a license to operate a massage parlor shall be mailed to the applicant by the City Clerk not less than ten days before the hearing date. Notice of such public hearing shall also be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the community once, not less than ten days prior to the hearing date, and by posting a notice of hearing upon the premises for at least ten days prior to the hearing. Publication and posting shall be done by the City Clerk. 
(1)  Notice given by posting shall be placed so as to be conspicuous and plainly visible to the general public and shall include a sign of suitable material, not less than 22 inches wide and 26 inches high, composed of letters not less than one inch in height and stating the type of license applied for, the date of the application, the date of the hearing, the name and address of the applicant, and such other information as may be required to fully apprise the public of the nature of the application. If the applicant is a partnership, the sign shall contain the names and addresses of all partners, and, if the applicant is a corporation, association, or other organization, the sign shall contain the names and addresses of the president, vice-president, secretary, and manager or other managing officers. 
(2)  Notice given by publication shall contain the same information as that required for signs. 
(D)  The City Clerk shall propose the boundaries of the neighborhood in writing to the special permit and license board with a copy to the applicant. If a majority of the board or the applicant disputes the proposed neighborhood boundaries, the issue shall be considered by the board at a public hearing. A dispute of the boundaries by the applicant must be filed within ten days of the letter notifying the applicant of the boundaries established. 
(E)  Prior to the public hearing, the City or its designee shall circulate petitions to determine the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood and the desires of the inhabitants regarding the application for a license. The petition form shall be approved by the City. 
(F)  At least five days prior to the date of the public hearing, the City Clerk shall send the petition and investigation results to the applicant and make them available to other interested parties. 
(G)  After such public hearing, the special permit and license board shall make findings of fact and a recommendation to the City Council, with or without conditions, that may either grant or deny the license consistent with the findings and recommendation of the Special Permit and License Board, or may schedule the matter for further hearing before the City Council. If such further hearing is held, the City Council may grant or deny the license notwithstanding the recommendation of the Special Permit and License Board. A copy of the decision of the City Council, its findings of facts and conclusions, shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail to the address shown on the application within 30 days after the date of the public hearing. 
(H)  In determining whether to grant or deny the license, the Special Permit and License Board or the City Council shall consider all factors allowed pursuant to state statutes, including the following: 
(1)  The number, type, and availability of other massage parlors located near or in the neighborhood; 
(2)  The character of the applicant or its officers or directors, including information provided by a background check and inspection of the premises made by the police department; 
(3)  The applicant's prior experience, qualifications and fitness to operate such a business; 
(4)  The reasonable requirements of the neighborhood and the desires of the inhabitants, including any petitions or remonstrances evidencing such requirements and desires; 
(5)  Pedestrian safety; 
(6)  Traffic volume and adequacy of parking and access; 
(7)  Essential character of the neighborhood and the applicant's effect on the peace of the neighborhood; 
(8)  Compliance of the structure with all applicable zoning and building regulations; 
(9)  Police activity in comparable businesses; and 
(10)  Architectural compatibility with the character of the neighborhood. 
(I)  Any party in interest shall be allowed to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses at the public hearing. 
(1959 2189 3443) 
5-15-5. - Fees. 
(A)  All original applications to operate a massage parlor shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $350.00 to defray the cost of reviewing and evaluating the application. The applicant shall also reimburse the City for the actual cost of petitioning. 
(B)  The nonrefundable fee for renewal of a license to operate a massage parlor shall be $150.00, payable at the time of filing the application for renewal. 
(1959 2189 3443) 
5-15-6. - Renewal. 
    All licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire December 31st of the year for which issued, unless cancelled, suspended or revoked, and shall be renewed annually upon application for renewal and payment of the required fees, unless renewal is denied as provided below. 
(1959 2189 2754) 
5-15-7. - License Denial, Suspension, or Revocation. 
(A)  A license may be denied, cancelled, denied renewal, suspended or revoked for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter, for any reason set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title, or on the grounds that the health, safety or welfare of the community may be endangered by the continued operation of the licensee, or any of the following: 
(1)  The issuance would be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, due to the character, reputation, or moral integrity of the applicant; 
(2)  The character of the applicant or licensee, or its officers, directors, or partners is such that a violation of this Chapter would be likely to result if a license were granted; 
(3)  The licensed premises have been inactive for at least three months; 
(4)  Violation by the licensee or by any of its agents, servants, or employees of state law or of this Code; or 
(5)  For any cause specified by law. 
(B)  A license may be cancelled, denied renewal, suspended or revoked after the licensee has been given notice and hearing. The notice shall set forth the reasons for the proposed action, in writing, and shall be given by personal delivery to the applicant or mailed to the address contained in the license, postage prepaid, or as provided in Chapter 1 of this Title. Said notice shall be given no less than ten days prior to a hearing to be scheduled before the Special Permit and License Board. 
(C)  A license may be summarily suspended for no more than 30 days by the City Manager when required for the immediate protection of the public health, safety and welfare. A hearing shall be scheduled as soon as may be reasonably possible. 
(D)  The special permit and license board shall conduct an appeal of the denial of a new license or a hearing pursuant to the procedures established for hearings in Chapter 1 of this Title. The special permit and license board shall deliver its decision in writing within 30 days. 
(E)  Decisions of the Special Permit and License Board are final, subject only to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(1959 2574) 
5-15-8. - Change of Location; Transfer of Business or Stock. 
(A)  No change of location for licensed premises shall be allowed. 
(B)  Transfer of business or stock: 
(1)  Within 30 days after the transfer of ownership ten percent or more of a partnership interest or of the capital stock of the corporation, the new owner of the stock or business shall file with the City Clerk a written report of the transfer on forms provided by the City Clerk. The report shall be accompanied by an investigation fee of $250.00. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the report of transfer, the City Clerk shall report the transfer to the City Manager, after sufficient investigation by the Police Department, and the City Manager may approve the transfer or, in his sole discretion, refer the matter to the special permit and license board for a public hearing regarding the transfer, at which parties in interest may be heard. 
(3)  The Special Permit and License Board shall hold the hearing after proper notice is given. Publication, posting and notice requirements shall be the same as are required for a hearing on an original application. 
(4)  At the hearing, all interested parties may appear and be heard; provided, however, that the board shall consider only the character of the proposed new owner or owners and whether the new owner or owners comply with all requirements of the Code and state statutes. 
(1959 2574) 
5-15-9. - Identity Cards. 
    Every licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall, prior to commencing work in or upon the licensed premises, apply for and obtain an identity card from the Westminster Police Department, and shall carry the card at all times while in or upon the licensed premises. The nonrefundable application fee for a card shall be $5.00. The Police Department shall do a background check on the applicant prior to issuance of the card. The card shall be in the form required by the City. 
(1959 2189) 
5-15-10. - Prohibited Acts. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To operate a massage parlor without holding a validly issued license; 
(2)  To work in or upon the licensed premises of a massage parlor without obtaining and carrying a valid identity card pursuant to Section 5-15-9, W.M.C.; 
(3)  To render massage therapy services for compensation without valid registration pursuant to Title 12, Article 35.5, C.R.S.; 
(4)  To perform other massage services within the City; 
(5)  To obtain the services provided in a massage parlor by misrepresentation of age or by any other method in any place where massage is practiced when such person is under 18 years of age, unless such person is accompanied by his parent or has a physician's prescription for massage services; 
(6)  To allow the sale, giving, or procuring of any massage services to any person under the age of 18 years, unless such person is accompanied by his parent or has a physician's prescription for massage services; 
(7)  To permit any person under the age of 18 years to be employed as an employee in a massage parlor. If any person who, in fact, is not 18 years of age exhibits a fraudulent proof of age, any action relying on such fraudulent proof of age shall not constitute grounds for the revocation or suspension of any license issued under this Chapter, unless the person employing such person knew or should have known that the proof of age was fraudulent. 
(8)  To fail to display at all times in a prominent place on the licensed premises a printed card with a minimum height of 14 inches and a width of 11 inches with each letter a minimum of one-half inch in height, which shall read as follows: 
WARNING 
IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE TO BE IN OR UPON THESE PREMISES AT ANY TIME, UNLESS HE IS ACCOMPANIED BY HIS PARENT OR HAS A PHYSICIAN'S PRESCRIPTION FOR MASSAGE SERVICES. 
IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON TO ALLOW A PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE TO BE IN OR UPON THESE PREMISES AT ANY TIME, UNLESS HE IS ACCOMPANIED BY HIS PARENT OR HAS A PHYSICIAN'S PRESCRIPTION FOR MASSAGE SERVICES. FINES OR IMPRISONMENT MAY BE IMPOSED BY THE COURTS FOR VIOLATION OF THESE PROVISIONS UNDER ARTICLE 48.5 OF TITLE 12, COLORADO REVISED STATUTES. 
(9)  To possess, consume or dispense, or to allow the possession, consumption or dispensation of alcoholic beverages, drugs or narcotics upon the premises. This subparagraph shall not apply to the use of drugs or narcotics that have been prescribed by a licensed physician. 
(1959 2189 3443) 
5-15-11. - Penalty. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this Chapter. A violation of this Chapter shall be a criminal offense. violators shall be subject to the penalties provided by Section 1-8-1, W.M.C., including imprisonment, and may also be subject to civil remedies provided by Chapter 4 of Title VIII of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such person is in violation of this Chapter. 
(B)  In addition to any other penalties, the court trying such offense may decree that any license issued under the provisions of this Chapter be suspended or revoked and may decree that no such license shall thereafter be issued to any such person for a period not to exceed five years. 
(C)  The penalties provided in this Section shall not be affected by the penalties provided in any other provision of state or local law, but shall be construed to be in addition to any other penalties. 
(1959 2000 3443) 
CHAPTER 16. - DANCE HALLS AND CABARETS 

5-16-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Dance hall shall mean any commercial premises designed for public dancing and that includes one or more designated dance floors, but excluding commercial dance studios designed and used primarily for dance instruction. 
    Cabaret shall mean a dance hall that is licensed for the sale of fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous or spirituous liquor. 
    "Dance hall" and "cabaret" shall not include any adult businesses as defined by Section 5-17-2, W.M.C., and the issuance of any license to any dance hall or cabaret pursuant to this Chapter shall not be deemed or construed as authorizing any such adult business. 
(1959 3563) 
5-16-2. - License Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any dance hall or cabaret without first obtaining a license pursuant to this Chapter. 
(1959 3563) 
5-16-3. - License Application. 
(A)  The applicant for a license shall submit a verified application to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk. The application shall include a floor plan for the interior of the premises to be licensed, which shall include a drawing that shows the dimensions and location of the stage and dance floor, a copy of the lease or other evidence of the applicant's right to possession of the premises, information regarding the zoning of the location of the premises, and the fee required by this Chapter. 
(B)  The application shall be reviewed by the City Manager, who, within 20 days after receipt of the application and after such additional investigation as he may deem necessary, shall schedule a public hearing before the Special Permit and License Board. If the applicant is simultaneously applying for a license to sell fermented malt beverages or alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, the public hearings shall be consolidated. 
(C)  Notice of such hearing shall be mailed by the City Clerk to the applicant not less than ten days before the hearing date. Notice of such hearing shall also be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City once, not less than ten days prior to the hearing date and by posting a notice of the hearing upon the premises for at least ten days prior to the hearing. Publication and posting shall be done by the City Clerk. 
(D)  After such public hearing, the special permit and license board shall grant or deny the license and may place reasonable conditions upon the license. 
(E)  In determining whether to grant or deny the license, the board shall take into consideration: 
(1)  The character of the applicant; 
(2)  The applicant's prior experience and qualifications to operate such a business; 
(3)  Traffic volume and adequacy of parking and access; 
(4)  The potential effect of the business on the peace of the neighborhood, including off-site noise and light; 
(5)  Compliance of the structure with all applicable zoning and building regulations; 
(6)  Police activity in comparable businesses; 
(7)  The proposed size and character of the business in relation to surrounding land uses; and 
(8)  The reasonable requirements of the neighborhood and the desires of its inhabitants. 
(1959 2229 3563) 
5-16-4. - Fees. 
(A)  All original applications shall be accompanied by a $450.00 non-refundable application fee to defray the cost of reviewing and evaluating the application. If the applicant is simultaneously applying for a license to sell fermented malt beverages or alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, and the public hearings are consolidated, the application fee shall be $100.00. 
(B)  The annual license fee thereafter shall be $100.00, payable at the time of filing the application for renewal. 
(1959 3563) 
5-16-5. - Renewal. 
(A)  All dance hall licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless cancelled, suspended or revoked, and shall be renewed annually upon application for renewal and payment of the required fees. 
(B)  Cabaret licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire concurrently with the expiration of the fermented malt beverages or alcoholic beverages license issued to the establishment, unless cancelled, suspended or revoked, and shall be renewed annually upon application for renewal and payment of the required fees. 
(1959 2229 2574 3563) 
5-16-6. - License Denial, Cancellation, Suspension or Revocation. 
    A license may be denied, cancelled, suspended or revoked for any reason stated in Chapter 1 of this Title and any violation of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(1959 2229 2574 3563) 
5-16-7. - Transfers. 
(A)  An application for a transfer of ownership or location of a dance hall or cabaret license shall be submitted on forms provided by the City Clerk, together with a non-refundable application fee of $250.00. 
(B)  No transfer of ownership or location of a cabaret license shall be approved except in conjunction with the transfer of the associated fermented malt beverage or alcoholic beverage license. 
(C)  An application for transfer of ownership or location of a dance hall or cabaret license shall be referred by the City Clerk to the Police Department for investigation. Following said investigation, the City Clerk may approve the transfer, or refer the matter to the Special Permit and License Board, in which case the Special Permit and License Board shall consider the matter at a public meeting, and may approve the transfer or may schedule a public hearing. 
(D)  Should a public hearing be scheduled on an application for transfer of ownership or location of a dance hall or cabaret license, any interested party may appear and be heard. For a proposed transfer of ownership, the Special Permit and License Board shall consider only the character of the transferee, and, in the case of an application for a transfer of a cabaret license, whether the requirements of this Code and state statute for the transfer of the ownership of the associated fermented malt or alcoholic beverage license have been met. 
(E)  For a proposed transfer of location, the criteria for approval shall be the same as for an original application as set forth in Subsection 5-16-3(e), W.M.C. 
(1959 2229 3563) 
5-16-8. - Prohibited Acts. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or his agent knowingly to do or to permit any of the following acts on the premises of any premises licensed pursuant to this Chapter, or on any parking lot, street or sidewalk adjacent to the premises. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a dance hall or cabaret licensee to install, maintain or operate, or permit the installation, maintenance or operation of, within or upon the licensed premises, any gambling table, device, machine, apparatus or other thing contrary to this Code or to the laws of this state, or that is kept or used for the purpose of gambling, either directly or indirectly. The licensee is hereby specifically charged with knowledge of and made responsible for the use of all tables, games and devices in any manner constituting a violation of this Section. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee knowingly to permit any unlawful or disorderly act, conduct or disturbance to be committed by any person or group of persons upon any premises licensed hereunder. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to report immediately to the Westminster Police Department any unlawful or disorderly act, conduct or disturbance committed by any person or group of persons upon any premises licensed hereunder. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to conduct any activities requiring an adult business license without having first secured an adult business license. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to operate or permit the operation of any amplified sound devices anywhere outside of the licensee's enclosed premises in a manner that disturbs the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(B)  Minors restricted: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to enter or remain on the premises of any business holding both a tavern liquor license and a cabaret license, or for any parent or guardian to allow the minor to do so. It shall be unlawful for a minor to use false identification to seek entry or to remain on the premises. For purposes of this subsection, a "minor" is any person under the age of 21. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or its managers, agents, and employees to admit any minor or to allow any minor to remain on the premises of any business holding both a tavern liquor license and a cabaret license. For purposes of this subsection, a "minor" is any person under the age of 21. 
(3)  Subsections (1) and (2) above shall not apply to bona fide employees of a duly licensed dance hall, nor to bona fide employees of a duly licensed tavern with a cabaret license that regularly serves meals as defined in Section 12-47-103(20), C.R.S. 
(4)  Subsections (1) and (2) above shall not apply to members of entertainment groups who have contracted with the licensed business, while such groups are on the premises to provide entertainment. 
(1959 2398 2614 3563) 
5-16-9. - Management and Supervision. 
    Each licensee shall manage such premises himself or employ a separate and distinct manager on the premises of at least 21 years of age, and such licensee or manager shall be present and responsible for the premises during all hours of operation. The licensee shall report the name of the manager to the City Clerk and shall report any change in managers within 30 days after the change. 
(1959 3563) 
5-16-10. - Occupancy Limits. 
    The occupancy capacity of the premises shall be determined according to the requirements of this Code. There shall be posted on the premises in a place open to the view of the occupants thereof a sign stating the maximum number of occupants permitted therein at any one time. 
(1959 3563) 
5-16-11. - Security Guards. 
    Whenever the Police Department has repeatedly been required to investigate complaints of any disorderly conduct or disturbances at any premises licensed hereunder, the City Manager or his designee may, in his discretion, schedule a public hearing before the Special Permit and License Board in the manner provided for an original application for a license for the purpose of determining whether maintenance of licensed security guards should be required as a condition for the continuation of the license. 
(1959 3563) 
5-16-12. - Hours of Operation. 
    Premises licensed hereunder shall open to the public no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and close no later than 2:00 a.m. daily. The Special Permit and License Board may require different hours as a condition of granting the license, but in no event shall premises licensed hereunder remain open to the public later than 2:00 a.m. 
(1959 3563) 
CHAPTER 17. - ADULT BUSINESSES 

5-17-1. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to regulate the time, place, and manner in which adult entertainment is presented, to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations designed to curb the harmful secondary effects of adult businesses upon the surrounding communities. These reasonable and uniform regulations are designed to protect citizens from increased crime, to preserve the quality of life, property values and the character of neighborhoods and businesses, to deter the spread of urban blight, and to protect against the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. The provisions of this Chapter are not intended to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent of this Chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article II, Section 10, of the Colorado Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. It is also not the intent or purpose of this Chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(2687) 
5-17-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Adult arcade shall mean any commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, monetary or otherwise, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, videocassette players or similar machines, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store shall mean a commercial establishment that (i) devotes a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or interior floor space to, (ii) receives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from, or (iii) devotes a significant or substantial portion of its advertising expenditures to the promotion of the sale, rental or viewing, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store, so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  The definition of principal business purpose shall include any establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade the items listed in subparagraphs (1) and (2) above or any premises in which at least 100 square feet of floor space is occupied by the display of such items. 
    Adult business shall mean an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort service, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. A business shall be considered an adult business under this Code regardless of whether attempts are made to obscure the sexual nature of products with labels or packaging, if a reasonably prudent person would regard the products as designed for, depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The definition of adult business shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
    Adult cabaret shall mean a nightclub, bar, restaurant, concert hall, auditorium or other commercial establishment that regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or 
(2)  Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by the exhibition of specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motel shall mean a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way that advertises the availability of this adult-type of photographic reproductions; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than six hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period that is less than 24 hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater shall mean a commercial establishment that is distinguished or characterized by the showing of films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions with an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas that are regularly shown for any form of consideration. 
    Adult theater shall mean a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
    Commercial establishment shall mean and include clubs, fraternal organizations, social organizations, civic organizations or other similar organizations with paid memberships. It may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as an adult business. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as a sexually oriented business, so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Escort shall mean a person required to be licensed as such pursuant to Title V, Chapter 19, W.M.C. 
    Escort service shall mean a person or business required to be licensed as such pursuant to Title V, Chapter 19, W.M.C. 
    Employee shall mean a person who works or performs in and for an adult business, regardless of whether or not the person is paid a salary, commission, wage, or other compensation by the operator of the business. 
    Establishment shall mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any adult business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult business, to any adult business; 
(3)  The addition of any adult business to any other existing adult business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any adult business. 
    Licensee shall mean a person in whose name a license to operate an adult business has been issued. 
    Location shall mean a particular parcel of land that may be identified by an address or by other descriptive means. 
    Manager shall mean an operator, other than a licensee, who is employed by an adult business to act as a manager or supervisor of employees or is otherwise responsible for the operation of the business. 
    Nude model studio shall mean any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity shall mean (a) the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male or female genitals, or areola or nipple of the female breast, or (b) a state of dress that fails to opaquely and fully cover human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of the female breast. 
    Operator shall mean and include the owner, license holder, custodian, manager, operator, or person in charge of any adult business premises. 
    Ownership or partnership interest shall mean a person who has a five percent or greater interest in the business, and directors and officers of a corporation, but excluding stockholders. 
    Person shall mean an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, or other legal entity or managing agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of them. 
    Premises shall mean a distinct and definite location that may include a building, a part of a building, a room, or any other definite area contiguous to the building, part of a building or room that requires a license and that is classified as an adult business, including parking lots and sidewalks immediately adjacent to the structure containing the sexually oriented business, which location is specified in an approved application for a license under this Chapter and that is owned or is in the possession of the licensee and within which such licensee is authorized to operate an adult business. 
    Residential district shall mean any area, regardless of zoning, that is used for residential purposes, whether within the City or outside of the City boundaries. 
    Semi-nude shall mean a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    Sexual encounter center shall mean a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude, except therapy performed by a massage therapist, as the latter term is defined in Section 5-15-2, W.M.C. 
    Specified anatomical areas shall mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified criminal acts shall mean sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, sexual assault, any offense for which a person must register as a sex offender under state law, or crimes connected with another adult business, including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity, prostitution, pandering or tax violations. 
    Specified sexual activities shall mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or 
(5)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (4), above. 
    Substantial enlargement of an adult business shall mean the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25 percent. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business shall include any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, management arrangement, gift, or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(2687 3646) 
5-17-3. - Adult Business License Required. 
    Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for a person to operate or cause to be operated an adult business without a license, including when the license has been suspended, revoked or has expired. The adult business license shall be required in addition to any other license required by this Code, such as a cabaret or dance hall license, or liquor license. An adult business in existence on June 7, 1999, shall not require a license, unless a transfer of ownership or control occurs as defined in this Chapter. 
(2687) 
5-17-4. - Manager's License Required. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to work as a manager of an adult business without first obtaining a manager's license. 
(B)  An Adult Business Manager shall submit a verified application for a manager's license on a form provided by the City Clerk. The application shall contain the applicant's name, any aliases, address, proof of date of birth, and telephone number. Each applicant shall pay the nonrefundable fee charged by the Colorado Department of Public Safety for a criminal history check and the license fee required by this Chapter. 
(C)  Upon receipt of a completed application and the payment of all applicable fees, the City Clerk shall transmit the application to the police department for investigation of the applicant. The background investigation shall be sufficient to verify the accuracy of all information provided in the application and to determine whether the applicant has been convicted of or has plead nolo contendere to specified criminal activities, as defined above, within the times set forth below: 
(1)  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
(2)  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
(3)  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the applicant has been convicted of two or more misdemeanors. 
    Whenever "conviction" is specified in this subsection, the term shall also include a plea of nolo contendere. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant. An applicant who has been convicted of a specified criminal act may qualify for an adult business manager license only when the time period required in this subsection has elapsed. 
(D)  The City Manager shall grant the application within 30 days of its filing unless: 
(1)  The applicant is under the age of 18 years, or 21 years if the adult business offers live nude entertainment; 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide the information required by this Section; 
(3)  The license fee has not been paid; or 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in subsection (C), above. 
(E)  Applicants and licensees shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this Section, in the event that information previously provided to the City changes from that stated in the application. The failure to comply with this continuing duty within 30 days from the date of the change in information shall be grounds for immediate suspension of the manager's license until such information is provided, as well as such other penalties that may be imposed pursuant to this Code. 
(F)  A manager's license shall remain in effect until the manager's employment by the licensee is terminated or is revoked pursuant to this Chapter or the grounds stated in Chapter 1 of Title V. 
(2687) 
5-17-5. - Adult Business License Application. 
(A)  The applicant for a license to operate an adult business shall submit a verified application to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk. The application to operate an adult business shall include: 
(1)  The address and complete plans and specifications for the interior of the premises to be licensed; 
(2)  A copy of the lease, deed or other evidence of the applicant's right to possession of the premises; 
(3)  Information regarding the zoning of the location of the premises; 
(4)  The fees required by this Chapter; 
(5)  Names of each person with an ownership or partnership interest in the business, including directors and officers of the applicant, each of whom shall be photographed and fingerprinted at the Westminster Police Department; 
(6)  Address, proof of age, driver's license number, social security number and federal tax identification number of each person named in the application; 
(7)  If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, its date of formation or incorporation, evidence that it is in good standing or authorized to do business in Colorado, the names and capacity of all officers, directors, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process; 
(8)  Whether the applicant or any individual listed in the application has had a previous adult business permit or license under this Chapter or the adult business ordinances of another city, county or state denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the business for which such permit or license was denied, suspended or revoked; 
(9)  The name and location of any other adult business in which the applicant or any individual listed in the application has an interest; and 
(10)  A current certificate and straight-line drawing by a land surveyor depicting the property lines and the distances from the land uses specified in Section 11-4-13(D), W.M.C., as it may be amended. 
(B)  Applicants and licensees shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this Section, in the event that information previously provided to the City changes from that stated in the application. The failure to comply with this continuing duty within 30 days from the date of the change in information shall be grounds for immediate suspension of the license until such information is provided, as well as such other penalties that may be imposed pursuant to this Code. 
(C)  Upon receipt of a completed application, including fingerprints and photographs taken by the Westminster Police Department, and the payment of all applicable fees, the City Clerk shall transmit the application to the Police Department for investigation of the background of each individual listed in the application. Each applicant shall pay the nonrefundable fee charged by the Colorado Department of Public Safety for a criminal history check. The background investigation shall be sufficient to verify the accuracy of all information provided in the application and to determine whether any applicant or individual listed in the application has been convicted of or plead nolo contendere to specified criminal activities, as defined above, within the times set forth below: 
(1)  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
(2)  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
(3)  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the applicant has been convicted of two or more misdemeanors. 
    Whenever "conviction" is specified in this subsection, the term shall also include a plea of nolo contendere. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant. An applicant who has been convicted of a specified criminal act may qualify for an adult business license only when the time period required in this subsection has elapsed. 
(2687) 
5-17-6. - License Denial, Suspension, or Revocation. 
(A)  A license may be denied, cancelled, denied renewal, suspended or revoked by the city manager for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter for any reason set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title or on the grounds that the health, safety or welfare of the community may be endangered by the continued operation of the licensee, or any of the following: 
(1)  The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in Subsection 5-17-5(C), W.M.C.; 
(2)  The applicant is under the age of 21 years; 
(3)  The individual applicant or a director or officer of a corporation or a partner of a partnership or manager of a limited liability company has had an adult business license revoked or suspended or has operated an adult business that was determined to be a public nuisance anywhere within Colorado within one year prior to the application; 
(4)  A corporate applicant or limited liability company applicant is not in good standing or authorized to do business in Colorado; 
(5)  The applicant is in default to the City or state with regard to taxes, fees, judgments, fines, or penalties assessed against the applicant; or 
(6)  Any reason provided in Section 5-1-6, W.M.C. 
(B)  In the event that the City Manager takes one of the adverse actions listed in (A), above, he shall make written findings of fact stating the reasons for denial, and a copy of such decision shall be sent by certified mail to the address shown in the application. An applicant shall have the right to file a written appeal of the decision to the special permit and license board within ten days of the City Manager's mailing of the decision. 
(C)  A license may be summarily suspended for no more than 30 days by the City Manager when required for the immediate protection of the public health, safety and welfare. A hearing shall be scheduled as soon as may be reasonably possible. 
(D)  The Special Permit and License Board shall conduct an appeal of the denial of a new license or a hearing pursuant to the procedures established for hearings in Chapter 1 of this Title. The Special Permit and License Board shall deliver its decision in writing within 30 days. 
(E)  Decisions of the Special Permit and License Board are final, subject only to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2687) 
5-17-7. - Renewal. 
(A)  All licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire December 31st of the year for which issued, unless cancelled, suspended or revoked, and shall be renewed annually upon application for renewal and payment of the required fees, unless renewal is denied as provided below. 
(2687) 
5-17-8. - Change of Location; Transfer of Business or Stock. 
(A)  A licensee shall not operate an adult business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application for the license. Each license issued under this Chapter is separate and distinct, and no person shall exercise any of the privileges granted under any license other than that which he holds. A separate license shall be issued for each specific business or business entity and each geographical location. 
(B)  At least 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of an adult business, or of the transfer of ownership of five percent or more of an ownership or partnership interest, the proposed new owner of the stock or business shall file with the City Clerk a written application for approval of the transfer on forms provided by the City Clerk. The same information shall be submitted as for a new adult business license. 
(C)  Upon receipt of the application, the City Clerk shall report the proposed transfer to the City Manager and to the Police Department for further investigation of the character of the proposed new owner. If a decision on the transfer by the City Manager is not issued within 30 days from the City Clerk's receipt of the application, it shall be deemed approved. 
(D)  Any transfer of ownership of an adult business in noncompliance with this Section shall cause the termination of the adult business license. 
(E)  When a license has been issued to a husband and wife or to general or limited partners, the death of a spouse or partner shall not require the surviving spouse or partner to obtain a new license. All rights and privileges granted under the original license shall continue in full force and effect as to such survivors for the balance of the term of the license. 
(F)  No license may be transferred if the City has notified the licensee that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the licensee. 
(G)  Any attempt to transfer a license, either directly or indirectly, in violation of this Section shall render the license void. 
(2687) 
5-17-9. - License Fees. 
(A)  The annual fee for an adult business license is $150.00. 
(B)  The annual manager's license fee is $50.00. 
(C)  An applicant for an adult business license or for approval of a change of ownership shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of $500.00 at the time of filing an application to cover the costs of investigation and processing. 
(2687) 
5-17-10. - Employee Conduct. 
(A)  Manager Required on Premises: A licensed manager or his designee shall be on the premises and occupying each manager's station at all times that the business is occupied by patrons. 
(B)  Right of Entry to Inspect Premises: The application for an adult business license shall constitute consent of the licensee and its agents or employees to permit the Police Department or any other agent of the City to conduct routine inspections of any licensed adult business during the hours the establishment is conducting business. It shall be unlawful for any person, applicant, licensee, or manager, or the agent of any of said persons, to refuse to permit such inspection of the premises. 
(C)  Clothing: No licensee, manager or employee mingling with business patrons or serving food or drinks shall be unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose any specified anatomical areas. It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this Section that an employee exposed any specified anatomical area only during the employee's bona fide use of a restroom or during the employee's bona fide use of a dressing room that is accessible only to employees. 
(D)  Physical Contact: No licensee, manager or employee shall encourage or knowingly permit any person upon the premises to touch, caress, or fondle specified anatomical areas of any other person. 
(E)  View From Outside the Premises: No adult entertainment occurring on the premises shall be visible at any time from outside the premises. 
(F)  Doors to Remain Unlocked: It is the duty of the licensee and manager to ensure that any doors to areas open to customers remain unlocked during business hours. 
(G)  Tips: It shall be unlawful for any employee to receive tips from patrons, except as set forth in this Chapter. 
(H)  Minimum Age: No employees, agents, servants or independent contractors shall be permitted to work on the premises who are under the age of 18 years of age, except for adult businesses that offer live nude entertainment, the minimum age shall be 21. 
(2687) 
5-17-11. - Regulation of Premises. 
(A)  Display: Any adult business license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be prominently displayed at all times upon the premises for which the license was issued. 
(B)  Viewing Rooms: 
(1)  A person who operates or causes an adult business to be operated that exhibits on the premises in a viewing room a film, videocassettes, or other video reproduction that depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the requirements of this subsection. 
(2)  The business shall have one or more manager's stations. A manager's station shall not exceed 32 square feet. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the City Manager. 
(3)  At least one employee must be on duty and situated at each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. The interior of the manager's station shall be visible from all parts of the interior of the premises. 
(4)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video display equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purposes from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. The view area shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times, and no patron shall be permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the license application. 
(5)  No viewing room of less than 150 square feet may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. 
(6)  Viewing rooms must be separated from other viewing rooms by a solid, uninterrupted physical divider that is a minimum of one-quarter inch thick and serves to prevent physical contact between patrons. No holes or openings shall be placed or allowed to remain in the wall between any two adjacent viewing rooms. 
(7)  No door, screen, or other covering shall be placed or allowed to remain on any viewing room. 
(C)  Hours of Operation: It shall be unlawful for an adult business to be open for business or for the manager or any employee of a licensee to allow patrons upon the premises during the following time periods: 
(1)  On any Tuesday through Saturday from 2:00 a.m. until 7:00 a.m. 
(2)  On any Monday, other than a Monday that falls on January 1, from 12:00 a.m. until 7:00 a.m. 
(3)  On any Sunday from 2:00 a.m. until 8:00 a.m. 
(4)  On any Monday that falls on January 1, from 2:00 a.m. until 7:00 a.m. 
(D)  Patron Minimum Age: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to be upon the premises of an adult business. It shall be unlawful for the licensee, manager or any employee of the licensee to allow anyone under the age of 18 years upon the premises of the adult business. If the adult business offers live nude entertainment, then the minimum age shall be 21 years of age. 
(E)  Interior Lighting: The interior portion of the premises of an adult business to which patrons are permitted access shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place, including viewing rooms, at an illumination of not less than five foot-candles, as measured at the floor level. Adult motion picture theaters shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access to provide an illumination of not less than one foot-candle of light as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensee, manager and employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(F)  Exterior Lighting: All off-street parking areas and premises entries of an adult business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system that provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult business to help ensure the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and other criminal conduct. 
(G)  Stage: No employee or entertainer shall be unclothed in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose any specified anatomical area, except upon a stage at least 18 inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least six feet from the nearest patron or behind a solid uninterrupted physical barrier that completely separates the entertainer from any patrons. This barrier must be a minimum of one-quarter inch thick and have no openings between the entertainer and any patrons. The stage shall be fixed and immovable. 
(H)  Tip Boxes: A licensee or manager who provides for tips from patrons shall establish one or more boxes or other containers to receive tips. All tips for such employees shall be placed by the patron into the tip box. A business that provides tip boxes for its patrons shall post one or more signs to be conspicuously visible to the patrons, in letters at least one inch high, to read as follows: 
"All tips are to be placed in a tip box and not handed directly to employees. Any physical contact between a patron and employees is strictly prohibited." 
(2687) 
5-17-12. - Adult Motels. 
(A)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated more than five times in a 24-hour period creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel, as that term is defined in this Chapter. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for a person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment to rent a sleeping room more than five times in a 24-hour period. 
(C)  For purposes of this Section, the term "rent" shall mean permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. If a customer immediately rejects a particular room and requests a different room, only the latter room shall be considered rented for purposes of this Section. 
(2687) 
5-17-13. - No Liquor License Violations. 
    Nothing in this Section shall be construed to permit any act on the premises of a licensed adult business in violation of Title 12, Article 46 or 47, C.R.S. 
(2687) 
5-17-14. - Exemptions. 
    It is not an unlawful act under this Chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Colorado; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
(a)  That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
(b)  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
(c)  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
5-17-15. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Chapter is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, the remaining provisions of this Chapter are valid, unless it appears to the court that the valid provisions of this Chapter are so essentially and inseparably connected with, and so dependent upon, the void provision that it cannot be presumed that the City Council would have enacted the valid provisions without the void provision, or unless the court determines that the valid provisions, standing alone, are incomplete and are incapable of being executed in accordance with the legislative intent. 
(2687) 
5-17-16. - Prohibited Acts and Penalty. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this Chapter or knowingly to permit any patron to violate the requirements of this Chapter. A violation of this Chapter shall be a criminal offense. Violators shall be subject to the penalties provided by Section 1-8-1, W.M.C., including imprisonment. A violation of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, subject to civil remedies provided by Chapter 4 of Title VIII of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such person is in violation of this Chapter. 
(B)  In addition to any other penalties, the court trying such offense may decree that any license issued under the provisions this Chapter be suspended or revoked and may decree that no such license shall thereafter be issued to any such person for a period not to exceed five years. 
(C)  The penalties provided in this Section shall not be affected by the penalties provided in any other provision of state or local law but shall be construed to be in addition to any other penalties. 
(2687) 
CHAPTER 19. - ESCORT SERVICES 

5-19-1. - Legislative Declaration. 
    The City Council hereby declares that the operation of escort services in this City affects the public health, safety, and welfare and that City regulation of such operation is in the public interest. 
(1959) 
5-19-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Escort shall mean any person who, for a salary, fee, commission, hire, or profit, makes himself available to the public for the purpose of accompanying other persons for companionship, or agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort service shall mean any business, agency, or person who, for a fee, tip, commission, hire, profit or other consideration, furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes. 
    Escort service runner shall mean any person who, for a salary, tip, fee, hire, profit or other consideration, acts in the capacity of an agent for an escort service by contacting or meeting with escort patrons, whether or not said person is employed by such escort service or by another business or is self-employed. 
    Escort patron shall mean any person who seeks the services of an escort, escort service, or escort service runner. 
    Licensed premises shall mean a single, discrete, identifiable location at which a licensed activity is permitted and, in fact, is conducted under the authority of any one license. 
    Person shall mean a natural person, partnership, association, company, corporation, or organization or a managing agent, servant, officer, partner, owner, operator, or employee of any of them. 
(1959) 
5-19-3. - License Required; State Statutes. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Hold oneself out to the public as an escort, an escort service runner, or an escort service, 
(2)  Accept compensation as an escort, an escort service runner, or an escort service, 
(3)  Conduct, manage, or carry on an escort service, or 
(4)  Provide escorts within the City of Westminster without having first obtained a license therefor as provided in this Chapter. 
(B)  The Colorado General Assembly has declared that the licensing and regulation of escorts, escort services, and escort service runners is a matter of statewide concern. The local licensing process required by this Code shall comply with all licensing requirements and regulations specified in Article 25.5 of Title 12, C.R.S., which shall control in the event that less stringent requirements are set forth in this Chapter. 
(1959) 
5-19-4. - License Applications. 
(A)  The applicant for an escort license, an escort runner license, or an escort service license shall submit a verified application to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk. The fee required by this Chapter shall be included with the application. 
(B)  The application for an escort license, an escort runner license, or an escort service license shall include: 
(1)  Name, address and date of birth of the applicant and, if a partnership, also the names, addresses and dates of birth of all the partners and, if a corporation, association, or other organization, also the names, addresses and dates of birth of the stockholders, directors, president, vice-president, secretary, and managing officer; and 
(2)  The fee required by this Chapter. 
(C)  The application for an escort service license shall also include: 
(1)  Complete plans and specifications for the interior of the premises to be licensed; 
(2)  A copy of the lease or other evidence of the applicant's right to possession of the premises; and 
(3)  Information concerning the zoning of the location of the premises. 
(D)  The application shall be reviewed by the City Manager, who, within ten days after receipt of the application and after such additional investigation as he may deem necessary, shall schedule a public hearing before the Special Permit and License Board. Notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the escort service applicant by the City Clerk not less than ten days before the hearing date. Notice of such public hearing shall also be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the community once, not less than ten days prior to the hearing date and by posting a notice of hearing upon the premises for at least ten days prior to the hearing. Publication and posting shall be done by the City Clerk. 
(E)  The City Clerk shall propose the boundaries of the neighborhood in writing to the Special Permit and License Board with a copy to the applicant. If a majority of the board or the applicant disputes the proposed neighborhood boundaries, the issue shall be considered by the board at a public meeting. A dispute of the boundaries by the applicant must be filed within ten days of the letter notifying the applicant of the boundaries established. 
(F)  Prior to the hearing, the City or its designee shall circulate appropriate petitions to determine the needs of the community for an escort service and the desires of its citizens regarding such a facility within the neighborhood surrounding the applicant. The petition form shall be approved by the City. 
(G)  Posting and petitioning shall not be required if the special permit and license board is considering only an escort or an escort runner license application, if the applicant proposes to work for a previously licensed escort service. 
(H)  At least five days prior to the public hearing, the City Clerk shall send the results of the petitioning and investigation of the application to the applicant and make them available to other interested parties. 
(I)  After such public hearing, the Special Permit and License Board shall make findings of fact and a recommendation, including any conditions that should be imposed on the licensee, to the City Council, who may either grant or deny the license consistent with the findings and recommendation of the Special Permit and License Board, or may schedule the matter for further hearing before the City Council. If such further hearing is held, the City Council may grant or deny the license notwithstanding the recommendation of the Special Permit and License Board. 
(J)  In determining whether to grant or deny an escort service license, the City Council and the board shall take into consideration: 
(1)  The character of the applicant; 
(2)  The applicant's prior experience and qualifications to operate such a business; 
(3)  The needs of the community for such a facility and the desires of its citizens regarding such a facility, including any petitions or remonstrances evidencing such desires; 
(4)  Pedestrian safety; 
(5)  Traffic volume and adequacy of parking and access; 
(6)  Essential character of the neighborhood and the applicant's effect on the peace of the neighborhood; 
(7)  Compliance of the facility with all applicable zoning and building regulations; 
(8)  Police activity in comparable businesses; and 
(9)  Architectural compatibility with the character of the neighborhood. 
(K)  In determining whether to grant or deny an escort or escort service runner license, the special permit and license board or the City Council shall consider: 
(1)  The character of the applicant; 
(2)  The applicant's experience and qualifications to provide such service; and 
(3)  The premises or property from which the applicant would conduct business. 
(L)  Each license issued under this Chapter is separate and distinct, and no person shall exercise any of the privileges granted under any license other than that which he holds. A separate license must be obtained by each person wishing to exercise any of the privileges governed by this Chapter and for each geographical location at or from which any person wishes to conduct business as an escort, escort service or escort service runner. 
(M)  An application for a change of location of an escort service licensed pursuant to this Chapter shall be treated as an application for a new license. Any change of location by the licensee without the approval of the City Council shall render the license void. 
(N)  Each license shall specify the date of issuance, the period that is covered, the name of the licensee, and the premises licensed. The license shall be conspicuously displayed at all times in the licensed premises. 
(O)  For purposes of determining good moral character of an applicant, the applicant's criminal record shall be considered, including, but not limited to, any conviction or guilty plea to a charge based on acts of dishonesty, fraud, deceit, sexual misconduct, or prostitution-related misconduct of any kind, whether or not the acts were committed in this state. 
(1959) 
5-19-5. - Fees. 
(A)  A nonrefundable application fee of $300.00 for an escort service license and $200.00 for an escort or escort service runner license shall be submitted with the original application. 
(B)  If the license application is approved, no license shall be issued until a license fee is paid in the amount of $5,000.00 for an escort service license and $500.00 for an escort or escort service license. 
(C)  Renewal fees shall be paid annually in advance in the amount of $5,000.00 for an escort service license and $250.00 for an escort or escort service license. 
(1959) 
5-19-6. - Renewal. 
(A)  All licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire December 31st of the year for which issued, unless cancelled, suspended or revoked, and shall be renewed annually upon application for renewal and payment of the required fees. 
(B)  The renewal application shall be reviewed by the City Manager, who shall have the power to grant or deny such license renewal and to impose reasonable limitations and restrictions on any license renewed. The City Manager shall evaluate the application under the criteria set forth for original applications. The City Manager, in the manager's sole discretion, may cause a hearing on the application for renewal to be held. The hearing shall be conducted by the Special Permit and License Board. Publication, posting and notice requirements shall be the same as for a hearing on an original application. 
(1959 2574) 
5-19-7. - License Denial, Cancellation, Denial of Renewal, Suspension or Revocation. 
(A)  A license may be denied, cancelled, denied renewal, suspended or revoked for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter, for any reason set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title, on the grounds that the health, safety or welfare of the community may be endangered by the continued operation of the license, or on the grounds stated below: 
(1)  The issuance would be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare due to the character, reputation, or moral integrity of the applicant; 
(2)  The character of the applicant, or its officers, directors or partners is such that a violation of this Chapter would be likely to result if a license were granted; 
(3)  The applicant, or any of its officers, directors or partners, has held a license pursuant to this Chapter or the applicable state statute that has been suspended or revoked or for which renewal has been denied within two years prior to the date of the current application; 
(4)  The applicant is a member of any class of persons prohibited by state law to hold a license pursuant to this Chapter; or 
(5)  Based on any violation of the provisions of this Code or any other law. 
(B)  A license may be cancelled, denied renewal, suspended or revoked after the licensee has been given notice and hearing. The notice shall set forth the reasons for the proposed action, in writing, and shall be given by personal delivery to the applicant or mailed to the address contained in the license, postage prepaid, or as provided in Chapter 1 of this Title. Said notice shall be given no less than ten days prior to a hearing to be scheduled before the special permit and license board. 
(C)  A license may be summarily suspended for no more than 30 days by the City Manager when required for the immediate protection of the public health, safety and welfare. A hearing shall be scheduled as soon as may be reasonably possible. 
(D)  The Special Permit and License Board shall conduct an appeal of a cancelled, denied renewal, suspended or revoked license pursuant to the procedures established for hearings in Chapter 1 of this Title. The Special Permit and License Board shall deliver its decision in writing within 30 days. 
(E)  Decisions of the Special Permit and License Board are final, subject only to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(F)  A license shall be denied unless the applicant meets the following qualifications: 
(1)  If an individual, he has attained the age of 18 years; or 
(2)  If a partnership or limited partnership, all partners have attained the age of 18 years; or 
(3)  If a corporation, the directors and all officers thereof have attained the age of 18 years; and 
(4)  If an individual, he is a resident of this state for 120 days immediately prior to the filing of the application with the City Clerk; or 
(5)  If a partnership or limited partnership, all of the partners thereof are residents of this state for 120 days immediately prior to the filing of the application with the City Clerk; or 
(6)  If a corporation, the directors and all of the officers thereof are residents of this state for 120 days immediately prior to the filing of the application with the City Clerk; and 
(7)  If a corporation, the corporation is qualified with the secretary of state to do business in this state or is incorporated under the laws of this state. 
(1959 2574) 
5-19-8. - Transfer. 
(A)  Within 30 days after the transfer of ownership of an amusement center, or of the transfer of ownership of ten percent or more of the capital stock of the corporation, the new owner of the stock or business shall file with the City Clerk a written report of the transfer on forms provided by the City Clerk. The report shall be accompanied by an investigation fee of $250.00. 
(B)  Upon receipt of the report of transfer, the City Clerk shall report the transfer to the City Manager, after sufficient investigation by the police department, and the City Manager may approve the transfer or, in his sole discretion, direct that a public hearing be held regarding the transfer, at which parties in interest may be heard. 
(C)  The special permit and license board shall hold the hearing after proper notice is given. Posting, publication, and notice requirements shall be the same as are required for a hearing on an original application. 
(D)  At the hearing, all interested parties may appear and be heard; provided, however, that the board shall consider only the character of the new owner or owners and whether the new owner or owners comply with all requirements of the code and rules and regulations adopted pursuant to the Code. If the new owner or owners are not approved, the license may be revoked. 
(1959 2574) 
5-19-9. - Identity Cards. 
    Every applicant, licensee or agent or employee of said applicant or licensee shall, prior to commencing work for, in, or upon the premises of the escort service, obtain a photographic identity card from the Westminster Police Department, and shall carry the card at all times while in or upon the licensed premises or while acting as an escort or escort service runner. The nonrefundable application fee for a card shall be $50.00. The Police Department shall do a background check on the applicant prior to issuance of the card. The card shall be in the form required by the City Council. 
(1959) 
5-19-10. - Prohibited Acts. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly: 
(1)  To operate an escort service without holding a currently valid license issued pursuant to this Chapter; 
(2)  To work as an escort or escort service runner without holding a currently valid license issued pursuant to this Chapter; 
(3)  To work as an escort or escort service runner without obtaining and carrying a valid identity card pursuant to Section 5-19-9, W.M.C.; 
(4)  To allow the provision or procurement of any escort service to or for any person under the age of 18 years without the prior written consent of such person's parent or legal guardian; 
(5)  To permit any person under the age of 18 years to be employed in any capacity with an escort service or as an escort service runner; 
(6)  To violate any of the provisions of this Chapter; 
(7)  For any escort service or escort service runner to employ the services of any person who has not obtained a valid identity card pursuant to Section 5-19-9, W.M.C. 
(1959) 
5-19-11. - Duties of Escort Service. 
(A)  Every escort service shall refer all prospective escorts or escort service runners to the City Clerk for licensing. Upon termination of employment of any escort or escort service runner with such escort service, the escort service shall notify the City Clerk of such termination within five days. 
(B)  The escort service shall provide to each escort patron a written contract for services. The contract shall clearly state the name and address of the escort service, escort and customer, the type of services to be performed, the length of time such services shall be performed, the total amount of money such services will cost the escort patron, and any special terms or conditions relating to the services to be performed. The contract shall include a statement in clear and concise language that prostitution is illegal in this state, and that both parties to an act of prostitution may be punished by both fine and imprisonment, and that no act of prostitution shall be performed in relation to the services for which contracted. Each contract shall be numbered and utilized in numerical sequence by the escort service. The contract shall be signed by the escort patron and a copy furnished to him. The escort service shall also retain copies of all such contracts, and one copy of each such contract executed in any calendar month shall be transmitted by the escort service to the City Clerk no later than ten days after the last day of such month. The City Clerk shall treat such contracts as open public records. 
(1959) 
5-19-12. - Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this Chapter. A violation of this Chapter shall be a criminal offense. Violators shall be subject to the penalties provided by Section 1-8-1, W.M.C., including imprisonment, and may also be subject to civil remedies provided by chapter 4 of title VIII of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such person is in violation of this Chapter. 
(1959 2000) 
CHAPTER 22. - MINI WAREHOUSE SPACE LEASE OR RENTAL 

5-22-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Mini warehouses or mini storage shall mean a building or group of buildings containing individual storage units rented or leased to individuals for the storage of merchandise, commodities or private property. 
    Warehouse shall mean a structure used for the storage of merchandise, commodities or private property. 
(1959) 
5-22-2. - License Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of renting or leasing space in a warehouse, mini warehouse or mini storage unit without first obtaining a general business license pursuant to Chapter 2 of this Title. 
(1959) 
5-22-3. - Exemptions. 
    The licensing requirements and special conditions delineated herein shall not apply to warehouses or storage areas serving and incidental to any business otherwise licensed by the City, unless portions of that warehouse or storage area are rented or leased to other persons or firms. 
5-22-4. - Regulations. 
(A)  The following special conditions shall govern the business of renting or leasing space in warehouses, mini warehouses or mini storage units: 
(1)  Permitted uses for warehouses, mini warehouses or mini storage units are limited to the storage of domestic or commercial goods, unless the business license explicitly permits additional uses. 
(2)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are expressly prohibited in a warehouse, mini warehouse or mini storage unit: 
(a)  Private or commercial workshops; 
(b)  Auto repair shops; 
(c)  The conduct of any business; 
(d)  Any occupancy requiring a permit under the Uniform Fire Code, unless such storage conforms to the provisions of all pertinent city building, fire and zoning codes, and is approved by the City Manager or his designee, and 
(e)  The storage of explosives, more than five gallons of flammable or combustible liquids, or other hazardous materials. 
(3)  All commercial uses, with the exception of storage, shall be limited to commercial warehouse complexes and other commercial areas. 
(B)  The owner or licensee of any mini warehouse shall be responsible for assuring compliance with the above provisions and for making provisions to assure access to the individual storage units by the City for periodic inspections and emergencies by providing and requiring use of a master keyed lock system. The owner shall provide any necessary provisions in his contracts with the tenants to allow such access. 
(1959) 
Title VI. - POLICE REGULATIONS 
CHAPTER 1. - OFFENSES; GENERAL PROVISIONS 

6-1-1. - Definitions. 
    Definitions set forth in any section of this title apply whenever the same term is used in the same sense in another section of this title, unless the definition is specifically limited, or the context indicates it is inapplicable. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this title, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Agent shall mean any director, officer, or employee of a corporation, or any other person who is authorized to act on behalf of the corporation. 
    Bodily injury shall mean physical pain, illness, or any impairment of physical or mental condition. 
    Criminal negligence. A person acts with criminal negligence when, through a gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person would exercise, he fails to perceive a substantial and unjustifiable risk that a result will occur or that a circumstance exists. 
    Culpable mental state shall mean intentionally, or with intent, or knowingly, or willfully, or recklessly, as these terms are defined in this section: 
(1)  "Intentionally" or "with intent." All offenses defined in this Code in which the mental culpability requirement is expressed as "intentionally" or "with intent" are declared to be specific intent offenses. A person acts "intentionally" or "with intent" when his conscious objective is to cause the specific result proscribed by the ordinance defining the offense. It is immaterial to the issue of specific intent whether or not the result actually occurred. 
(2)  "Knowingly" or "willfully." All offenses defined in this Code in which the mental culpability requirement is expressed as "knowingly" or "willfully" are declared to be general intent crimes. A person acts "knowingly" or "willfully" with respect to conduct or to a circumstance described by the ordinance defining an offense when he is aware that his conduct is of such a nature or that such circumstances exists. A person acts "knowingly" or "willfully" with respect to a result of his conduct when he is aware that his conduct is practically certain to cause the result. 
(3)  "Recklessly." A person acts "recklessly" with respect to a result or to a circumstance described by an ordinance defining an offense when he consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the result will occur or that the circumstance exists. 
    Deadly weapon shall mean any firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, knife, or other illegal weapon. 
    Destructive device shall mean any material, substance or mechanism capable of being used, either by itself or in combination with any other substance, material or mechanism, to cause sudden and violent injury, damage, destruction or death. 
    Firearm shall mean any instrument or device used in the propulsion or discharge of shot, slugs, shells, cartridges, bullets or other harmful objects or projectiles by the action of gunpowder exploded or burned within it, or by the action of compressed air within it, or by the power or action of springs, and including what are commonly know as air rifles, air pistols and B-B guns. 
    High managerial agent shall mean an officer of a corporation or any other agent in a position of comparable authority with respect to the formulation of corporate policy or the supervision in a managerial capacity of subordinate employees. 
    Knife shall mean any dagger, dirk, knife or stiletto with a blade over three and one-half inches in length, or any other dangerous instrument capable of inflicting cutting, stabbing, or tearing wounds, but does not include a hunting or fishing knife carried for sport use. The issue that a knife is a hunting or fishing knife must be raised as an affirmative defense. 
    Officer shall mean any administrative officer of the City. 
    Police officer shall mean a police officer in uniform or, if out of uniform, one who has identified himself as a police officer. 
    Possession shall mean physical possession of an item by the defendant or, if the defendant is not in physical possession of an item, means that the item was at least partially under the defendant's dominion and control. "Possession" need not be exclusive, and an item may be possessed jointly by the defendant and one or more other persons without a showing that the defendant had actual physical possession of the item. 
    Premises shall mean real property, buildings and other improvements thereon. 
    Property is that of "another" or "one or more other persons" if anyone other than the defendant has a possessory or propriety interest therein. 
    Protected person shall mean the person or persons identified in the mandatory protection order as the person or persons for whose benefit the mandatory protection order was issued. 
    Protection order shall mean any order prohibiting the restrained person from contacting, harassing, injuring, intimidating, molesting, threatening, or touching any protected person or protected animal, or from entering or remaining on premises, or from coming within a specified distance of a protected person or premises, or any other provision to protect the protected person or protected animal from imminent danger to life or health, that is issued by a court of this state or a municipal court, and that is issued pursuant to a state law or as part of the proceedings concerning a criminal municipal ordinance violation, or any other order of a court prohibiting a person from contacting, harassing, injuring, intimidating, molesting, threatening, or touching any person, or from entering or remaining on premises, or from coming within a specified distance of a protected person or premises. For purposes of Section 6-1-7, W.M.C., "protection order" includes any order that amends, modifies, supplements, or supersedes the initial protection order. "Protection order" also includes any restraining order entered prior to July 1, 2003, and any foreign protection order as defined in state law. 
    Public place shall mean any street, alley, road, highway, sidewalk, parking lot, public or community building, public park, any private property open to the general public, and includes any vehicle in or on any of the above-described locations. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to effect any change to federal and state laws and precedents applicable to search and seizure. 
    Registry shall mean the computerized information system created in Section 18-6-803.7, C.R.S., or the National Crime Information Center created pursuant to 28 U.S.C. Sec. 534. 
    Restrained person shall mean the person identified in the order as the person prohibited from doing the specified act or acts. 
(1224 2001 2138 2365 2900 3070 3646; Ord. No. 3922 , § 1, 2-26-2018) 
6-1-2. - Complicity. 
    A person is legally accountable as principal for the behavior of another constituting an offense if, with the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of the offense, he aids, abets or advises the other person in planning or committing the offense. 
(1224 2001) 
6-1-3. - Limitation for Commencing Criminal Proceedings. 
(A)  No person shall be prosecuted, tried or punished for any offense under this title unless the complaint or action for the same is instituted within 18 months after the alleged commission of the offense. 
(B)  The time limitations imposed by subsection (A) of this section shall be tolled if the offender is absent from the City, and the duration of such absence, not to exceed one year, shall be excluded from the computation of the time within which any complaint or action must otherwise be filed. 
(C)  The period within which a prosecution must be commenced does not include any period in which a prosecution is pending against the defendant for the same conduct, even if the complaint or action that commences the prosecution is quashed or the proceedings thereon are set aside or are reversed on appeal. 
(D)  When an offense is based on a series of acts performed at different times, the period of limitation prescribed by this Code starts at the time when the last act is committed. 
(1224) 
6-1-4. - Criminal Liability for Corporate Conduct. 
(A)  An individual is criminally liable for conduct constituting a violation of this Code that he performs or causes to occur in the name of or on behalf of a corporation to the same extent as if that conduct were performed or caused by him in his own name or behalf. 
(B)  A corporation is guilty of an offense if: 
(1)  The conduct constituting the offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty of affirmative performance imposed on corporations by the provisions of this Code; or 
(2)  The conduct constituting the offense is engaged in, authorized, solicited, requested, commanded, or knowingly tolerated by the board of directors, or by a high managerial agent acting within the scope of his employment or on behalf of the corporation. 
(1400 2001 3646) 
6-1-5. - Criminal Attempt. 
(A)  A person commits criminal attempt if, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for commission of an offense, he engages in conduct constituting a substantial step toward the commission of the offense. A substantial step is any conduct, whether act, omission, or possession, that is strongly corroborative of the firmness of the actor's purpose to complete the commission of the offense. Factual or legal impossibility of committing the offense is not a defense if the offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the actor believed them to be, nor is it a defense that the crime attempted was actually perpetrated by the accused. 
(B)  A person who engages in conduct intending to aid another to commit an offense commits criminal attempt if the conduct would establish his complicity under Section 6-1-2, W.M.C., were the offense committed by the other person, even if the other is not guilty of committing or attempting the offense. 
(C)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the defendant abandoned his effort to commit the crime or otherwise prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting the complete and voluntary renunciation of his criminal intent. 
(D)  Criminal attempt is a criminal offense, punishable by up to 90 days imprisonment and a fine of up to $450.00 or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1820 2001) 
6-1-6. - Conspiracy. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit conspiracy. A person commits conspiracy to commit an offense if, with the intent to promote or facilitate its commission, he agrees with another person or persons that they, or one or more of them, will engage in conduct that constitutes an offense or an attempt to commit an offense, or he agrees to aid the other person or persons in the planning or commission of an offense or of an attempt to commit such offense. 
(B)  No person may be convicted of conspiracy to commit an offense, unless an overt act in pursuance of that conspiracy is proved to have been done by him or by a person with whom he conspired. 
(C)  If a person knows that one with whom he conspires to commit an offense has conspired with another person or persons to commit the same offense, he is guilty of conspiring to commit an offense with the other person or persons, whether or not he knows their identity. 
(D)  If a person conspires to commit a number of offenses, he is guilty of only one conspiracy so long as such multiple crimes are part of a single criminal episode. 
(E)  Conspiracy is a criminal offense, punishable by up to 90 days imprisonment and a fine of up to $450.00 or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(2001) 
6-1-7. - Protection Order Against Defendant. 
(A)  Pursuant to Section 18-1-1001, C.R.S., the Municipal Court shall issue a mandatory protection order against any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this title, which order shall remain in effect from the time that the person is advised of his rights at arraignment or the person's first appearance before the court and informed of such order until final disposition of the action or until further order of the court. Such order shall restrain the person charged from harassing, molesting, intimidating, retaliating against, or tampering with any witness to or victim of the acts charged. 
(B)  At the time of arraignment or the person's first appearance before the court, the court shall inform the defendant of the mandatory protection order effective pursuant to this section and shall inform the defendant that a violation of such order is punishable by contempt or by fine or imprisonment as provided by this section. 
(C)  The court is authorized to order any further appropriate restraint on the conduct of the defendant or to continue, dismiss or modify any existing mandatory protection order. 
(D)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate a protection order. Violation of a protection order is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(E)  A person commits the crime of violation of a protection order if, after the person has been personally served with a protection order that identifies the person as a restrained person or otherwise has acquired personal actual knowledge of the contents of a protection order that identifies the person as a restrained person, the person contacts, harasses, injures, intimidates, molests, threatens, or touches the protected person or protected property, including an animal, identified in the protection order or enters or remains on premises or comes within a specified distance of a protected person, or protected property, including an animal, or premises or violates any other provision of the protection order. 
(F)  Any sentence imposed pursuant to subsection (D) of this section shall run consecutively and not concurrently with any sentence imposed for any crime that gave rise to the issuing of the protection order. 
(G)  Whenever a protection order is issued, the protected person shall be provided with a copy of such order. A peace officer shall use every reasonable means to enforce a protection order. 
(H)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to alter or diminish the inherent authority of the court to enforce its orders through civil or criminal contempt proceedings. 
(I)  No person charged with violation of a protection order pursuant to this section shall be permitted, in the criminal action resulting from such charge, to collaterally attack the validity of the order that such person is accused of violating. 
(1998 3057 3646; Ord. No. 3922 , § 2, 2-26-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3922 , § 2, adopted Feb. 26, 2018, revised the catchline of § 6-1-7 from "Mandatory Protection Order Against Defendant" to read as herein set out. 
6-1-8. - Violation of Bail Bond Conditions. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person released on bail bond of whatever kind to knowingly fail to appear for trial or other proceedings in the case in which the bond was filed or to knowingly violate any condition of the bail bond. 
(B)  Penalty: Any violation of this section shall be deemed a criminal violation of this Code, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(2919) 
CHAPTER 2. - CRIMES AGAINST PEACE; FIREARMS 

6-2-1. - Disorderly Conduct. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit disorderly conduct. A person commits disorderly conduct if he intentionally, knowingly or recklessly: 
(1)  Makes a coarse and obviously offensive utterance, gesture or display in a public place, and the utterance, gesture or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace, whether or not an actual breach of the peace takes place; or 
(2)  Abuses or threatens a person in a public place in an obviously offensive manner that tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; or 
(3)  Makes unreasonable noise in a public place or near a private residence that he has no right to occupy; or 
(4)  Fights with another in a public place, except in an amateur or professional contest of athletic skill; or 
(5)  Not being a police officer, displays a deadly weapon in a manner calculated to alarm. 
(B)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (A)(2) of this section that the actor had significant provocation for his abusive or threatening conduct. 
(C)  Disorderly conduct is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001 2366) 
6-2-2. - Harassment; Stalking. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful to commit harassment. A person commits harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, he or she: 
(1)  Strikes, shoves, kicks or otherwise touches a person or subjects him to physical contact; or 
(2)  In a public place, directs obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to, or at, another person; or 
(3)  Follows a person in or about a public place; or 
(4)  Directly or indirectly initiates communication with a person or directs language toward another person, anonymously or otherwise, by telephone, telephone network, data network, text message, instant message, computer, computer network, computer system, or other interactive electronic medium in a manner intended to harass or threaten bodily harm or property damage, or makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal by telephone, telephone network, data network, text message, instant message, computer, computer network, computer system, or other interactive electronic medium that is obscene; or 
(5)  Makes a telephone call or causes a telephone to ring repeatedly, whether or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate conversation; or 
(6)  Makes repeated communications at inconvenient hours that invade the privacy of another and interfere in the use and enjoyment of another's home or private residence or other private property; or 
(7)  Repeatedly insults, taunts, challenges or makes communications in offensively coarse language to another in a manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit harassment by stalking. A person commits harassment by stalking if, directly or indirectly through another person, such person knowingly: 
(1)  Makes a credible threat to another person and, in connection with such threat, repeatedly follows, approaches, contacts, or places under surveillance that person, a member of that person's immediate family, or someone with whom that person has or had a continuing relationship; or 
(2)  Makes a credible threat to another person and, in connection with such threat, repeatedly makes any form of communication with that person, or a member of that person's immediate family, or someone with whom that person has or had a continuing relationship, whether or not a conversation ensues; or 
(3)  Repeatedly follows, approaches, contacts, places under surveillance, or makes any form of communication with another person, a member of that person's immediate family, or someone with whom that person has or has had a continuing relationship in a manner that would cause a reasonable person to suffer serious emotional distress and does cause that person, a member of that person's immediate family, or someone with whom that person has or has had a continuing relationship to suffer serious emotional distress. For purposes of this paragraph, a victim need not show that he or she received professional treatment or counseling to show that he or she suffered serious emotional distress. 
(C)  Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Credible threat shall mean a threat, physical action, or repeated conduct that would cause a reasonable person to be in fear for the person's safety or the safety of his or her immediate family or of someone with whom the person has or has had a continuing relationship. The threat need not be directly expressed if the totality of the conduct would cause a reasonable person such fear. 
    Immediate family shall include the person's spouse and the person's parents, grandparents, siblings, or child. 
    In connection with shall mean acts that further, advance, promote, or have a continuity of purpose, and may occur before, during or after the credible threat. 
    Obscene shall mean a patently offensive description of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not said ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including, but not limited to, masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, analingus or excretory functions. 
    Repeatedly shall mean on more than one occasion. 
(D)  Any act prohibited by subsections (A)(4), (A)(5) and (A)(6) of this section may be deemed to have occurred, or to have been committed at the place at which the communication was either made or received. 
(E)  Harassment is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001 2299 2366; Ord. No. 3922 , § 3, 2-26-2018) 
6-2-3. - Disturbing the Peace. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly or willfully disturb the peace and quiet of another by unreasonable noise, indecent behavior or offensive conduct. 
(B)  Disturbing the peace is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001 2173) 
6-2-4. - Assault. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit assault. A person commits assault if, by any threat or physical action, he knowingly places or attempts to place another person in fear of imminent bodily injury. 
(B)  Assault is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001 2365) 
6-2-5. - Battery. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit battery. A person commits battery if he knowingly or recklessly causes bodily injury to another person. 
(B)  Battery is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001 2365) 
6-2-6. - Unlawful Assembly. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for two or more persons to assemble together for the purpose of committing any crime or for the purpose of committing a violation of any municipal ordinance. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for two or more persons to assemble together in such a disorderly manner as to threaten or disturb the public peace by unreasonably denying or interfering with the rights of others to peacefully use their property or public facilities without obstruction, interference, or disturbance. 
(C)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit peaceful assemblies. 
(D)  It shall be unlawful to disobey a lawful order of a police officer to disperse from obstructing vehicle or pedestrian traffic, from occupying a public building after regular business hours in areas not normally open to the public, or in such a manner as to interfere with, delay or impede the normal and orderly conduct of business conducted in the building. 
(E)  Unlawful assembly is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001) 
6-2-7. - Engaging in a Riot. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a riot. "Riot" means a public disturbance involving an assemblage of five or more persons that by tumultuous and violent conduct creates grave danger of injury to property or persons or substantially obstructs the performance of any governmental function; provided, however, that if such person employs a deadly weapon or destructive device, then this section shall have no application. 
(B)  Engaging in a riot is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001) 
6-2-8. - False Imprisonment. 
(A)  Any person who knowingly confines or detains another without the other's consent and without proper legal authority commits false imprisonment. This section shall not apply to a peace officer acting in good faith within the scope of the officer's duties. 
(B)  False imprisonment is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(2364) 
6-2-9. - Firearms. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly or recklessly discharge firearms, deadly weapons or destructive devices of any kind or description within the limits of the City; provided, however, that this shall not apply to police officers in the discharge of their duties. 
(B)  Exceptions; permits: The City Manager may at any time, upon receipt of proper application, grant a permit to shooting galleries, gun clubs, rifle ranges, and others for shooting in fixed locations. Such permits shall be in writing and shall conform to such requirements as the City Manager shall specify, after consulting with the Police Chief, necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The permits thus issued shall be subject to revocation at any time by the City Manager pursuant to Chapter 1 of Title V of this Code. 
(C)  Except as provided in Section 6-2-10, W.M.C., it shall be a criminal offense for anyone to possess a deadly weapon while on city premises. 
(D)  A violation of this section is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001 3070) 
6-2-10. - Concealed Weapons. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a police officer, to carry concealed on or about his person any deadly weapon, except a person who, at the time of carrying a concealed handgun, had a valid written permit to carry the handgun issued pursuant to state law. 
(B)  It shall be an affirmative defense that the defendant was: 
(1)  A person in his own dwelling or place of business or on property owned or under his control at the time of the act of carrying; or 
(2)  A person in a private automobile or other private means of conveyance, who carries a weapon for lawful protection of his or another person's or property while traveling. 
(C)  All persons carrying a concealed handgun must show, upon request of a police officer, proof of written permit issued pursuant to state law. 
(D)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to forbid a police officer, an armored car employee providing money transport from a city facility, a private security guard hired by the City, or other duly authorized city employee from carrying a weapon. 
(E)  It shall be a criminal offense for anyone, other than a police officer, an armored car employee providing money transport from a city facility, a private security guard hired by the City, or an authorized city employee, to carry any weapon in view onto or in a city premises. Possession of a concealed handgun permit shall be of no defense if the handgun is carried in such a manner as to be visible, in whole or in part, or accessible for any length of time to another individual. 
(F)  Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    City premises shall mean any city-owned recreation facility, office building, library, park, open space, trail, golf course, ice center, or other city property open to the public. 
    Handgun shall mean a pistol, revolver, or other firearm of any description, loaded or unloaded, from which any shot, bullet, or other missile can be discharged, and the length of the barrel, not including any revolving, detachable, or magazine breech, does not exceed 12 inches. 
(G)  Carrying a concealed weapon in violation of the above subsections is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1270 2001 3070) 
6-2-11. - Illegal Weapons. 
(A)  Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Blackjack shall mean any billy, sand club, sandbag, or other hand-operated striking weapon consisting of, at the striking end, an encased piece of lead or other heavy substance and, at the handle end, a strap or springy shaft that increases the force of impact. 
    Gas gun shall mean a device designed for projecting gas-filled projectiles that release their contents after having been projected from the device and includes projectiles designed for use in such a device. 
    Gravity knife shall mean any knife that has a blade released from the handle or sheath thereof by the force of gravity or the application of centrifugal force that, when released, is locked in place by means of a button, spring, lever, or other device. 
    Metallic knuckles shall mean a weapon worn on the hand, consisting of a metal strip or chain with holes or links into which the fingers fit. 
    Nunchaku shall mean an instrument consisting of two sticks, clubs, bars, or rods to be used as handles, connected by a rope, cord, wire or chain that is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense. 
    Switchblade knife shall mean any knife, the blade of which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring, or device in its handle. 
    Throwing start shall mean a disk having sharp radiating points or any disk-shaped bladed object that is hand-held and thrown and that is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an illegal weapon, unless such person is a peace office as defined by State law while acting in the lawful discharge of his duties, or such person has a valid permit and license for possession of such weapon. An "illegal weapon" means a blackjack, gas gun, gravity knife, metallic knuckles or switchblade knife. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful to knowingly aim, swing, or throw a throwing star or nunchaku at another person or to knowingly possess a throwing star or nunchaku in a public place, except for the purpose of presenting an authorized public demonstration or exhibition, receiving instruction in conjunction with an organized school or class, or transporting the throwing star or nunchaku in a closed container for said demonstration or instruction. 
(D)  Upon the motion of the prosecuting attorney after the conviction of a defendant, the court may order the forfeiture of any illegal weapon as an element of sentencing, or as a condition of probation or of a deferred sentence. 
(E)  Violation of this section is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(2001) 
6-2-12. - Possession of Firearms by Juveniles. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to have in such juvenile's possession any firearm. 
(B)  The prohibition contained in subsection (A) of this section shall not apply when a juvenile is in the actual company of the juvenile's parent or legal guardian. 
(C)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the offense described in subsection (A) of this section that the juvenile was, at the time of such possession: 
(1)  Traveling directly to or from or engaging in: 
(a)  A hunter's safety course approved by the Colorado Division of Wildlife; or 
(b)  An organized firearms safety course taught by an adult of at least 21 years of age; or 
(c)  Practicing the use of firearms at an authorized shooting range; or 
(d)  An organized competition involving the use of firearms at an authorized shooting range; or 
(e)  Holding a valid hunting license issued pursuant to Article 4 of Title 33, C.R.S., and was actively engaged in traveling to or returning from a lawful activity relating to hunting, pursuant to any such license; and such juvenile was at all times traveling or engaging in such activity under the direct supervision of an adult who is 21 years of age or older and who has the permission of the juvenile's parent or legal guardian to supervise the juvenile in the use of the firearm. 
(2)  In the juvenile's residence. 
(D)  Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Authorized shooting range shall mean any shooting ranges within the City whose safety rules have been approved by the City Manager pursuant to Section 6-2-9(B), W.M.C., and any established shooting ranges operating outside of the City limits. 
    Juvenile shall mean a person 17 years of age or younger. 
(E)  It shall be unlawful for any adult to provide a firearm intentionally, knowingly, or by criminal negligence to any juvenile in violation of this section, or for any parent or legal guardian of any juvenile, who knows of such juvenile's violation of this section, to fail to make reasonable efforts to prevent such violation. 
(F)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep a firearm in such a criminally negligent manner so as to create a situation or circumstance that allows a juvenile to gain access or makes it likely that a juvenile will gain access to such firearm under circumstances not described in subsection (B) above. Criminal negligence may be inferred if a juvenile gains access to a firearm because it was not secured in a locked place. 
(G)  Penalties: 
(1)  In the event a defendant enters a plea of guilty or no contest to this section or is found guilty at trial, the firearm that was the subject of the violation of this section shall be subject to forfeiture upon order of the court. 
(2)  A violation of this section is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. Minimum fines upon conviction shall be imposed as listed below and the municipal court shall not have discretion to suspend or reduce these fines: 
(a)  First offense: Fine of not less than $250.00. 
(b)  Second offense: Fine of not less than $500.00. 
(c)  Third or additional offenses: Fine of not less than $1,000.00. 
(3)  A minimum jail sentence of 15 days shall be imposed for any violation after the first conviction of a violation of this section. The municipal court shall not have discretion to suspend or reduce this jail sentence. 
(4)  The municipal court may substitute up to 120 hours of community service for either the mandatory fine or a sentence of imprisonment for any violation of this section. 
(2138) 
6-2-13. - Obstruction of the Seeking of Emergency Assistance. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly obstruct or otherwise interfere with anyone who is seeking medical, police, fire or other emergency assistance from any person or agency, public or private. 
(B)  Obstruction of the seeking of emergency assistance is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(3119) 
CHAPTER 3. - THEFT; FRAUD; TRESPASSING; LOITERING 

6-3-1. - Theft. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful to commit theft. A person commits theft when he knowingly obtains or exercises control over anything of value of another without authorization, or by threat or deception, where the value of the thing involved is less than $500.00, and: 
(1)  Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value; or 
(2)  Knowingly uses, conceals, or abandons the thing of value in such manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; or 
(3)  Uses, conceals, or abandons the thing of value intending that such use, concealment or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use and benefit; or 
(4)  Demands any consideration to which he is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person. 
(B)  For the purposes of this section, a thing of value is that of "another" if anyone other than the defendant has a possessory or proprietary interest therein. 
(C)  Every person who obtains control over any stolen thing of value, where the value of the thing involved is less than $500.00, knowing the thing of value to have been stolen by another, may be tried, convicted and punished, whether or not the principal is charged, tried or convicted. 
(D)  Questioning of person suspected of shoplifting without liability: If any person conceals upon his person or otherwise carries away any unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise held or owned by any store or mercantile establishment, the merchant or any employee thereof or any police officer, acting in good faith and upon probable cause based upon reasonable ground therefor, may detain and question such person in a reasonable manner for the purpose of ascertaining whether the person is guilty of theft. Such questioning of a person by a merchant, merchant's employee or police officer does not render the merchant, merchant's employee or police officer civilly or criminally liable for slander, false arrest, false imprisonment, malicious prosecution or unlawful detention. 
(E)  For the purposes of this section, any reference or mention of stealing, false pretenses, or shoplifting shall be interpreted as if the word "theft" were substituted therefor. 
(F)  Theft is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1275 1505 2001 2057 2584) 
6-3-2. - Reserved. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2584) 
6-3-3. - Fraudulently Avoiding Payment of Admission Fees. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person fraudulently to enter, without payment of the proper admission fee, any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other place where admission fees are charged; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the admission of police officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place of public entertainment or amusement. 
(B)  A violation of this section is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(2001) 
6-3-4. - Criminal Mischief. 
(A)  Criminal Mischief/Public Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly damage the real or personal property, or improvements thereto, belonging to the City or other public entity, where the aggregate damage to the real or personal property is less than $500.00. 
(B)  Criminal Mischief/Private Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly damage the real or personal property of one or more other persons, where the aggregate damage to the real or personal property is less than $500.00. 
(C)  Criminal mischief is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1378 1505 2001 2057 2627) 
6-3-5. - Trespassing. 
(A)  Unlawful Trespass: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit trespass. A person commits trespass if he enters or remains upon premises of another when consent to enter or remain is absent, denied, or withdrawn by the owner, occupant, any agent of the owner or occupant, or any other person having lawful control thereof. 
(B)  Premises Defined: Premises shall mean any real estate, all improvements thereon, and any motor vehicle. 
(C)  Prima Facie Evidence: It shall be prima facie evidence that consent is absent, denied, or withdrawn, when one or more of the following events occur: 
(1)  The owner, occupant, any agent of the owner or occupant, or any other person having lawful control of private property requests a person to leave the premises and the person fails or refuses to do so; or 
(2)  Private property, which is not then open to the public, is posted with signs giving notice that entrance is forbidden or restricted to certain hours or persons; or 
(3)  A private residence has been posted with a sign stating "NO SOLICITATIONS," "NO TRESPASS," or a sign with similar meaning, and a person knocks on the door or otherwise attempts to contact or speak to the residence's occupant for the purpose of: (a) selling, distributing or offering to sell or distribute services, food, beverages, goods or merchandise, or (b) distributing information about services, food, beverages, goods, or merchandise, or (c) inviting or attempting to discuss verbally or in written form, ideas and issues, or (d) distributing written information, or (e) seeking funds or other forms of assistance. 
(4)  Such premises are fenced or otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders. 
(5)  The possession, consumption, use, display, transfer, distribution, sale, transportation or growing of marijuana, as that term is defined in Title VI, Chapter 12, of this Code, in violation of the rules, regulations or prohibitions of the owner, occupant, agent of the owner or occupant, or any other person having lawful control of a premises. 
The enumeration in this subsection of the events constituting prima facie evidence shall not be construed to require any summons and complaint to specify one or more provisions of this subsection. 
(D)  Penalty: Trespass is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 1593 2001 2056 2706 2782 3563 3666) 
6-3-6. - Loitering on School Grounds. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, with intent to interfere with or disrupt the school program or with intent to interfere with or endanger school children, in a school building or on school grounds, or within 100 feet of school grounds, when persons under the age of 18 are present in the building or on the grounds not having any reason or relationship involving custody of, or responsibility for, a pupil or any other specific, legitimate reason for being there, and having been asked to leave by a school administrator or his representative or by a police officer. 
(B)  "Loiter" shall mean to be dilatory, to stand idly around, to linger, delay or wander about, or to remain, abide, or tarry. 
(C)  It shall be an affirmative defense that the defendant's acts were lawful and he was exercising his rights of lawful assembly as a part of peaceful and orderly petition for the redress of grievances, either in the course of labor disputes or otherwise. 
(D)  Loitering on school grounds is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1344 2001) 
6-3-7. - Reserved. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2584) 
6-3-8. - Fraud by Check. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful to commit fraud by check. Any person who deceitfully issues a check for less than $500.00 that is not paid because the drawer has insufficient funds with the drawee issues a fraudulent check and commits fraud by check. 
(B)  Fraud by check is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1412 1505 2001 2057 2627) 
6-3-9. - Theft of Rental Property. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit theft of rental property. A person commits theft of rental property if, with regard to personal property, the value of which is less than $500.00, he: 
(1)  Obtains the temporary use of personal property of another that is available only for hire by means of threat or deception, or knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the personal property; or 
(2)  Having lawfully obtained possession for temporary use of the personal property of another that is available only for hire knowingly fails to reveal the whereabouts of or to return said property to the owner thereof or his representative, or to the person from whom he has received it, within 72 hours after the time at which he agreed to return it. 
(B)  Theft of rental property is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1821 2001 2057 2627) 
6-3-10. - Theft by Receiving. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit theft by receiving. A person commits theft by receiving when he receives, retains, loans money by pawn or pledge on, or disposes of any thing of up to $500.00 in value of another, knowing or believing that said thing of value has been stolen, and when he intends to deprive the lawful owner permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value. 
(B)  A person may be convicted of theft by receiving whether or not the person who stole the thing of value from the lawful owner is charged or convicted. 
(C)  Theft by receiving is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(2001 2057 2627) 
6-3-11. - Prohibition of Nighttime Juvenile Loitering. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any minor 17 years of age or younger to loiter, unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such place where the minor is loitering, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the effective hours of this prohibition are between 12 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person who is 21 years of age or older and who has the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity or dance; 
(4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above referenced places during the prescribed period of time; 
(5)  When the minor is attending or travelling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; 
(6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel, with interstate travel through the City of Westminster excepted in all cases from the curfew. 
(B)  Definitions: The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Loiter shall mean to be dilatory, to stand idly around, to linger, delay or wander about, or to remain idle in or about a public place, whether in or out of a vehicle. 
    Permit or allow shall mean to consent, to tolerate, to give permission, to authorize, or to give opportunity. 
    Public place shall mean in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public buildings, private property open to customers, places of amusement, eating places, parking lots, vacant lots or any similar place. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care, control or custody of a minor to knowingly permit or allow, including by insufficient control, such minor to loiter in violation of subsection (A) of this section. "Knowingly" includes knowledge that a parent should be reasonably expected to have concerning the whereabouts of the minor in that adult's custody. It shall be no defense that the responsible adult was indifferent to the activities, conduct or whereabouts of the minor. The provisions of this subsection (C) do not apply if the responsible adult has made a missing person notification to the appropriate police department prior to the minor's violation of subsection (A) of this section. 
(D)  A violation of this section is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(2056) 
6-3-12. - Criminal Tampering. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for a person to commit the crime of criminal tampering. A person commits the crime of criminal tampering if the person knowingly tampers with property of another with the intent to cause injury, inconvenience, or annoyance to that person or to another, whether or not injury or damage has occurred. 
(B)  Criminal tampering is a criminal offense punishable by fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(3191) 
CHAPTER 4. - CRIMES AGAINST DECENCY 

6-4-1. - Public Indecency. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit public indecency. Any person who performs any of the following in a public place, or where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public, commits public indecency: 
(1)  An act of sexual intercourse; or 
(2)  An act of deviate sexual intercourse; or 
(3)  A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of any person; or 
(4)  A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person; or 
(5)  An act of masturbation; or 
(6)  An excretory function, including urination, defecation or expectoration. 
(B)  Public indecency is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001) 
6-4-2. - Indecent Exposure. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit indecent exposure. A person commits indecent exposure if he knowingly exposes his genitals to the view of any person under circumstances in which such conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm to the other person. 
(B)  Indecent exposure is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001) 
CHAPTER 5. - ARREST; PRISONERS; POLICE OFFICERS; FALSE REPRESENTATIONS 

6-5-1. - Resisting Arrest. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to resist arrest. A person resists arrest if he knowingly prevents, or attempts to prevent, a police officer acting under color of his official authority from effecting an arrest of the actor or another by: 
(1)  Using, or threatening to use, physical force or violence against the police officer or another; or 
(2)  Using any other means that creates a substantial risk of causing physical injury to the police officer or another; or 
(3)  Running from, eluding or hiding from a police officer or officers attempting to effect an arrest. 
(B)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the police officer was attempting to make an arrest that, in fact, was unlawful, if he was acting under color of his official authority, and in attempting to make the arrest he was not resorting to unreasonable or excessive force, giving rise to the right of self defense. A police officer acts "under color of his official authority" when, in the regular course of assigned duties, he is called upon to make and does make, a judgment in good faith based upon surrounding facts and circumstances that an arrest should be made by him. 
(C)  Resisting arrest is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001) 
6-5-2. - Escapes. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person confined for conviction of any offense, or in lawful custody, to knowingly escape, or attempt to escape, such custody or confinement. 
(B)  A violation of this section is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both as provided in Section 1-8-1 of this Code. 
(1224 2001) 
6-5-3. - Furnishing Weapons and Other Articles to Prisoners. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish or attempt to furnish, or take into any jail or any temporary detention facility, or to deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any prisoner therein confined, or in the custody of any police officer, any weapon, tool, intoxicating liquor, drug or other article, without the consent of the police officer in charge. 
(B)  A violation of this section is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001) 
6-5-4. - Refusing to Aid a Police Officer. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person 18 years of age or older, upon command by a person known to him to be a police officer, to unreasonably refuse or fail to aid the police officer in effecting an arrest, or securing an arrest, or preventing the commission by another of an offense. 
(B)  Refusing to aid a police officer is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001) 
6-5-5. - Obstructing a Police Officer. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person, by using or threatening to use violence, force, physical interference, or obstacle, to knowingly obstruct, impair or hinder the enforcement of the penal law or the preservation of the peace, or the placement or attempted placement of a person into custody for purposes of his own safety and welfare or the safety and welfare of others, by a police officer, or any person duly empowered with police authority. 
(B)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the police officer, or any person duly empowered with police authority, was acting in an illegal manner, if he was acting in the regular course of assigned duties and in good faith based upon surrounding facts and circumstances. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to reveal their correct name, address and date of birth when requested to do so by a police officer, or any person duly empowered with police authority engaged in the investigation of any violation of law, traffic accident, disaster or other event. 
(D)  Obstructing a police officer is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001 2031) 
6-5-6. - False Representation. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself to be a police officer, or an officer of the City, or to attempt to impersonate any police officer, or an officer of the City, or without authority, to perform any official act on behalf of a police officer or an officer of the City. 
(B)  False representation is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001) 
6-5-7. - False Reporting to Authorities. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely report to authorities. A person falsely reports to authorities, if: 
(1)  He knowingly causes a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be transmitted to or within an official or volunteer fire department, ambulance service, or any other government agency that deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property; or 
(2)  He makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities of a crime or other incident within their official concern when he knows that it did not occur; or 
(3)  He makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities pretending to furnish information relating to an offense or other incident within their official concern when he knows that he has no such information or knows that the information is false. 
(B)  False reporting is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(2001) 
6-5-8. - Alarm Systems. 
(A)  Definitions: The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Alarm shall mean any device that, when activated by the victim of a hold-up or robbery at a specific location, by forced or other entry into premises, or by other stimuli, transmits a signal designed to cause police to investigate criminal activity or emergency. The alarm may be electrical or mechanical and may signal by audible or visual means. "Alarm" shall include burglar alarms, hold-up or robbery alarms, panic alarms, and local alarms, but shall not include alarms intended to detect and report fires, gases, humidity, or other conditions not directly related to a criminal act or portable alarm devices used by the city police department, personal protection alerting devices that alert only the user, and alarms installed in or on motorized vehicles. 
    Alarm user shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity that installs on its premises or has installed on its premises an alarm, an audible alarm device, or a system of such devices. 
    Audible alarm device shall mean any alarm device that produces an audible signal at the premises where it is installed, whether by means of bells, horns, sirens or other mechanism, thereby notifying persons within audible range of the signal that police should be notified. 
(B)  Audible alarm devices shall be equipped with an automatic shutoff mechanism capable of terminating the activated audible signal within a maximum time of: 
(1)  Fifteen minutes in residential locations; and 
(2)  Thirty minutes in nonresidential locations. 
(C)  Audible alarm systems may be disconnected by the City through use of reasonable and appropriate means as required if the alarm does not automatically shut off as described in subsection (B) of this section. The City, its employees, and agents shall not be responsible or liable for damage resulting from such disconnection. 
(D)  After each activation of an alarm on his premises, an alarm user shall inspect or cause the alarm to be inspected by an operator or other alarm maintenance person to ensure its proper operation. 
(E)  Each alarm user shall respond to the location where an alarm originated within 30 minutes after a request to do so by the Police Department, or provide for such response by an alarm maintenance person. 
(F)  Alarm devices shall not transmit prerecorded messages to or be programmed to dial the City Police Department. 
(G)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Violators shall be subject to the penalties provided by Section 1-8-1, W.M.C., and may also be subject to civil remedies provided by Chapter 4 of Title VIII of this Code. 
(2001) 
CHAPTER 6. - MINORS 

6-6-1. - False Statement Card Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to make false statements or to furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or false driver's license, registration card, identification card or note, or other document or documents purporting to establish the age or identity of such person or issued to a person other than the one presenting the same, for the purpose of gaining admission to liquor licensed establishments, or any other establishment to which entry is restricted based on age, either by law or by management of the establishment. 
(1224 1813 2001) 
6-6-2. - Services of Others Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to engage or utilize the services of any other person, whether for remuneration or not, to procure for such person any article that the person himself is forbidden by law to purchase. 
(1224 1813 2001) 
6-6-3. - Unlawful Purchasing Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, whether for remuneration or not, to procure for any person under the age of 21 years, any article that the person himself is forbidden by law to purchase. 
(1224 1813 2001) 
6-6-4. - Unlawful Purchase or Distribution of Cigarettes, Tobacco, or Nicotine Products. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for anyone under the age of 18 years to purchase any cigarette, tobacco, or nicotine products within the City of Westminster. Cigarette, tobacco, or nicotine products are defined as: 
(1)  A product that contains nicotine or tobacco or is derived from tobacco and is intended to be ingested or inhaled by or applied to the skin of an individual; or 
(2)  Any device that can be used to deliver tobacco or nicotine to the person inhaling from the device, including an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, or pipe. 
(3)  Cigarette, tobacco, or nicotine products does not mean a product that the food and drug administration of the United States department of health and human services has approved as a tobacco use cessation product. 
(B)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly furnish to any person who is under 18 years of age, by gift, sale, or any other means, any cigarettes, tobacco, or nicotine products, as defined in Subsection (A) of this Section. Before giving, selling, distributing, dispensing, or offering to sell to an individual any cigarette, tobacco, or nicotine product, a person shall request and examine from the individual a government-issued photographic identification that establishes that the individual is at least 18 years of age; except that, in face-to-face transactions, this requirement is waived if the individual appears older than 30 years of age. 
(C)  Any entity licensed to do business in the State of Colorado who sells, or offers to sell, any cigarettes, tobacco, or nicotine products, either over the counter or by use of a vending machine, or any other coin-operated machine, shall display a warning sign, as specified in this Subsection. Said warning shall be displayed in a prominent place at or about the point of sale or on such machine at all times, shall have a minimum height of three inches and a width of six inches, and shall read as follows: 
WARNING 
UNDER THE WESTMINSTER MUNICIPAL CODE IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN (18) YEARS OF AGE TO PURCHASE CIGARETTES, TOBACCO, OR NICOTINE PRODUCTS AND, UPON CONVICTION, A FINE OF UP TO $500.00 MAY BE IMPOSED. 
(D)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of Subsections (A), (B) or (C) of this Section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of up to $500.00. Nothing in this Section prohibits the Court in its discretion from sentencing the person to participate in a tobacco education program in lieu of part or all of a fine. 
(1)  For violations of Subsection (C) of this Section "any person" shall mean any owner, manager, or employee of the entity licensed to do business in the State of Colorado. 
(1786; Ord. No. 3978 , § 1, 3-25-2019) 
CHAPTER 7. - ANIMALS 

6-7-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Abandon shall mean leaving of an animal for more than 24 hours by its owner or custodian without making effective provisions for its proper care. This shall include, but is not limited to, depositing or dropping off an animal on public property or on property other than that of the owner or custodian without prior permission of the property owner. 
    Animal shall mean any living dumb creature, domestic or wild. 
    Animal management officer shall mean an employee or agent of the City authorized by the chief of police to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
    Animal shelter shall mean any premise designated by the City for the purpose of boarding or the caring of any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the City or law of the state. 
    Bee shall mean the hymenopterous insects in the genus Apis, especially Apis mellifera, primarily distinguished by honey and wax production in colonial, perennial, docile hives, when the hives are intentionally initiated and maintained on residential property for honey production. Bee shall not refer to naturally occurring bee colonies, mason bees, or other bee species that are not intentionally kept for honey production. 
    Cat shall mean a domestic cat (felis catus) regardless of gender that can be vaccinated against rabies. 
    Chicken shall mean a domestic fowl kept for its eggs or meat, excluding ducks, geese, pigeons, turkeys, pea fowl, and guinea hens. 
    Common area shall mean and include areas such as but not limited to the yards, grounds, garden areas, play areas, clubhouses, swimming pools, walkways, common garage areas, entryways, hallways, and driveways of condominiums, townhouses, apartment complexes, motels, hotels and mobile home parks. 
    Countywide Licensing Administrator shall mean the entity to which authority to issue dog licenses for all dogs within the City, regardless of county of residence, and to collect fees for said licenses has been delegated by the parties to the animal shelter/dog licensing/funding intergovernmental agreement, dated August 15, 2012, as may be amended from time to time. 
    Dog shall mean a domestic dog (canus lupus familiaris) regardless of gender that can be vaccinated against rabies. 
    Dog license shall mean current indication that the dog has been registered with the countywide licensing administrator within the previous 365 days. 
    Domestic animal shall mean domesticated or household dogs, cats, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, rats, mice, ferrets, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and invertebrates, commonly found in a pet store and intended to live and breed in a tame condition. It shall also include pot-bellied pigs and expressly does not include bees or chickens. 
    Endangered species shall mean any species of animal, bird or reptile that is currently listed as endangered by the United States Department of Interior or the Colorado Department of Natural Resources. 
    Exotic animals shall mean a rare or unusual animal or pet kept within human households and not commonly thought of as a pet. 
    Feral shall mean an animal that has escaped from domestication and returned, partly or wholly, to a wild state. 
    Fowl shall mean ducks, geese, pigeons, turkeys, pea fowl, guinea hens, and the like. For purposes of this title, fowl expressly does not mean chickens. 
    Guard dog shall mean any dog disciplined through special training to protect persons or property by attacking or threatening to attack any person found within the enclosed area patrolled by such dog. 
    Harboring shall mean the act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing a premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care. 
    Humane trap shall mean a box-type trap that does not cause bodily harm to the animal intended to be captured or to any other animal or person coming in contact with such trap. 
    Kennel shall mean premises where more than five non-livestock animals, excluding offspring not exceeding four months of age belonging to one of the adult animals, are kept for any purpose, including boarding, foster care or training. The term "kennel" does not include pet shop. 
    Livestock shall mean any animal commonly kept or harbored, as a source of food, hides, income through agricultural sale, as a pack animal or draft animal or for use as transportation. Livestock includes, but is not limited to, horses, mules, sheep, goats, cattle, swine, ducks, geese, pigeons, turkeys, pea fowl, and guinea hens. In the event of uncertainty concerning whether a particular animal is a species of livestock, the presumption shall be that such animal is a species of livestock until the owner of such animal proves by a preponderance of the evidence to the satisfaction of the municipal court that the animal is not a species of livestock. 
    Owner shall mean any person who has right of property in an animal or harbors an animal or allows an animal to remain about his premises for a period of 72 hours or longer; claims responsibility for an animal; or is declared by court decree to be the responsible party for an animal or the authorized agent of any such person. The parent or guardian of any minor claiming ownership of an animal shall be deemed to be the owner of the animal for purposes of this chapter. 
    Person shall mean any natural person, corporation, partnership, association, or other entity. 
    Pet shop shall mean an establishment engaged in the business of breeding, buying or selling animals, other than livestock, in commercial, wholesale or retail trade. 
    Potbellied pig shall mean a pig registered with a bona fine potbellied pig registry and weighing less than 95 pounds. 
    Potentially dangerous animal shall mean any animal that may reasonably be assumed to pose a threat to public safety as demonstrated by any of the following behaviors: 
(1)  Causing an injury to a person or domestic animal that is less severe than a serious injury; 
(2)  Without provocation, chasing or menacing a person or domestic animal in an aggressive manner; or 
(3)  Acting in a highly aggressive manner while encroaching onto public or private property, from a vehicle, or from the owner's yard through, on or over a fence. 
    Prohibited animal shall mean any animal that is ordinarily found in an unconfined state and is usually not kept as a household pet, including, but not limited to, lions, tigers, cheetahs, panthers, leopards, cougars, mountain lions, ocelots, any wild members of the genus felis, lynx, bobcats, foxes, minks, skunks, raccoons, bears, nonhuman primates, wolves and coyotes; poisonous or venomous snakes and lizards; lethal toads and arachnids (spiders, scorpions, and tarantulas), crocodilians and nonpoisonous snakes over six feet in length. "Prohibited animal" shall not include domestic ferrets (mustelia furo), rabbits, dogs, cats, and small rodents. Alleged domestication of any prohibited animal shall not affect its status under this definition. In the event of uncertainty whether a particular animal is a prohibited animal, it shall be presumed prohibited until proven not prohibited by a preponderance of the evidence to the satisfaction of the municipal court. 
    Proper enclosure shall mean secure confinement indoors or secure confinement in a locked pen, fenced yard, or structure measuring at least six feet in width, 12 feet in length, and six feet in height, capped with secure sides and constructed at the bottom so as to prevent escape by digging, which provides proper protection from the elements for the animal, is suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and is designed to prevent the animal from escaping while on the owner's property. The proper enclosure must comply with all zoning and building ordinances/regulations of the City, be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and be approved by an animal management officer, and such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
    Rabies vaccination shall mean inoculation of a domestic animal with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the Colorado Department of Health and administered by a licensed veterinarian. The vaccination shall be valid for the period of time specified in writing by the veterinarian for the specific vaccine used. 
    Responsible person shall mean a person at least 18 years old who is familiar with the animal, and has the size, strength, and experience to be able to keep the animal under complete control at all times. 
    Running at large shall mean an animal off the premises of the owner and not under the physical control of the owner. 
    Serious injury shall mean death or any physical injury that results in severe bruising, muscle tears, or skin lacerations requiring professional medical treatment or requires corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
    Shelter shall mean a moisture-proof structure made of durable material that allows retention of body heat and is of suitable size to accommodate the animal. 
    Stray animal shall mean any animal for which there is no identifiable owner. 
    Vicious animal shall mean any animal that: 
(1)  Causes a serious injury or death to a person or domestic animal; or 
(2)  Has a previous potentially dangerous animal conviction and continues to engage in behavior that poses a threat to public safety as described in this chapter's definition of potentially dangerous animal; or 
(3)  Has engaged in or been trained for animal fighting as described and prohibited in Section 18-9-204, C.R.S.; or 
(4)  Has a demonstrated history of behavior that would cause a reasonable person to believe that the animal may inflict serious injury or death upon any person or domestic animal. 
    Wild animal shall mean all wildlife, including but not limited to, raptors, furbearers, all game animals, and all other species of animals, which exist in their natural, unconfined state and are usually not domesticated. 
(1463 1890 1973 2066 2576 3062 3288 3790 3794) 
6-7-2. - Rabies Control. 
(A)  Vaccinations: It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog or cat four months of age or older to fail to have such animal vaccinated against rabies. All dogs and cats shall be vaccinated at four months of age and revaccinated thereafter at the expiration of the validity of the vaccine used, as shown on the written document prepared by a licensed veterinarian. The vaccination shall be valid for the period shown on the document. Any person moving into the City from a location outside the City shall comply with this section within 30 days after having moved into the City by having the animal vaccinated or showing proof of current, valid vaccination. If the dog or cat has inflicted a bite on any person or another animal within the last ten days, the owner of said animal shall report such fact to a veterinarian, and no rabies vaccine shall be administered until after the required observation or quarantine period. 
(B)  Proof of Vaccination: It shall be unlawful for any person who owns a vaccinated animal to fail or refuse to exhibit his copy of the certificate of vaccination upon demand to any person charged with the enforcement of this chapter. A current rabies tag, if provided by the veterinarian administering the vaccine, shall be attached to a collar, harness or other device and shall be worn by the vaccinated dog or cat at all times. The requirement for a dog to display a current rabies tag shall not apply to a dog that is displaying a current dog license tag affixed to a collar, harness or other device worn on the dog in compliance with Section 6-7-4, W.M.C. 
(C)  Harboring Unvaccinated Dogs and Cats: It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor any dog or cat that has not been vaccinated against rabies, as provided herein, or that cannot be identified as having a current vaccination certificate. 
(D)  Non-transferability: Vaccination certificates and tags are not transferable and cannot be used for any animal other than the animal that received the vaccination and for which the certificate was originally issued. 
(E)  Exceptions: No person charged with violating Subsections 6-7-2(A), 6-7-2(B) or 6-7-2(C), W.M.C., shall be convicted if he produces in Court a bona fide and valid certificate of vaccination that was in full force and effect, as required by Subsection 6-7-2(A), W.M.C., at the time of the alleged violation. 
(1463 1963 2045 2576 2657 3288 3345 3790) 
6-7-3. - Reporting Animal Bites. 
(A)  Duty to Report: It shall be unlawful for any person having knowledge that an animal has bitten a human to fail to immediately report the incident to the Westminster Police Department, the Animal Management Officer, or to the Colorado Department of Health. Every physician or other medical practitioner who treats a person for such bites shall, within 12 hours, report such treatment to the Westminster Police Department, the Animal Management Officer, or the Colorado Department of Health, giving the name and precise location of the bitten person and such other information as the officer or agency may require. 
(B)  Exclusions: Bites to humans from rodents, rabbits, birds and reptiles are excluded from the reporting requirements of this section, unless otherwise specified by the Colorado Department of Health. 
(C)  Suspected Rabies: It shall be unlawful for any veterinarian who clinically diagnoses rabies, or any person who suspects rabies in an animal, to fail to immediately report the incident to the Westminster Police Department, the animal management officer, or to the Colorado Department of Health, stating precisely where such animal may be found. If a known or suspected rabid animal bites or attacks another animal, such shall also be reported as required above. 
(D)  Confinement of Animals: Any animal capable of transmitting or carrying the rabies virus that has bitten a person shall immediately be confined to be observed for symptoms of rabies unless the animal is submitted to a laboratory for analysis. An Animal Management Officer shall determine the length of time that said animal must remain in confinement based upon the guidelines and requirements of the Colorado Department of Health. The procedure and place of observation or analysis shall be designated by the investigating officer or responsible agency. If the animal is not confined on the owner's premises, confinement shall be by impoundment in the City animal shelter, a pet shop with a class B license, or at any veterinary hospital of the owner's choice within the City of Westminster. Such confinement shall be at the expense of the owner. Stray animals whose owners cannot be located shall be confined as designated by the City. The owner of any animal that has been reported to have inflicted a bite on any person shall on demand produce said animal for impoundment, as prescribed in this section or for laboratory analysis. Refusal to produce said animal constitutes a violation of this section, and each day of such refusal shall constitute a separate and continuing violation. 
(E)  Removal of Animals From Confinement: It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, remove or release any animal that has been confined, impounded, or is in the custody of the City or its agents as authorized under this chapter, without the consent of the City or the impounding agency. 
(1463 1890 1973 2066 2576 3288 3790) 
6-7-4. - Dog Licensing. 
(A)  Dog License Required: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog being kept in the City of Westminster, including both Adams and Jefferson Counties, over the age of four months, or within 30 days of acquisition of said dog, whichever occurs last, to fail to obtain a license for such animal as required by this section. Any dog present in the City that has been kept or harbored in the City for 30 days or more within the prior 365-day period shall have a current dog license. 
(2)  The countywide licensing administrator will administer the City of Westminster's Dog License program and distribute the dog license tags. Application for a dog license shall be made to the countywide licensing administrator or to such agents as designated by the administrator. Dog Licenses and tags shall be issued, renewed, replaced and expired in accordance with the countywide administrator's requirements, including, but not limited to, proof of current rabies vaccination and reduced dog license fee if the dog is spayed or neutered. 
(3)  A dog owner may request an exemption to these dog license provisions if, for medical reasons the dog cannot be vaccinated. In this event, a dog owner must submit an affidavit from a licensed veterinarian stating the reasons why the dog is unable to be vaccinated. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for a dog owner to fail to renew a dog license once every 365 days. 
(5)  The dog license fee, including the fee for replacement licenses, shall be in amounts as set by the countywide licensing administrator. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of an assistance or service dog to fail to obtain a dog license as required by this section. An individual with a disability who owns a service dog is exempt from the annual license fees. 
(7)  Any dog owner or any entity exempt from the countywide licensing administrator's dog license requirements shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(B)  Dog License Tag to be Displayed: It is unlawful for any person to harbor any dog that must be licensed per Subsection 6-7-4(A), W.M.C., which is not displaying a current dog license tag affixed to a collar, chain, or harness worn on the dog. 
(C)  Dog License Tag Not Transferable: It is unlawful for any person to affix to the collar, chain, or harness of any dog, or permit to remain affixed, a dog license tag for any other dog or to display such a tag to an animal management officer or peace officer. 
(3345 3790) 
6-7-5. - Animals Running at Large. 
(A)  Animals Running at Large Prohibited: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of an animal to fail to restrain the animal by physical means from running at large. Running at large includes unattended animals chained or tied in public places or in common areas. In addition to being a violation of this section, an animal running at large is declared to be a public nuisance that may be abated pursuant to the provisions specified in Chapter 4 of Title VIII of this Code. This subsection (A)(1) shall not apply to dogs running off-leash at an off-leash dog site as established in Section 13-1-3(Z), W.M.C 
(2)  Neutering/spaying required. Subject to the discretion of the municipal court, it may be unlawful for any owner of an animal running at large to allow the animal to remain in a non-neutered or unspayed condition. 
(3)  It shall be the burden of the owner to prove that the animal is neutered or spayed by the production of a veterinarian's opinion or other documentary evidence. 
(B)  Confinement During Estrus: It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to securely confine any unspayed female dog or cat in the state of estrus (heat), in a house, building or secure enclosure, in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come in contact with another animal except for planned breeding, and such that the animal does not create a nuisance by attracting other dogs or cats. When outside on the property of the owner for metabolic waste elimination, the animal must be physically restrained on a hand-held leash. Owners who do not comply may be ordered to remove the dog or cat in heat to a boarding kennel, veterinary hospital or animal shelter. All expenses incurred as a result of the confinement shall be paid by the owner of the dog or cat. Failure to comply with the removal order shall be a violation of this section and the dog or cat shall then be impounded as prescribed in this chapter. 
(C)  Sick or Injured Animals: Sick or injured animals found on public property may be impounded and given adequate veterinary medical treatment pending notification of the owner. If the animal is significantly injured or sick such that recovery is improbable, the animal may be euthanized, without liability to the City, animal shelter, their employees, officers, or agents, or to any veterinarian examining, diagnosing, or treating the animal. An Animal Management Officer or police officer may humanely destroy any animal the officer reasonably believes to be so sick or injured that recovery is improbably, even if veterinary care could be provided, in order to avoid further pain and suffering by the animal, without liability to the City or the officer. If the injured animal is treated or impounded, the owner of such animal shall be liable for all expenses of the treatment or impoundment. 
(1463 1890 1973 2657 2811 3288 3790) 
6-7-6. - Removal of Animal Excrement; Damage to Property. 
    It shall be unlawful: 
(A)  For any owner of any animal to refuse or fail to remove promptly excrement deposited by said animal upon any common thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, play area, park, other public property, or any private property when permission of the owner or tenant of said property has not been obtained, and such is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(B)  For any owner of any animal to permit said animal, whether or not it is running at large, to destroy, damage or injure any shrubbery, plants, flowers, grass, lawn, fence or anything whatsoever upon any public premises or private premises owned or occupied by a person other than the owner of said animal, and such is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(C)  To place animal excrement in storm sewers, or to dispose of excrement in any manner except by depositing it in a toilet or a receptacle ordinarily used for garbage and covered by a lid, or in an otherwise lawful and sanitary manner. 
(D)  To fail to remove promptly all fecal wastes from private premises, including the premises of the owner of an animal or any other person consenting to the deposit of such waste on his or her premises, or to fail to place such waste in a closed fly-tight container or to fail to remove the contents of said containers from the City as necessary to prevent such contents from becoming a nuisance. 
(E)  To fail to maintain the premises upon which animals are kept in a clean and sanitary condition, which premises shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable hours by city representatives. 
(1463 1973) 
6-7-7. - Disturbance. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal to allow the animal to disturb any person by barking, howling, yelping, or other audible sound. In addition to being a violation of this section, the same is hereby declared to be a public nuisance that may be abated pursuant to the provisions specified in Chapter 4 of Title VIII of this Code. 
(B)  (1)  No person shall be charged with violating this section unless a written warning was given to the owner or person in custody of the animal by an Animal Management Officer or police officer within 12 months preceding the first date alleged as a date of violation in the complaint. A warning is given under this subsection if it is personally given to the owner or person in custody of the animal, or it is posted upon the property of the owner or person in custody or mailed first-class to such person. Such records are prima facie evidence that such warnings were given. 
(2)  No summons shall be issued and no person shall be convicted at trial for violating this section unless two or more witnesses from different households testify to the loud and persistent or loud and habitual nature of the noise, or unless there is other evidence corroborating the testimony of a single witness. An Animal Management Officer or a police officer who can corroborate the elements in this section may issue summons and testify as the second witness. 
(1463 1635 1973 2576 3288 3790) 
6-7-8. - Vicious Animals and Potentially Dangerous Animals. 
(A)  Owner Responsibility and Liability: Any owner of a vicious animal or potentially dangerous animal shall be jointly and severally responsible with all other owners of such animal for compliance with the requirements of this section. For the purpose of prosecution for violation of this section, it shall not be necessary in order to obtain a conviction to prove notice or knowledge on the part of the owner of the vicious animal or potentially dangerous animal that said animal was violating any of the provisions of this section. 
(B)  Requirements for Possession of a Potentially Dangerous Animal: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, keep, harbor, or have custody or control of a potentially dangerous animal, except in compliance with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The owner shall be 18 years of age or older. 
(2)  The owner shall not permit a potentially dangerous animal to be outside a proper enclosure on the owner's property unless such animal is under the physical control of a responsible person and restrained by a lead not exceeding four feet in length. 
(3)  The potentially dangerous animal and owner shall complete a socialization and/or behavior program approved by the Animal Management Officer. 
(4)  The potentially dangerous animal shall be spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian or a licensed shelter. 
(5)  The potentially dangerous animal shall be permanently identified through the implantation of a microchip containing owner identification information by a licensed veterinarian or a licensed shelter. The microchip information must be registered with the appropriate company responsible for maintaining such information for the microchip. 
(6)  The owner of a potentially dangerous animal shall notify the Animal Management Officer in person or by telephone as soon as practicable, but no later than one hour after owner's knowledge of the occurrence of either of the following events: 
(a)  The animal has escaped or has otherwise ceased to be in the custody of the owner for any reason, unless the owner knows such animal to be physically secured and restrained or confined in the custody of another competent adult; or 
(b)  The animal has attacked a human being or domestic animal. 
(7)  The owner of a potentially dangerous animal shall notify the Animal Management Officer in person or by telephone within 24 hours of the occurrence of any one of the following events: 
(a)  The animal has been sold, given, or otherwise transferred to the ownership or possession of another person, including the name, address, and telephone numbers of the new owner and the effective date of the transfer; or 
(b)  The animal has died. 
(C)  Requirements for Possession of a Vicious Animal: In addition to satisfying the requirements for possession of a potentially dangerous animal pursuant to Section 6-7-8(B), W.M.C., it shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, keep, harbor, or have custody or control of a vicious animal, except in compliance with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Notwithstanding Section 6-7-8(B)(2), W.M.C., the owner shall not permit a vicious animal to be outside a proper enclosure on the owner's property, unless such animal is caged or under the physical control of a responsible person, properly muzzled, and restrained by a lead not exceeding four feet in length. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any human being or animal. 
(2)  The owner of a vicious animal shall maintain at all times either a policy of insurance or a surety bond in a minimum amount of $100,000.00 to cover claims for any personal injuries or property damage inflicted by the vicious animal. The insurer or surety, as the case may be, shall be required to provide the Animal Management Officer with 30 days prior written notice of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the policy of insurance or surety bond, respectively. 
(D)  Impoundment; Nuisance Declared: Any animal which has exhibited behavior that would cause a reasonable person to believe that the animal is a vicious animal or a potentially dangerous animal may be summarily impounded when the Animal Management Officer reasonably believes the animal is a present threat to the health or safety of the community. Such animal is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the court in proceedings brought under the procedures established in this Code for the abatement of nuisances. If impoundment of said animal cannot be made with safety to the Animal Management Officer or other persons, the animal may be destroyed by and Animal Management Officer or peace officer without notice to the owner or harborer. 
(E)  Exceptions: No animal shall be found to be a vicious animal or potentially dangerous animal under this chapter if: 
(1)  The animal is used by a peace officer while the officer is engaged in the performance of peace officer duties. 
(2)  At the time of the threat, behavior, or attack against a domestic animal, said animal was at large and entered upon the property of the owner and the threat, behavior, or attack began, but did not necessarily end, upon such property. 
(3)  At the time of the threat, behavior, or attack against a domestic animal, said animal was biting or otherwise attacking the dangerous animal or its owner. 
(4)  At the time of the threat, behavior, or attack against a person, the victim was committing or attempting to commit a criminal offense against the animal's owner, and the threat, behavior, or attack did not occur on the owner's property. 
(5)  At the time of the threat, behavior, or attack against a person, the victim was committing or attempting to commit a criminal offense against a person on the owner's property or the property itself and the threat, behavior, or attack began, but did not necessarily end, upon such property. 
(6)  At the time of the threat, behavior, or attack against a person, the victim tormented, provoked, abused, or inflicted injury upon the animal in such an extreme manner that it resulted in the threat, behavior, or attack. 
(7)  The exceptions set forth in this Subsection 6-7-8(E), W.M.C., shall not apply to any animal that has engaged in or been trained for animal fighting as described and prohibited in Section 18-9-204, C.R.S. 
(1463 1635 1973 2576 2657 3062 3288) 
6-7-9. - Impounded Animals. 
(A)  Impoundment: If there is probable cause to believe that an animal is owned or harbored in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance, regulation, state statute or regulation, the animal may be taken into custody by an Animal Management Officer or other designated official and impounded in the animal shelter. Stray animals may be similarly impounded. 
(B)  Disposition of Impounded Animals: As soon as practicable after impoundment, a bona fide effort shall be made to give notice of impoundment to the owner. Any impounded animal shall be released to the owner upon payment of the impoundment fee, boarding fee, veterinary care charges, and any other costs associated with impoundment. If such animal is not redeemed within the time period contained within Section 35-80-106.3, C.R.S., it shall be considered abandoned and may be euthanized or placed for adoption at the discretion of the animal shelter. The failure of the owner to redeem an animal shall release the City and the animal shelter, and their officers, employees, and agents, from any and all liability for the animal's subsequent euthanization or adoption. 
(C)  Disposition of Impounded Animal Being Held Pending Court Proceedings: If an animal is impounded, and is being held pending Court proceedings for any violation of the provisions of this chapter, the animal may not be released except on the order of the court. The court may order said animal to be euthanized in a humane manner if, after a judicial hearing, it finds that: (1) such animal is vicious and that it represents a clear and present danger to the citizens or other animals in the community; or (2) the animal is experiencing extreme pain or suffering. Any animal that remains unclaimed for five days after its release has been ordered by the court may be euthanized or placed for adoption at the discretion of the animal shelter. The owner shall be liable for the costs of the care, keeping or disposal of the animal. 
(D)  Failure to Produce Animal: The owner of any animal subject to impoundment under paragraph (A) of this section shall, on demand of an Animal Management Officer, or other person who may be so authorized by this chapter, produce the animal for impoundment as prescribed in this section. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any such animal to fail or refuse to produce the animal on demand. 
(1463 1890 1973 2576 3288 3790) 
6-7-10. - Kennels. 
(A)  Operation of Kennel Requirements: It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate a kennel without first obtaining a license from the City. A kennel may not be located within a residentially zoned district, or the residential area of a PUD zone district unless specifically allowed in the PUD. 
(B)  Licenses: Issuance; Renewal: Kennel licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December each year. No kennel license shall be issued until an inspection certificate has been issued by an Animal Management Officer or designee. The license issued shall specify the maximum number of animals permitted. It shall be unlawful for the licensee to keep any number of animals in excess of the maximum specified on the license. All applicants for a kennel license within the City, if required to be licensed by the Colorado Department of Health or the Colorado Department of Agriculture, must have a valid license issued by said department to qualify for licensing by the City. The possession of a State license, however, shall not in itself assure that a city license will be granted to anyone. Standards and regulations affecting kennels may be adopted by the City that are more restrictive than applicable state standards. 
(C)  Revocation or Suspension of Licenses: The City Manager may suspend or revoke the license of any person operating a kennel licensed under this chapter that is in violation of any provision of this chapter, zoning law, health law, or any other applicable ordinance or statute, or who maintains the kennel in such a manner as to be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of persons residing in the immediate vicinity, or detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of animals being kept by the licensee. Such suspension or revocation shall follow the procedures established in Title V, Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(D)  Exceptions: The following must possess a current kennel license issued by the City, but are not required to pay any fee for such license: 
(1)  A veterinary hospital operated by a veterinarian currently licensed by the State of Colorado. 
(2)  A bona-fide publicly or privately owned zoological park. 
(3)  A bona-fide research institution using animals for scientific research. 
(4)  A publicly owned animal shelter. 
(5)  A bona-fide animal shelter operated by an organized humane society. 
(6)  Schools. 
(E)  Care of Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person who operates a kennel to fail to maintain the facilities in a sanitary condition, to fail to provide proper heating and ventilation, space appropriate to the size, weight and species of animal, adequate nutrition, and humane care and treatment for all animals in his care. 
(1463 1890 1973 2576 3288 3790) 
6-7-11. - Pet Shops. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful to own or operate a pet shop without having obtained a valid class "A" or class "B" pet shop license from the City. 
(1)  A CLASS "A" license shall not entitle the licensee to sell or offer for sale any exotic animals. A pet shop with a CLASS "A" license shall be confined in a building that is totally enclosed, and all pet shop animals shall be confined exclusively within that building. The pet shop may not have outside runs or pens and none of the pet shop animals may be harbored outside the building at any time for any reason. 
(2)  A class "B" license shall entitle the licensee to sell or offer for sale any exotic animals. At the request of the City, a pet shop with a class "B" license shall board any impounded exotic animals. Reimbursement for board of such animals shall be at the rates established in this chapter. Impounded animals shall be clearly identified and kept separate from other pet shop animals. The licensee shall provide written notice to the animal management officer of any release or disposition of any impounded animal. A class "B" pet shop may have an outside run or pen to be used solely for harboring reptiles, so long as the outside run or pen is fully enclosed and secure. Prior to issuance of a class "B" license, the applicant shall provide a bond, issued to the City by a qualified corporate surety licensed to do business in the State of Colorado in a penal sum not less than $10,000.00, conditioned upon the faithful boarding of impounded animals pursuant to this chapter and regulations issued by the Chief of Police. 
(B)  Licenses; Issuance; Renewal Requirements: Pet shop licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December of each year. No pet shop license shall be issued until an inspection certificate has been issued by the Animal Management Officer or his designee. All applicants for a pet shop license within the City, if required to be licensed by the Colorado Department of Health, must have a valid license issued by said Department to qualify for licensing by the City. The possession of a state license, however, shall not in itself assure that a city license will be granted to anyone. Standards and regulations affecting pet shops may be adopted by the City that are more restrictive than applicable state standards. 
(C)  Revocation or Suspension of Licenses: The City Manager may suspend or revoke the license of any person operating a pet shop licensed under this section that is in violation of any provision of this chapter, zoning law, health law or any other applicable law of the City or of the State of Colorado, or who maintains the pet shop in such a manner as to be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of persons residing in the immediate vicinity or detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of animals being kept by the licensee. Such suspension or revocation shall follow the procedures established in Title V, Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(D)  Care of Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person who operates a pet shop to fail to maintain the facilities in a sanitary condition, to fail to provide proper heating and ventilation, space appropriate to the size, weight and species of animal, adequate nutrition, humane care and treatment for all animals in his care, and to fail to take reasonable care to release for sale, trade or adoption only those animals that are free of disease or injuries. 
(1463 1890 1973 3288) 
6-7-12. - Restrictions on Sale and Possession of Animals. 
(A)  Animals in Residential Districts: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly possess, harbor, keep, maintain, or permit on any property within the city zoned for residential use more than ten domestic animals, of which no more than three shall be a combination of dogs or cats over the age of four months; or more than the number of bee hives allowed in Subsection 6-7-12(H), W.M.C.; or more than the number of female chickens allowed in Subsection 6-7-12(I), W.M.C. 
(2)  In addition to being a violation of this section, the same is hereby declared to be a public nuisance that may be abated pursuant to the provisions specified in Chapter 4 of Title VIII of this Code. 
If the keeping of animals under this subsection (A) is in conflict with any provision of this chapter concerning exotic, endangered, or prohibited animals, or any state or federal statute or regulation, such other provision, statute or regulation shall control. This subsection (A) shall not include fish. 
(B)  Animals Limited: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain livestock in residential, business, commercial, and industrial zoned districts, and planned unit developments unless specifically allowed in the PUD, excepting that livestock shall be permitted in parcels zoned 0-1 or in parcels of ten acres or more in size in all zoning districts prior to commencement of construction on the parcel. In any case, the number of animals kept in a PUD shall not exceed the number permitted by the provisions of the official development plan. Livestock, excluding fowl, shall have one-half acre of pasture available for each animal. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain bees or chickens within the city except in lots zoned 0-1; or in lots of ten acres or more in size in all zoning districts prior to commencement of construction; or in single-family detached residential lot pursuant to the requirements of Subsection 6-7-12(H) and Subsection 6-7-12(I), W.M.C, unless specifically prohibited by the lot's applicable official development plan. In addition to being a violation of this chapter, the keeping of bees or chickens in violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance that may be abated pursuant to the provisions specified in Chapter 4 of Title VIII of this Code. 
(C)  Prohibited Endangered and Exotic Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to import, offer for sale, sell, keep, maintain, harbor or permit anywhere in the City any prohibited animal, or endangered species as defined in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, sell, or permit the sale of any exotic animal unless in a pet shop with a class "B" license. 
(D)  Federal and State Statutes and Regulations: It shall be unlawful for any person to import, offer for sale, sell, keep, possess or willfully maintain, harbor or permit in the City any animal in violation of any state or federal statute or regulation. 
(E)  Exceptions: The prohibitions in subsections (B) and (C) of this section shall not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  A bona fide publicly or privately owned zoological park. 
(2)  A bona fide research institution using animals for scientific research. 
(3)  A circus duly authorized to do business in the city. 
(4)  A veterinary hospital operated by a veterinarian currently licensed by the State of Colorado. 
(5)  Wildlife rehabilitators, falconers, or scientific collection permit holders who are currently licensed by Colorado Parks and Wildlife. 
(F)  Potbellied Pigs: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, harbor, keep, maintain or permit at his dwelling within the City any potbellied pig or any pig purporting to be a potbellied pig, unless the owner complies with the requirements of this section. It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to comply with these requirements. 
(1)  The pig must be registered through a bona fide potbellied pig registry. 
(2)  The owner of any potbellied pig four months of age or older shall obtain a permit issued by the City of Westminster for the pig. Upon proof of registration through a bona fide potbellied pig registering and proof of neutering, the City shall issue a permit. 
(3)  An identification tag with the owner's name and phone number shall be attached to a harness and worn by the pig at all times. 
(4)  A potbellied pig shall be neutered prior to four months of age. 
(5)  A potbellied pig shall not exceed 95 pounds in weight. 
(6)  No more than one potbellied pig shall be permitted on any residential property. 
(7)  A potbellied pig kept on residential property shall be kept as a pet for personal enjoyment, and not kept or raised for breeding, sale, or human consumption. 
(G)  Public Sale of Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell an animal follows: 
(1)  From a public highway, street, park or any public property adjacent to a public highway, street or park; or 
(2)  From any commercial private property without the express written consent of the owner or lessee of the property; or 
(3)  That is weak, sick, or un-weaned; or 
(4)  That is a cat or dog fewer than eight weeks of age. 
(H)  Bees: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, harbor, keep, maintain or permit on his property within the City bees or bee hives, unless the owner or occupant of the property complies with the requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with these requirements. 
(1)  The intentional keeping of bees shall require a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, and such permit shall be issued only to the owner or occupant of the property where the bees are to be kept. 
(2)  Bees may only be kept in a hive located in the rear yard of a single-family detached property with an existing residence. 
(3)  The maximum number of hives per single-family detached lot shall be allowed as follows: 
(a)  One-quarter acre or less: two hives; 
(b)  More than one-quarter acre up to and including one-half acre: four hives; 
(c)  More than one-half acre up to and including three-quarters of an acre: six hives; 
(d)  More than three-quarters of an acre: eight hives. 
(4)  At all times, bees must be provided with a properly designed beehive meeting the following requirements: 
(a)  All hives shall provide a secure design, sufficient to protect the bee colony from predators; 
(b)  All hives shall provide adequate shelter from inclement weather conditions, including protection from sun, wind, rain, snow, hail, and extreme temperatures; 
(c)  Each hive shall not exceed a maximum gross floor area of nine square feet; 
(d)  Each hive shall not exceed six feet in height, as measured from the ground, excluding the roof element, which may cause the hive's total height to measure not more than seven feet from the ground; 
(e)  Each hive shall be set back from all rear yard property lines by a minimum of ten feet. 
(6)  A six-foot tall flyaway barrier or privacy fence within the rear yard shall be erected and maintained in good condition at all times. 
(7)  A fresh water supply for the bees shall be maintained in the rear yard of the property at all times, in a location readily accessible to all bees kept in the rear yard of the property. 
(8)  Honeycomb that is removed from a hive must immediately be moved away from the hive and enclosed in a bee-proof and predator-proof location, building, or storage container. 
(9)  Unused hive components, beekeeping equipment, and supplies associated with beekeeping must be enclosed in a bee-proof location, building, or storage container and inaccessible to bees. 
(10)  Aggressive or Africanized bees are prohibited. 
(11)  In addition to being a violation of this chapter, the keeping of bees in violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance that may be abated pursuant to the provisions specified in Chapter 4 of Title VIII of this Code. 
(I)  Chickens: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, harbor, keep, maintain or permit on his property within the City any chickens, unless the owner or occupant of the property complies with the requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with these requirements. 
(1)  The keeping of chickens shall require a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, and such permit shall only be issued to the owner or occupant of the property where the chickens are to be kept. 
(2)  Chickens may only be kept in the rear yard of a single-family detached property with an existing residence and with a proper chicken coop meeting the following requirements: 
(a)  A coop shall be fully enclosed, having floors, walls, and roofs sufficient to protect the chickens from predators; 
(b)  Each coop shall provide a minimum of six square feet of living space per chicken; 
(c)  A coop shall provide adequate shelter from inclement weather conditions, including protection from sun, wind, rain, snow, hail, and extreme temperatures; 
(d)  Each coop shall not exceed a maximum gross floor area of 120 square feet; 
(e)  A coop shall not exceed six feet in height as measured from the ground; 
(f)  A coop shall be set back from all rear yard property lines by a minimum of ten feet; 
(g)  Only one coop is allowed per rear yard. 
(3)  Only hens (female chickens) are permitted. 
(4)  The maximum number of chickens per single-family detached lot shall be as follows: 
(a)  Lots up to two acres: six chickens; 
(b)  Lots more than two acres: 12 chickens. 
(5)  Chickens shall be securely kept within a coop in the rear yard from dusk until dawn. If allowed to roam within the enclosed rear yard at any time from dawn until dusk, chickens shall be rendered unable to fly. 
(6)  A rear yard with chickens shall be fully screened by a privacy fence a minimum of six feet in height located on or inside all property lines of the rear yard; except that lots opening to city-owned open space are not required to erect a privacy fence along the property line shared with the City. 
(7)  Animal excrement shall be properly disposed of, and sanitary conditions maintained in order to minimize the presence of flies and other insects, and to minimize odor and potential for disease. 
(8)  A fresh water supply for the chickens shall be maintained in the rear yard property at all times, in a location readily accessible to all chickens. 
(9)  Chicken feed shall be enclosed in a re-sealable, airtight, vermin-proof container. 
(10)  The slaughtering of chickens is permitted only indoors and slaughtering shall be limited only to those chickens allowed by permit for the specific property. Entrails and remains shall be disposed of properly. The slaughtering of chickens outdoors is prohibited. 
(11)  In addition to being a violation of this chapter, the keeping of chickens in violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance that may be abated pursuant to the provisions specified in Chapter 4 of Title VIII of this Code. 
(1463 1890 1973 2066 3062 3288 3790 3794) 
6-7-13. - Care and Treatment. 
(A)  Cruelty to Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence to overload, overwork, torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance, unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate, needlessly kill, carry or confine in or upon any vehicle in a cruel or reckless manner, or allow to be housed in a manner that results in chronic or repeated serious physical harm of any animal. Neglect of an animal resulting in the death of the animal shall constitute cruelty. Ownership of the animal or the commission of such acts on private property shall not be a defense to prosecution for violation of this section. 
(B)  Poisoning: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly poison any domestic animal or livestock, or to knowingly distribute poison or toxicants on public or private property in any manner whatsoever that causes the poisoning of any domestic animal or livestock. This provision shall not apply to the extermination of undesirable pests as defined in Articles 7, 10, and 43 of Title 35, C.R.S. 
(C)  Neglect of Animals: It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person entrusted with the care of any animal or bees to deprive or fail to provide such animal or bees of adequate and wholesome food, water, or protection from the weather as shall be consistent with the keeping of the species, breed, and type of animal or bees involved; to fail to provide the animal with proper protection from extremes in temperatures; to fail to provide the animal with an opportunity for exercise; to fail to provide the animal with adequate veterinary care; or to otherwise neglect the animal or bees in such a manner as to endanger its health or cause it to suffer or die. 
(D)  Sanitation: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal or bees to fail to maintain the premises upon which animals or bees are kept in a clean and sanitary condition, which premises shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable hours by city representatives. 
(E)  Abandoning Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly abandon an animal by leaving the animal with intent not to return within a reasonable time. Abandonment includes, but is not limited to, the dumping of an animal from a moving or stationary motor vehicle. This section shall not apply to voluntary relinquishments to the animal shelter, an animal management officer or to a licensed veterinarian. 
(F)  Confinement of Animals: Every person who keeps an animal confined in an enclosed area shall provide it with an adequate exercise area as well as adequate shelter, food, and water. If the animal is restricted by a leash, rope, chain or cable, it shall be affixed in such manner that it will prevent the animal from becoming entangled or injured, and permit access to adequate shelter, food and water. 
(G)  Display or Sale of Dyed or Immature Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, display, sell, barter or give away, dyed, colored or in any way artificially treated baby chicks, ducklings, fowl, rabbits or any other animal as pets, playthings, novelties, gifts or for any other purpose. 
(H)  Fighting Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, sponsor, instigate, allow or encourage any animal to fight with another of its own species or with another of a different species. It shall be unlawful for any person to train, breed or keep any animal for the purpose of fighting. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a place where animals are permitted to fight for exhibition, wager or sport. 
(I)  Feeding of Wild Animals: It shall be unlawful to knowingly place or provide food for any wild animal. This prohibition shall not apply to squirrels or birds. 
(1463 1973 2576 3790 3794) 
6-7-14. - Capturing Animals. 
(A)  An Animal Management Officer or peace officer is authorized to enter in or upon private property, including motor vehicles and fenced areas but not private buildings, to apprehend an animal running at large, a vicious animal, an animal suspected of being infected with rabies, or an animal that the officer reasonably believes is neglected, sick or injured such that the animal faces a serious risk of death or substantially suffering. 
(B)  An Animal Management Officer or peace officer is authorized to use tranquilizer guns, humane traps or other suitable devices to subdue or apprehend a stray animal, pet animal running at large, or wild animal, and is authorized to destroy an animal that the officer reasonably believes to be an immediate danger to the officer or to the public. 
(C)  An Animal Management Officer or peace officer is authorized to place a humane trap on private property for the purpose of capturing a stray animal, wild animal, or pet animal running at large, when requested to do so by the owner or possessor of the property. 
(D)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set or cause to be set any steel-jaw leg hold trap, snare, or any trap other than a humane trap for the purpose of capturing an animal, whether wild or domestic, excepting a licensed or recognized business that has been given permission by Colorado Parks and Wildlife, the Colorado Department of Health, or the animal management officer to trap problem wildlife. Any trapping authorized under this chapter must be in compliance with the Colorado Constitution and Statutes. 
(1973 2576 3288 3790) 
6-7-15. - Fees. 
    Fees for permit, license, impound, adoption, and other services rendered under this chapter shall be as listed below. Fees are in addition to any fines or penalties imposed in court proceedings. 
(A)  Licenses ..... Fees 
Kennel license ..... $25.00 
Pet shop license-Class "A" ..... 25.00 
Pet shop license-Class "B" ..... 500.00 
(B)  Impound fees, boarding fees, adoption fees, relinquishment fees and fees for veterinary care shall be as established by the animal shelter. 
(C)  The fee for a bee permit, a chicken permit, or a pot-bellied pig permit shall be set by the City Manager or his designee in an amount to cover the costs of administering the permit program. 
(1463 1890 1973 2576 3794) 
6-7-16. - Interference. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person, by using or threatening to use, violence, force, or physical interference, or obstacle, to knowingly obstruct, impair, or hinder an Animal Management Officer or peace officer in the discharge of his duties as herein prescribed. 
(B)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the Animal Management Officer or peace officer was acting in an illegal manner, if he was acting in the regular course of assigned duties and in good faith based upon surrounding facts and circumstances. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to reveal his correct name, address, and date of birth when requested to do so by an Animal Management Officer or peace officer engaged in any of his duties prescribed herein. 
(1463 1563 1973 2066 2657 3062 3288) 
6-7-17. - Penalties. 
(A)  The following provisions of this chapter are hereby deemed criminal violations of this Code. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter listed in this subsection (A) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine or by confinement in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment as specified in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C., subject to any recommended minimum fines: 
Section 6-7-3 Animal bites Sections 6-7-8(B) and (C) Vicious animals and potentially dangerous animals Section 6-7-9(D) Failure to produce animal Section 6-7-10(E) Care of animals Section 6-7-11(D) Care of animals Section 6-7-12(G) Sale of animals Section 6-7-13(A)-(I) Care and treatment Section 6-7-16 Interference  
(B)  The Animal Management Officer, or the City Attorney or his designee, may recommend that one or more special sanctions or conditions be levied against any owner convicted of a violation pursuant to Subsection 6-7-8(B) or 6-7-8(C), W.M.C. This recommendation may be presented to the Municipal Judge as a proposed condition of sentencing upon conviction and may be in lieu of or in addition to the requirements and penalties specified in this chapter. Proof that a recommended sanction or condition has been previously satisfied or would not serve its intended purpose may be presented to the municipal judge for consideration in sentencing. 
(C)  If the Animal Management Officer, or the City Attorney or his designee, recommends destruction of the animal in an expeditious and humane manner, or permanent removal of the animal from the City, the Municipal Judge shall conduct a judicial hearing to determine the disposition of the animal. At such judicial hearing, the Municipal Judge may take into consideration the severity of the incident, the prior history of the owner and/or animal, and the recommendation of the Animal Management Officer, City Attorney, or an animal behavior professional. The provisions of this paragraph shall not in any way limit the power of the Municipal Judge, on his own motion, to impose special sanctions as he deems appropriate. 
(D)  The failure or refusal to produce an animal pursuant to Subsection 6-7-9(D), W.M.C., shall subject the owner to immediate arrest, should probable cause exist to believe that the owner is harboring or keeping the animal and refuses to produce it upon such demand. Upon arrest, the owner shall be held to appear before the Municipal Judge, who may order the immediate production of the animal. Each day of such willful refusal to produce the animal shall constitute a separate violation and offense. 
(E)  All violations of this chapter not listed in subsection (A), above, are hereby deemed civil infractions of this Code and, upon conviction thereof, may be punished by a recommended fine. 
(F)  Recommended minimum fines: Recommended minimum fines upon conviction may be imposed as listed below: 
(1)  First offense-Recommended fine of not less than $75.00. Second and subsequent offenses-Recommended fine of not less than $100.00: 
6-7-2(B) Refusal to provide proof of vaccination 6-7-2(C) Harboring unvaccinated dogs and cats 6-7-2(D) Non-transferability-Vaccination certificates or tags 6-7-3(A) Duty to report animal bite 6-7-3(C) Failing to report suspected rabies 6-7-3(D) Refusal to produce animal 6-7-3(E) Removal of animals from confinement 6-7-4(B) Failure to display dog license tag 6-7-5(B) Failure to confine 6-7-6(A) Removal of animal excrement 6-7-6(B) Damage to property 6-7-7(A) Disturbance 6-7-7(C) Failure to exercise control 6-7-10(E) Failure to care for animals 6-7-11(D) Failure to care for animals 6-7-12(F) Potbellied pig requirements 6-7-12(H) Bee keeping requirements 6-7-12(I) Chicken husbandry requirements 6-7-13(D) Sanitation 6-7-13(F) Confinement of animals 6-7-19 Bee permitting 6-7-20 Chicken permitting  
(2)  First offense-Recommended fine of not less than $100.00. Second and subsequent offenses-Recommended fine of not less than $150.0: 
6-7-2(A) Failure to have dog or cat inoculated 6-7-4(A) Failure to have dog licensed 6-7-4(C) Transfer of dog license tag 6-7-9(D) Failure to produce animal 6-7-10(A) Unlicensed kennel 6-7-11(A) Unlicensed pet shop 6-7-12(A) Animals in residential districts limited 6-7-12(B) Livestock limited 6-7-12(C) Prohibited, endangered and exotic animals 6-7-12(D) Federal or state prohibited animals 6-7-12(G) Sale of animals 6-7-13(A) Cruelty to animals 6-7-13(B) Poisoning animals 6-7-13(C) Neglect of animals 6-7-13(E) Abandoning animals 6-7-13(G) Displaying or sale of dyed or immature animals 6-7-13(H) Fighting animals 6-7-13(I) Feeding of wild animals 6-7-16 Interference  
(3)  Reduced fine for neuter or spay: 
6-7-5(A) Animals running at large: First offense-A recommended fine of not less than $275.00, except that if the animal has been neutered or spayed, the fine may be reduced to $75.00. Second and subsequent offenses -Recommended fine of not less than $300.00, except that if the animal has been neutered or spayed, the fine may be reduced to $100.00. 
6-7-8(B) Requirements for possession of a potentially dangerous animal: First offense-A recommended fine of not more than $300.00, except that if the animal has already been neutered or spayed, the fine may be reduced to $100.00. 
6-7-8(C) Requirements for possession of a vicious animal: First offense-Recommended fine of not less than $300.00, except that if the animal has already been neutered or spayed, the fine may be reduced to $200.00. 
(4)  Any other section hereof not specifically listed above: 
First offense-Recommended fine of not less than $50.00. 
Second and subsequent offenses-Recommended fine of not less than $75.00. 
(G)  An animal management officer may, in his or her professional judgment, determine that bees are aggressive or africanized, as prohibited by Subsection 6-7-12(H)(10), and may pursue summary abatement of a hive or bees to prevent imminent danger of serious injury to persons or property, as authorized by Section 8-4-4, W.M.C. 
(3288 3345 3790 3794) 
6-7-18. - Guard Dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful to place or maintain a guard dog in any area for the protection of persons or property unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The dog is physically confined to a specific enclosed area that is adequately built or constructed to ensure that the dog will not escape; or 
(2)  The dog is under the complete and absolute control of the handler at all times; and 
(3)  Warning signs are conspicuously posted indicating the presence of the guard dog and such signs will include a current telephone number where some person responsible for controlling the guard dog can be reached at all times; and 
(4)  The dog has a current dog license. 
(3288 3790) 
6-7-19. - Bee Permitting. 
(A)  Bee Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of bees to fail to obtain a permit as required by this chapter prior to the arrival of the bees on the property. It shall be unlawful to own, keep, maintain or allow on property within the City bees in a manner that violates the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  Permit Requirements. At the time of applying for a permit, an owner or occupant of qualifying residential property, as defined in Subsection 6-7-12(B)(2), W.M.C., shall provide the following to the City in such form as may be reasonably required by the City: 
(1)  Permit fee; 
(2)  Complete permit application; 
(3)  Rear yard plot plan showing location of setbacks, fencing, fly away barriers, water supply, and hives; 
(4)  The owner or occupant's signed acknowledgement that he or she shall be the permit holder and acknowledgement that the permit holder shall be responsible to reimburse the City for bee-related nuisance abatement costs as may be assessed pursuant to Section 8-4-4, W.M.C.; 
(5)  The permit holder's signed consent to the City's, or an agent of the City's, entry into and inspection of the rear yard at all reasonable hours to confirm compliance with this chapter; 
(6)  The permit holder's signed acknowledgement of his or her personal liability for injury or damage to persons or property caused by the permit holder's bees; 
(7)  If the permit holder is the occupant of rental property, the permit holder shall provide the name and contact information of the property owner; and 
(8)  Such other information as may be reasonably required by the City. 
(C)  Permit Revocation. A bee permit may be denied, cancelled, or revoked for any violation of the provisions of this chapter related to the keeping of bees. 
(3794) 
6-7-20. - Chicken Permitting. 
(A)  Chicken Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any owner of a chicken to fail to obtain a permit as required by this chapter prior to the arrival of a chicken on the property. It shall be unlawful to own, keep, maintain or allow on property within the City a chicken in a manner that violates the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  Permit Requirements. At the time of applying for a permit, an owner or occupant of qualifying residential property, as defined in Subsection 6-7-12(B)(2), W.M.C., shall provide the following to the City in such form as may be reasonably required by the City: 
(1)  Permit fee; 
(2)  Complete permit application; 
(3)  Rear yard plot plan showing location of setbacks, fencing, coop, and water supply; 
(4)  The owner or occupant's signed acknowledgement that he or she shall be the permit holder; 
(5)  The permit holder's signed acknowledgement of owner's personal liability for injury or damage to persons or property caused by the permit holder's chickens; 
(6)  The permit holder's signed consent to the City's, or an agent of the City's, entry into and inspection of the rear yard at all reasonable hours to confirm compliance with this chapter; 
(7)  If the permit holder is the occupant of rental property, the permit holder shall provide the name and contact information of the property owner; and 
(8)  Such other information as may be reasonably required by the City. 
(C)  Permit Revocation. A chicken permit may be denied, cancelled, or revoked for any violation of the provisions of this chapter related to the care, keeping or maintenance of animals. 
(3794) 
CHAPTER 8. - FIREWORKS 

6-8-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Fireworks shall mean any combustible or explosive composition, article, device, substance or combination of substances, prepared for the primary purpose of producing a visual or auditory sensation by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, including, without limitation, the following articles and devices commonly known and used as fireworks: toy cannons, toy cones, toy pistols or toy guns in which explosives are used (unless excepted below), blank cartridges, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, sparklers, or other devices of like construction, and any devices containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or device containing any explosive substances. "Fireworks" do not include auto flares or other emergency signal devices, or paper caps containing an average of twenty-five hundredths grain or less of explosive content per cap, or toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps. 
    Pyrotechnic special effects material (special effects) shall mean a low explosive material, other than detonating cord, commonly used in motion picture, television, theatrical or group entertainment productions. 
(1224 2001 2447) 
6-8-2. - Prohibited Acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to sell, offer for sale, or possess with intent to offer for sale, or to use or explode any fireworks or pyrotechnic special effects material, except as provided in Section 6-8-3, W.M.C., and Section 11-10-6, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001 2447 3327) 
6-8-3. - Permits for Display. 
(A)  Any organization or public entity may apply for a permit for supervised public displays of fireworks and pyrotechnic special effects material. Application for a permit shall be made in writing at least 14 days in advance of the date of display. Before a permit is granted, the operator and the location and handling of the display shall be investigated by the Fire Chief or his designee. 
(B)  The permit shall be granted if the Fire Chief finds that the permit application, operator, and conditions meet the requirements of the Fire Code as adopted by the City in Title XI, Chapter 10, other requirements of this Code, and other reasonable requirements the Fire Chief deems necessary to protect the public welfare. 
(C)  A permit shall not be transferred or assigned. 
(D)  If the operations of a permittee require additional city personnel to be assigned to the permitted event in order to protect the public welfare, the permittee shall pay in advance all labor and equipment costs associated with the assignment of such additional personnel. 
(1224 2001 2447 3327) 
6-8-4. - Insurance. 
(A)  No permit for a display of fireworks shall be issued pursuant to Section 6-8-3, W.M.C., until the applicant furnishes the City with a certificate of insurance, naming the City as an additional insured for purposes of the display, demonstrating the applicant's insurance coverage for liability for physical injury and property damage in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00. 
(B)  No permit for use of pyrotechnic special effects material shall be issued pursuant to Section 6-8-3, W.M.C., until the applicant provides evidence that the applicant or the owner/manager of the site for such use is insured for liability for physical injury and property damage in an amount determined by the Fire Chief to be reasonable for the type of such material to be used and the physical conditions of the site. 
(1224 2001 2447) 
6-8-5. - Seizure of Fireworks. 
    Any police officer of the City, or the fire chief or his designee, shall seize, take and remove, at the expense of the violator, all stocks of fireworks or combustibles offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this chapter. 
(1224) 
6-8-6. - Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this chapter. A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a criminal offense, punishable by imprisonment or fine or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C., and may also be subject to civil remedies provided by Chapter 4 of Title VIII of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such person is in violation of this chapter and for each separate incident within a day. The court shall consider the issue of restitution to any victim suffering personal injury or property damage through the illegal use of fireworks. 
(2001 2447) 
CHAPTER 9. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

6-9-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Alcoholic beverages shall mean any fermented malt beverage (three and two-tenths percent alcohol by weight, or less), malt vinous or spirituous liquors (three and two-tenths percent alcohol by weight, or more), as defined by state law. 
    Container shall mean any enclosing structure or vessel, including, but not limited to, a decanter, flask, bottle, jar, thermos bottle, cup, can or jug. 
    Lewd or indecent displays shall mean scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of the activities described below or the performance of an act of or an act that simulates: 
(A)  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts that are prohibited by law; 
(B)  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals; 
(C)  The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals; or 
(D)  The displaying of the post-pubertal human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola or the displaying of the post-pubertal human female breast where the nipple only, or the nipple and areola only, are covered. 
    Licensee shall mean any person duly licensed by state and local licensing authorities to sell alcoholic beverages within the City, or any agent, servant or employee of such licensee. 
    Motor vehicle shall mean a vehicle driven or drawn by mechanical power and manufactured primarily for use on public highways, but does not include a vehicle operated exclusively on a rail or rails. 
    Nudity shall mean uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only, or the nipple and areola only, are covered. 
    Open alcoholic beverage container shall mean any container containing any amount of alcoholic beverage that is open and would allow consumption or the contents of which are partially removed, or a container of which the seal has been broken, except for a container resealed pursuant to Section 5-14-16, W.M.C. 
    Passenger area shall mean the area designed to seat the driver and passengers while a motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in his or her seating position, including, but not limited to, the glove compartment. 
    Premises shall mean all or any part of the physical boundaries of any establishment duly licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the City. The term "premises" shall include not only the building wherein the business is conducted, but also the parking lot adjacent thereto. 
    Public place shall mean any street, alley, road, highway, parking lot, public or community building, public park or sidewalk adjoining a public park; any private property open to the general public, or any place used by persons other than the owner, or owner's agent, without a special permit. 
    Seal shall mean the regular and original seal applied by the United States government over the cap of a beer, malt, vinous or spirituous liquor. 
(1224 2001 3325 3646) 
6-9-2. - Age Restrictions. 
(A)  Providing to Minors: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, give away, dispose of, exchange, deliver or permit the sale, serving, giving or procuring of any alcoholic beverages to or for any person under the age of 21 years. 
(B)  Minors Obtaining: It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to obtain or attempt to obtain alcoholic beverages by misrepresentation of age or by any other method in any place where alcoholic beverages are sold. 
(C)  Minors in Possession: It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to have in his possession alcoholic beverages in any store, or in any public place, or inside of vehicles in any public place. 
(D)  Parent's Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian, knowingly or under conditions a reasonable parent or guardian should have knowledge of, to suffer or permit any minor of whom he or she may be a parent or guardian, to violate the provisions of this chapter. 
(E)  A violation of this section is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 1736 2001) 
6-9-3. - Open Containers of Alcoholic Beverages. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, possess or have under his control, any alcoholic beverage in an open alcoholic beverage container in any public place within the City's jurisdiction. 
(B)  Motor vehicles: 
(1)  Except as otherwise permitted in paragraph (2) of this subsection (B), a person while in the passenger area of a motor vehicle that is on a public highway within the City's jurisdiction or the right-of-way of a public highway within the City's jurisdiction may not knowingly: 
(a)  Drink an alcoholic beverage; or 
(b)  Have in his or her possession an open alcoholic beverage container. 
(2)  The provisions of this subsection (B) shall not apply to: 
(a)  Passengers, other than the driver or a front seat passenger, located in the passenger area of a motor vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of persons for compensation; 
(b)  The possession by a passenger, other than the driver or a front seat passenger, of an open alcoholic beverage container in the living quarters of a house coach, house trailer, motor home, as defined in Section 42-1-102(57), C.R.S., or trailer coach, as defined in Section 42-1-102(106)(a), C.R.S.; 
(c)  The possession of an open alcoholic beverage container in the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk; or 
(d)  The possession of an open alcoholic beverage container in an area not normally occupied by the driver or a passenger in a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(C)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit drinking or having open containers of alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  In public areas where authorized by a properly issued special event permit. 
(2)  Pursuant to a permit issued by the department of parks, recreation and libraries. 
(3)  On private property authorized by the owner of such property or the guests of such owner. 
(D)  Except as otherwise permitted in paragraph (2) of subsection (B), above, drinking alcoholic beverages in any motor vehicle is hereby prohibited. 
(E)  A violation of this section is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1224 2001 3174 3325) 
6-9-4. - Conduct Prohibited in Liquor and Beer Establishments. 
(A)  Prohibited Acts: 
(1)  Permitting. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any disturbance, unlawful or disorderly act or conduct to be committed by any person or group of persons upon any premises. 
(2)  Encouraging, Participating In. It shall be unlawful for a licensee, in any manner, to encourage or participate in any disturbance, unlawful or disorderly act or conduct upon premises; provided, however, that such licensee may use such lawful means as may be proper to protect his person or property from damage or injury. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit, within or upon the licensed premises, any of the following: 
(a)  The loitering of habitual drunkards or intoxicated persons; 
(b)  Lewd or indecent displays; 
(c)  Profanity, rowdiness or undue noise; or 
(d)  Any disturbance or activity offensive to the senses of the average citizen, or to the residents of the neighborhood in which the premises are located. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises at any time when the sale of such beverages is prohibited by law. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager or agent to employ or permit upon any premises any employee, waiter, waitress, entertainer, host or hostess to mingle with patrons and personally beg, procure or solicit the purchase or sale of drinks or beverages for the use or consumption by the one begging, procuring or soliciting, or for the use or consumption by any other employee, waiter, waitress, entertainer, host or hostess. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager or agent to permit anyone to loiter in or about any premises for the purpose of begging or soliciting any patron, customer or visitor in such premises to purchase any drinks or beverages of any nature whatsoever for the one soliciting or begging. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any person or persons to appear in any state of nudity within or upon the premises. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit the showing of film, still pictures, electronic reproduction or other visual reproductions on the premises depicting any lewd or indecent displays or persons in any state of nudity. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager or agent to sell, serve, give away, dispose of, exchange, or deliver, or permit the sale, serving, giving, or procuring of, any alcoholic beverage to a visibly intoxicated person or to a known habitual drunkard. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager, or agent to have in possession or upon the licensed premises any alcoholic beverage, the sale of which is not permitted by said license. 
(B)  Requirements and Regulations: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to comply with the following requirements and regulations: 
(1)  Reports. Any licensee and its employees shall immediately report to the Police Department of the City any unlawful or disorderly act, conduct or disturbance committed on the premises. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section may be considered by the licensing authority in any action relating to revocation, suspension or non-renewal of a license. Repeated failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall constitute prima facie grounds for the suspension, revocation or non-renewal of a license. 
(2)  Warning Signs to be Displayed. Each licensee shall post, and keep at all times visible to the public in a conspicuous place on the premises, a sign to be provided by the City Clerk's office, which shall be in the following form: 
"WARNING: City of Westminster Police must be notified of all disturbances in this establishment and on the grounds and parking lot that are a part of this establishment." 
(3)  Each licensee shall display at all times in a prominent place a printed card with a minimum height of 14 inches and a width of 11 inches with each letter to be a minimum of one-half inch in height, which shall read as follows: 
WARNING 
IT IS ILLEGAL TO SELL LIQUOR, WINE, OR BEER TO ANY PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE AND IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE TO POSSESS OR TO ATTEMPT TO PURCHASE THE SAME. 
IDENTIFICATION CARDS THAT APPEAR TO BE FRAUDULENT WHEN PRESENTED BY PURCHASERS MAY BE CONFISCATED BY THE ESTABLISHMENT AND TURNED OVER TO A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. 
IT IS ILLEGAL IF YOU ARE TWENTY-ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER FOR YOU TO PURCHASE LIQUOR, WINE, OR BEER FOR A PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE. 
FINES AND IMPRISONMENT MAY BE IMPOSED BY THE COURTS FOR VIOLATION OF THESE PROVISIONS. 
(C)  Absence of Licensee Not a Defense: It shall not be a defense to a prosecution under this section that the licensee was not personally present on the premises at the time such unlawful or disorderly act, conduct or disturbance was permitted, encouraged or participated in; provided, however, that an agent, servant or employee of the licensee shall not be responsible hereunder when absent from the premises and not on duty. 
(D)  A violation of this section is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(E)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, give away, or deliver any fermented malt beverage, or malt, vinous or spirituous liquor to any person under the age of 21 in any establishment licensed under the Colorado Beer Code or the Colorado Liquor Code. Any person convicted of such act shall, in addition to the penalties provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C., be sentenced to a minimum of eight hours of community service. The Municipal Court Judge shall have discretion to suspend the minimum sentence of eight hours of community service. 
(1224 2001 2812 3325 3646) 
CHAPTER 10. - TRAINS 

6-10-1. - Rules Governing Trains or Locomotives. 
(A)  Speed Limit: It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or run within the City, railroad trains, engines or cars at any speed greater than 20 miles per hour. 
(B)  Obstruction of Crossings Limited: It shall be unlawful to obstruct the free passage of any street or public highway across which a railroad or railroads may be constructed or operated within the City by means of any car or cars, locomotive or locomotives, engine or engines, for a period of more than five minutes at any one time. 
(C)  Duty of Railroad Employees: It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, railroad company, corporation, engineer, conductor, yardman, switchman, flagman, or gateman, whenever the free passage of any such street or public highway has been obstructed for a period of five minutes at any one time, as provided in subsection (B), herein, by said car or cars, locomotive or locomotives, to fail to remove and signal, and cause the removing of any and all such car or cars, locomotive or locomotives, from across such street or public highway, so as to permit the free passage along such street or public highway for a period thereafter of not less than five minutes of all accumulated public travel, and each failure to do so shall constitute a distinct separate offense. 
(D)  Duty of Railroad Companies: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating any railroad in the City to fail to keep his employees in charge of the operation of locomotives, cars, trains, or gates, or other crossing safety appliances informed of the provisions of all laws of the City relating to the operating of said locomotives, trains, cars, gates or safety appliances. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating any railroad in the City to fail to furnish to any officer of the City applying therefor the name of any person in his or its employ who shall have been charged with having violated any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(E)  Interfering with railroad safety appliances prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, willfully or maliciously, to meddle or interfere with the operation, or in any way injure or damage any railroad gate or safety appliance installed, or otherwise operated over any street or highway within the City. 
(F)  Exception to chapter: The speed restriction of this chapter shall not apply if all railroad crossings in the City are protected by visual and audible safety appliances. 
(1224) 
6-10-2. - Reserved. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 3646) 
CHAPTER 11. - DISPOSITION OF PERSONAL PROPERTY 

6-11-1. - Custodian of Personal Property. 
    The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall have custody of all lost, abandoned and recovered personal property coming into the possession of the City or its agents or employees; except that any city department head, or his designee, may retain custody of such property found within his department if the property, in the opinion of the department head or designee, is of apparent nominal value, including, but not limited to, sports equipment or items of personal clothing. The Chief of Police, city department head, or his designee, shall keep a record of all property placed in his custody, and he shall, pending disposal of the property, cause the property to be stored securely on city property or in some other suitable place, but not in the personal custody of such person. For purposes of this chapter, nominal value shall mean worth less than $20.00. 
(1213 1734) 
6-11-2. - Finder of Lost, Abandoned or Stolen Property; Rights and Obligations. 
(A)  If an officer or employee of the City finds lost, abandoned or stolen property and takes possession of such property in the course of his employment, the City shall be deemed the finder and the property shall be placed with the proper custodian as set forth in Section 6-11-1, W.M.C. 
(B)  If a private person finds personal property not his own, he shall deliver such property to the city, to be placed with the proper custodian as set forth in Section 6-11-1, W.M.C. The finder shall make a written report containing the location and circumstances of the finding, and shall be issued a receipt for the property that shall inform the finder of his right to reclaim possession thereof by making written notification to the custodian of the finder's intent to claim said property. If the finder does not make such written notification within ten days after the property was delivered to the City, the finder's claim to the property shall be forfeited. 
(1213 1734) 
6-11-3. - Investigation Into Ownership. 
    Upon coming into possession of personal property that has no known owner, the custodian shall attempt to determine the ownership of the property by clearance of existing serial numbers, social security numbers or operation identification numbers through the CCIC/NCIC files. If the owner of the property cannot be determined, the property may be disposed of as provided in this chapter. 
(1213 1734 2004) 
6-11-4. - Notification of Owner of Personal Property. 
    If the owner of lost, abandoned or stolen personal property, motor vehicles excepted, is determined by the custodian, he shall give notice in writing to the owner that his property is in the possession of the city and may be reclaimed; and that it will be sold or otherwise disposed of by the city unless the owner reclaims the property within ten days after the effective date of the notice. The notice shall be sent to the owner at his last known address by regular or first-class United States mail, postage prepaid, and the notice shall be effective when mailed. 
(1213 1734) 
6-11-5. - Disposition of Property. 
(A)  If the lost, stolen or abandoned personal property has more than nominal value, the custodian, if not the Chief of Police, shall deliver the property to the Chief of Police within 48 hours after it comes into the possession of the City. If the property is not part of an investigation, it shall be kept for 30 days, and then may be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  If the property is of nominal value, and is not part of an investigation, it shall be retained for ten days; except that, in the discretion of the custodian, articles of used clothing and towels may be disposed of sooner than the ten days. 
(C)  If a person claims to be the owner of the property at any time prior to the City's disposition of the property, the custodian shall return the property to such claimant, provided that the claimant submits competent evidence of his ownership that is sufficient to satisfy the custodian that the claim is rightful, and provided that the claimant reimburses the City for all reasonable costs incurred by the City in obtaining possession of and storing the property, and in the publication and mailing of notice relating to the property. 
(D)  If the time limits stated in this section have passed, and if the owner of the property cannot be discovered, and the property has not been claimed by the finder, the City may decide to retain selected items of property for use in the conduct of city business, may sell the property, or may donate it to a nondenominational charitable organization. 
(1213 1734) 
6-11-6. - Procedure for Sale. 
(A)  Disposal of property by sale shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions in Chapter 2 of Title XV of this Code. 
(B)  In the event that no bid is made for an article of personal property offered at sale, it shall remain the property of the City. 
(C)  The sale and conveyance of said property shall be without right of redemption. 
(1213 1734) 
6-11-7. - Forfeiture of Personal Property. 
(A)  Personal property that is confiscated by a member of the Police Department or any other officer or employee of the City acting in the course of his employment or under authority of law, and that is not held for use as evidence in any criminal or other legal action, shall be disposed of as follows: 
(1)  Any property that is contraband, or the possession of which is unlawful, shall be summarily forfeited to the city to be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the Chief of Police, or his designee. 
(2)  The City may destroy or dispose of any property in its possession that has been used in an unlawful manner by the possessor thereof; provided that, the City shall first notify the owner at his last known address by sending a written notice by first-class United States mail that such property is in the possession of the City. The notice shall inform the owner that the owner has 30 days from the mailing date to initiate a court action seeking a court order for the return of the property. If the owner fails to initiate such an action within 30 days after the mailing date of the notification, the city may destroy or dispose of the property. 
(1213 1734) 
6-11-8. - Application. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the disposition of abandoned, lost, recovered or confiscated personal property. This does not include unclaimed deposits or other unclaimed moneys held, issued or owing by another department of the City in the ordinary course of the City's business, the disposition of which is governed by Chapter 29 of Title I of this Code. 
(2060) 
CHAPTER 12. - OFFENSES RELATING TO MARIJUANA 

6-12-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Controlled substance shall mean a controlled substance, as that term is defined in Section 18-18-102(5), C.R.S., as may be amended, which term shall include controlled substance analog, as defined in Section 18-18-102(6)(A), C.R.S., as may be amended. 
    Drug paraphernalia shall mean all equipment, products, and materials of any kind that are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, possessing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the laws of the state or this City. Drug paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances under circumstances in violation of the laws of this state or this City; 
(2)  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
(3)  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana; 
(4)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
(5)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
(6)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; 
(7)  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
(a)  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
(b)  Water pipes, which means pipes made of any substance with bowls large enough to hold water used for filtering the smoke to be inhaled; 
(c)  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
(d)  Smoking and c/carburetion masks; 
(e)  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
(f)  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
(g)  Chamber pipes; 
(h)  Carburetor pipes; 
(i)  Electric pipes; 
(j)  Air-driven pipes; 
(k)  Chillums; 
(l)  Bongs; or 
(m)  Ice pipes or chillers. 
    Enclosed means within a structure having a roof, walls, windows or doors, all sides of which are or may be closed to the weather. 
    Hashish means the tetrahydrocannabinol-rich resinous material of the cannabis plant, which has been collected, dried, and compressed into any of a variety of forms, such as balls, cakes, or cookie-like sheets. 
    Industrial hemp means the plant of the genus cannabis and any part of such plant, whether growing or not, with Delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration that does not exceed three-tenths percent on a dry weight basis. 
    Marijuana or marihuana shall mean all parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa L., whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marijuana concentrate. It does not include industrial hemp; fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant; sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination; or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product. 
    Marijuana concentrate shall mean hashish, tetrahydrocannabinols, or any alkaloid, salt, derivative, preparation, compound, or mixture, whether natural or synthesized, of tetrahydrocannabinols. 
(1590 2001 3646 3666) 
6-12-2. - Possession and Growing. 
(A)  Any person under 21 years of age who possesses, uses, displays, purchases, or transports not more than one ounce of marijuana commits a violation of this Code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(B)  Any person 21 years of age or older who possesses, uses, displays, purchases or transports more than one ounce but not more than two ounces of marijuana commits a violation of this Code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(C)  Any person 21 years of age or older who possesses, grows, processes, or transports more than six marijuana plants but not more than 12 marijuana plants, commits a violation of this Code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00. Notwithstanding the limits in Subsection 6-12-2(B), W.M.C., above, a person 21 years of age or older may possess on the premises where the marijuana plants are growing and for personal use only the marijuana produced by no more than six marijuana plants. 
(D)  Any person who grows marijuana in a place that is not enclosed or locked, or grows marijuana in an open or public manner, commits a violation of this Code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(1590 3666) 
6-12-3. - Display, Consumption, or Use. 
    Any person who openly and publicly displays, consumes, or uses not more than one ounce of marijuana commits a violation of this Code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished, at a minimum, by a fine of not less than $100.00 or, at a maximum, by a fine of not more than $100.00 and by imprisonment for 15 days; except that transportation of marijuana plants for personal use shall be permitted as set forth in Article XVIII, Section 16, of the Colorado Constitution. 
(3666) 
6-12-4. - Prohibition on City Property. 
    It shall be unlawful to possess, consume, use, display, transfer, distribute, sell, purchase, transport or grow any amount of marijuana on any property owned, leased or controlled by the City. A violation of this section is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(2001 3666) 
6-12-5. - Permitted Use. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a person who possesses or uses marijuana as permitted by state or federal law. 
(2001) 
6-12-6. - Possession of Drug Paraphernalia. 
(A)  Drug Paraphernalia Determination, Considerations: In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court, in its discretion, may consider, in addition to all other relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use. 
(2)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances. 
(3)  The existence of any residue or controlled substances on the object. 
(4)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the knowledge of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, or evidence that such person reasonably should know that it will be delivered to persons who such person knows or reasonably should know could use the object to facilitate a violation of this section. 
(5)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use. 
(6)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object that explain or depict its use. 
(7)  National or local advertising concerning its use. 
(8)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale. 
(9)  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a supplier of like or related items to the community for legal purposes, such as an authorized distributor or dealer of tobacco products. 
(10)  The existence and scope of legal uses for the object in the community. 
(11)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(B)  Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any drug paraphernalia if such person knows or reasonably should have known that the drug paraphernalia could be used in a manner which would violate the laws of this state or of this City. 
(C)  Penalty: Any person who possesses drug paraphernalia in violation of this section commits a violation of this Code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(2781 3646) 
CHAPTER 13. - CLEAN INDOOR AIR 

6-13-1. - Legislative Intent. 
(A)  It is the finding and declaration of the City of Westminster that it is in the best interest of the people of this City to protect nonsmokers from involuntary exposure to environmental smoke in most indoor areas open to the public, public meetings, food service establishments and places of employment. The City further finds and determines that a balance should be struck between the health concerns of non-consumers of tobacco and marijuana products and the need to minimize unwarranted governmental intrusion into, and regulation of, private spheres of conduct and choice with respect to the use or nonuse of tobacco and marijuana products in certain designated public areas and in private places. Therefore, the City hereby declares that the purpose of this chapter is to preserve and improve the health, comfort, and environment of the people of this City by limiting exposure to tobacco and marijuana smoke. 
(B)  Following adoption of Article XVIII, Section 16, of the Colorado Constitution, legalizing certain recreational use and possession of marijuana, the City finds and determines that there is a need to regulate the open and public consumption of marijuana. 
(3289 3666) 
6-13-2. - Definitions. 
    Airport smoking concession shall mean a bar or restaurant, or both, in a public airport with regularly scheduled domestic and international commercial passenger flights, in which bar or restaurant smoking is allowed in a fully enclosed and independently ventilated area by the terms of the concession. 
    Auditorium shall mean the part of a public building where an audience gathers to attend a performance, and includes any corridors, hallways, or lobbies adjacent thereto. 
    Bar shall mean any indoor area that is operated and licensed under Article 47 of Title 12, C.R.S., and Title V, Chapter 14, W.M.C., primarily for the sale and service of alcohol beverages for on-premises consumption and where the service of food is secondary to the consumption of such beverages. 
    Cigarette, tobacco, or nicotine product shall mean: 
(1)  A product that contains nicotine or tobacco or is derived from tobacco and is intended to be ingested or inhaled by or applied to the skin of an individual; or 
(2)  Any device that can be used to deliver tobacco or nicotine to the person inhaling from the device, including an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, or pipe. 
(3)  Cigarette, tobacco, or nicotine products does not mean a product that the food and drug administration of the United States department of health and human services has approved as a tobacco use cessation product. 
    Cigar-tobacco bar shall mean a bar that, in the calendar year ending December 31, 2005, generated at least five percent or more of its total annual gross income or $50,000.00 in annual sales from the on-site sale of tobacco products and the rental of on-site humidors, not including any sales from vending machines. In any calendar year after December 31, 2005, a bar that fails to generate at least five percent of its total annual gross income or $50,000.00 in annual sales from the on-site sale of tobacco products and the rental of on-site humidors shall not be defined as a "cigar-tobacco bar" and shall not thereafter be included in the definition, regardless of sales figures. 
    Employee shall mean any person who: 
(A)  Performs any type of work for benefit of another in consideration of direct or indirect wages or profit; or 
(B)  Provides uncompensated work or services to a business or nonprofit entity. 
    Employee shall include every person described above, regardless of whether such person is referred to as an employee, contractor, independent contractor, or volunteer or by any other designation or title. 
    Employer shall mean any person, partnership, association, corporation, or nonprofit entity that employs one or more persons. "Employer" includes, without limitation, the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of state government; any county, city and county, city, or town, or instrumentality thereof, or any other political subdivision of the state, special district, authority, commission, or agency; or any other separate corporate instrumentality or unit of state or local government. 
    Entryway shall mean the outside of the front or main doorway leading into a building or facility that is not exempted from this chapter under Section 6-13-4, W.M.C. "Entryway" also includes the area of public or private property within a specified radius outside of the doorway. The specified radius shall be 15 feet. 
    Environmental smoke or secondhand smoke shall mean the complex mixture formed from the escaping smoke of a burning tobacco or marijuana product, also known as "side stream smoke," and smoke exhaled by the smoker. 
    Food service establishment shall mean any indoor area or portion thereof in which the principal business is the sale of food for on-premises consumption. The term includes, without limitation, restaurants, cafeterias, coffee shops, diners, sandwich shops, and short-order cafes. 
    Indoor area shall mean any enclosed area or portion thereof. The opening of windows or doors, or the temporary removal of wall panels, does not convert an indoor area into an outdoor area. 
    Local authority shall mean a county, city and county, city, or town. 
    Marijuana or marihuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa L., as further defined in Title VI, Chapter 12, of this Code. 
    Place of employment shall mean any indoor area or portion thereof under the control of an employer in which employees of the employer perform services for, or on behalf of, the employer. 
    Public building shall mean any building owned or operated by: (1) The state, including the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of state government; (2) Any county, city and county, city, or town, or instrumentality thereof, or any other political subdivision of the state, a special district, an authority, a commission, or an agency; or (3) Any other separate corporate instrumentality or unit of state or local government. 
    Public meeting shall mean any meeting open to the public pursuant to Part 4 of Article 6 of Title 24, C.R.S., or any other law of this state. 
    Smoke-free work area shall mean an indoor area in a place of employment where smoking is prohibited under this chapter. 
    Smoking shall mean the burning of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or any other matter or substance that contains tobacco or marijuana. 
    Tobacco business shall mean a sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership, or other enterprise engaged primarily in the sale, manufacture, or promotion of tobacco, tobacco products, or smoking devices or accessories, either at wholesale or retail, and in which the sale, manufacture, or promotion of other products is merely incidental. 
    Work area shall mean an area in a place of employment where one or more employees are routinely assigned and perform services for or on behalf of their employer. 
(3289 3666; Ord. No. 3977 , § 1, 3-25-2019) 
6-13-3. - General Smoking Restrictions. 
(A)  Except as provided in Section 6-13-4, W.M.C., and in order to reduce the levels of exposure to environmental smoke, smoking shall not be permitted and no person shall smoke in any indoor area, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Public meeting places; 
(2)  Elevators; 
(3)  Government-owned or -operated means of mass transportation, including, but not limited to, buses, vans, and trains; 
(4)  Taxicabs and limousines; 
(5)  Grocery stores; 
(6)  Gymnasiums; 
(7)  Jury waiting and deliberation rooms; 
(8)  Courtrooms; 
(9)  Child day care facilities; 
(10)  Health care facilities, including hospitals, health care clinics, doctor's offices, and other health care related facilities; 
(11)  (a)  Any place of employment that is not exempted. 
(b)  In the case of employers who own facilities otherwise exempted from this chapter, each such employer shall provide a smoke-free work area for each employee requesting not to have to breathe environmental smoke. Every employee shall have a right to work in an area free of environmental smoke. 
(12)  Food service establishments; 
(13)  Bars; 
(14)  Limited gaming facilities and any other facilities in which any gaming or gambling activity is conducted; 
(15)  Indoor sports arenas; 
(16)  Restrooms, lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in public and private buildings, condominiums, and other multiple-unit residential facilities; 
(17)  Restrooms, lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in hotels and motels, and in at least 75 percent of the sleeping quarters within a hotel or motel that are rented to guests; 
(18)  Bowling alleys; 
(19)  Billiard or pool halls; 
(20)  Facilities in which games of chance are conducted; 
(21)  The common areas of retirement facilities, publicly owned housing facilities, and nursing homes, not including any resident's private residential quarters; 
(22)  Public buildings; 
(23)  Auditoria; 
(24)  Theaters; 
(25)  Museums; 
(26)  Libraries; 
(27)  To the extent not otherwise provided in Section 25-14-103.5, C.R.S., public and nonpublic schools; 
(28)  Other educational and vocational institutions; and 
(29)  The entryways of all buildings and facilities listed in paragraphs (1) to (28) of this subsection (A). 
(B)  A cigar-tobacco bar shall not expand its size or change its location from the size and location in which it existed as of December 31, 2005. A cigar-tobacco bar shall display signage in at least one conspicuous place and at least four inches by six inches in size stating: "Smoking allowed. Children under 18 years of age must be accompanied by a parent or guardian." 
(3289 3666) 
6-13-4. - Exceptions to Smoking Restrictions. 
(A)  This chapter shall not apply to prohibit marijuana or tobacco smoking in the following places; provided, however, that these exceptions shall not apply to allow marijuana smoking if such use has been prohibited by as permitted by Section 6-3-5(C)(5), W.M.C.: 
(1)  Private homes and private residences, except that smoking shall be prohibited if any such home or residence is being used for child care or day care; 
(2)  A hotel or motel room rented to one or more guests if the total percentage of such hotel or motel rooms in such hotel or motel does not exceed 25 percent. 
(B)  This chapter shall apply to prohibit marijuana smoking in the following locations, but tobacco smoking may be conducted in the following places in compliance with Section 6-13-5, W.M.C., below: 
(1)  A private vehicle unless the private vehicle is being used for the public transportation of children or as part of health care or day care transportation; 
(2)  A place of employment that is not open to the public and that is under the control of an employer that employs three or fewer employees; 
(3)  A private, nonresidential building on a farm or ranch, as defined in Section 39-1-102, C.R.S., that has annual gross income of less than $500,000.00; 
(4)  Limousines under private hire; 
(5)  Any retail tobacco business; 
(6)  A cigar-tobacco bar; 
(7)  An airport smoking concession; 
(8)  The outdoor area of any business; and 
(9)  The retail floor plan, as defined in Section 12-47.1-509, C.R.S., of a licensed casino. 
(3289 3666) 
6-13-5. - Optional Prohibitions. 
(A)  The owner or manager of any place not specifically listed in Section 6-13-3, W.M.C., including a place otherwise exempted under section 6-13-4, W.M.C., may post signs prohibiting smoking. Such posting shall have the effect of including such place in the places where smoking is prohibited or restricted pursuant to this chapter. The owner or manager of any place not specifically listed in Section 6-13-3, W.M.C., may post signs designating permissible tobacco smoking areas but may not allow smoking of marijuana. 
(B)  If the owner or manager of a place not specifically listed in Section 6-13-3, W.M.C., including a place otherwise exempted under Section 6-13-4, W.M.C., is an employer and receives a request from an employee to create a smoke-free work area as contemplated by Subsection 6-13-3(A)(11)(b), W.M.C., the owner or manager shall post a sign or signs in the smoke-free work area as provided in subsection (A) of this section. 
(3289 3666) 
6-13-6. - Other Applicable Regulations of Smoking. 
    This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by any other applicable law. 
6-13-7. - Unlawful Acts; Penalty. 
(A)  It is unlawful for a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls the use of a premise subject to this chapter to violate any provision of this chapter. 
(B)  It is unlawful for a person to smoke in an area where smoking is prohibited pursuant to this chapter. 
(C)  Any person found guilty of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00 for a first violation within a calendar year, a fine not to exceed $300.00 for a second violation within a calendar year, and a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each additional violation within a calendar year. Each day of a continuing violation shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(3289) 
6-13-8. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. 
(3289) 
CHAPTER 14. - DOMESTIC VIOLENCE PROGRAM 

6-14-1. - Legislative Intent. 
    Based on the research and information received by the City Council, it is evident that acts of domestic violence are frequently part of a continuing and cyclical pattern of controlling behavior within a domestic relationship. The City Council further concludes that an effective way to protect the public health, safety, and welfare in this regard is to provide that the appropriate city agencies intervene as rapidly as possible, in order to interrupt any existing pattern of violence within a relationship and to stem the reoccurrence of such a cycle at a later date. 
(2177) 
6-14-2. - Priority of Domestic Cases. 
(A)  Whenever possible, and in a manner consistent with the constitutional protections of the accused, a defendant charged with an offense involving domestic violence shall be brought before the Municipal Court on the morning of the next regularly scheduled court day, in order to address issues, including posting of appropriate bond and the setting of appropriate temporary orders, including temporary restraining orders prohibiting the accused from having any contact, directly or indirectly, with the alleged victim, as well as the witnesses. In addition, the alleged victim shall, whenever possible, be issued a subpoena to appear at the above-referenced court date, in order that the appropriate court personnel, including a member of the victim advocate's office, may maintain close personal contact with the victim for purposes of further court appearances as well as the provision of victim-support services. 
(B)  The Municipal Court shall give matters involving domestic violence the highest priority and shall, in a manner consistent with the constitutional rights of the accused, bring these matters to a conclusion, whether by jury trial, court trial or otherwise, as rapidly as possible. 
(2177) 
6-14-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Domestic violence shall mean an act or threatened act of violence upon a person with whom the actor is or has been involved in an intimate relationship, or any municipal ordinance violation against a person, or against property including an animal, when used as a method of coercion, control, revenge, intimidation, or punishment directed against a person with whom the actor is or has been involved in an intimate relationship. 
    Intimate relationship shall mean a relationship between spouses, former spouses, past or present unmarried couples, or persons who are both the parents of a child, regardless of whether the persons have been married or have lived together at any time. 
(2177; Ord. No. 3976 , § 1, 3-25-2019) 
6-14-4. - Domestic Violence Sentencing. 
    In addition to any sentence that is imposed upon a person for a violation of any criminal law under this Code, any person who is convicted of any crime, the underlying factual basis of which has been found by the court on the record to include an act of domestic violence, the court shall make therapeutic intervention a part of its sentence. The court shall order that the defendant complete a program of domestic violence counseling, unless the court finds on the record that such a program is unwarranted under the specific facts of the case in question. The court may, at the request of the defendant, order that the defendant complete an evaluation according to the standards promulgated in accordance with Section 18-6-803, C.R.S., prior to sentencing. If such evaluation recommends treatment, and if the court so finds, the person shall be ordered to complete the treatment program that is certified in accordance with Section 18-6-802, C.R.S. 
CHAPTER 15. - GAMBLING 

6-15-1. - Legislative Declaration; Construction. 
(A)  It is declared to be the policy of the City Council, recognizing the close relationship between professional gambling and other organized crime, to restrain all persons from patronizing such activities in this City; to restrain all persons from patronizing such activities when conducted for the profit of any person; to safeguard the public against the evils induced by common gamblers and common gambling houses; and at the same time to preserve the freedom of the press and to avoid restricting participation by individuals in sport and social pastimes which are not for profit, do not affect the public, and do not breach the peace. 
(B)  All the provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to achieve these ends and administered and enforced with a view to carrying out the declaration of policy stated in subsection (A) of this section. 
(1944) 
6-15-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Gain shall mean the direct realization of winnings; "profit" means any other realized or unrealized benefit, direct or indirect, including without limitation benefits from proprietorship, management, or unequal advantage in a series of transactions. 
    Gambling shall mean risking any money, credit, deposit, or other thing of value for gain, contingent in whole or in part upon lot, chance, the operation of a gambling device, or the happening or outcome of an event, including a sporting event, over which the person taking a risk has no control, but does not include: (1) Bona fide contests of skill, speed, strength, or endurance in which awards are made only to entrants or the owners of entries; or (2) Bona fide business transactions that are valid under the law of contracts; or (3) Other acts or transactions now or hereafter expressly authorized by law; or (4) Any game, wager, or transaction that is incidental to a bona fide social relationship, is participated in by natural persons only, and in which no person is participating, directly or indirectly, in professional gambling. 
    Gambling device shall mean any device, machine, paraphernalia, or equipment that is: (1) Used or usable in the playing phases of any professional gambling activity, whether that activity consists of gambling between persons or gambling by a person involving the playing of a machine; or (2) Any so-called "slot machine" or any other machine or mechanical device an essential part of which is a drum or reel with insignia thereon, and 
(A)  That when operated may deliver, as the result of the application of an element of chance, any money or property, or 
(B)  By the operation of which a person may become entitled to receive, as the result of the application of an element of chance, any money or property; or 
(3)  Any other machine or mechanical device (including, but not limited to, roulette wheels and similar devices) designed and manufactured primarily for use in connection with gambling, and 
(A)  That when operated may deliver, as the result of the application of an element of chance, any money or property, or 
(B)  By the operation of which a person may become entitled to receive, as the result of the application of an element of chance, any money or property; or 
(4)  Any subassembly or essential part intended to be used in connection with any such machine or mechanical device, but which is not attached to any such machine or mechanical device as a constituent part. 
    Gambling information shall mean a communication with respect to any wager made in the course of, and any information intended to be used for, professional gambling. In the application of this definition, the following shall be presumed to be intended for use in professional gambling: information as to wagers, betting odds, or changes in betting odds. Legitimate news reporting of an event for public dissemination is not gambling information within the meaning of this chapter. 
    Gambling premises shall mean any building, room, enclosure, vehicle, vessel, or other place, whether open or enclosed, used or intended to be used for professional gambling. In the application of this definition, any place where a gambling device is found is presumed to be intended to be used for professional gambling. 
    Gambling proceeds shall mean all money or other things of value at stake or displayed in or in connection with professional gambling. 
    Gambling record shall mean any record, receipt, ticket, certificate, token, slip, or notation given, made, used, or intended to be used in connection with professional gambling. 
    Licensed premises shall mean any business required to obtain a business license pursuant to this Code. 
    Professional gambling shall mean: (1) Aiding or inducing another to engage in gambling, with the intent to derive a profit therefrom; or (2) Participating in gambling and having, other than by virtue of skill or luck, a lesser chance of losing or a greater chance of winning than one or more of the other participants. 
(1944) 
6-15-3. - Unlawful Acts. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in gambling. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for a person to own, manufacture, sell, transport, possess, or engage in any transaction designed to affect the ownership, custody, or use of a gambling device or gambling record, knowing that it is to be used in professional gambling. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful to knowingly transmit or receive gambling information by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore, or other means or to knowingly install or maintain equipment for the transmission or receipt of gambling information. 
(D)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, agent, employee, operator or occupant of premises to knowingly maintain, aid or permit the maintaining of gambling premises. 
(E)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, agent, employee, operator or occupant of licensed premises to knowingly: 
(1)  Provide or sell play money, script, chips or tokens for use by social gamblers. 
(2)  Exchange or purchase play money, script, chips or tokens for prizes, items of value, United States currency, bank check or other form of money. 
(3)  Allow social gamblers to play card games, unless the players deal the cards themselves and the deal changes players before each hand. 
(4)  Allow any non-player to deal cards. 
(5)  Allow any social gambler to receive a tip or other form of compensation in exchange for dealing cards. 
(6)  Receive any portion of tips or other form of compensation from social gamblers or dealers. 
(7)  Allow social gamblers or dealers to pay the expenses of possessing or maintaining the licensed premises. 
(8)  Award prizes, money or any other thing of value in connection with the playing of games of chance. 
(9)  Permit the suppliers of gambling equipment or personnel to be paid based on any type of "cut," "rake," or percentage of revenue received by the owner, lessee, agent, employee, operator or occupant of the licensed premises. 
(F)  A violation of any provision of this section shall be a criminal offense. 
(1944) 
CHAPTER 16. - GRAFFITI 

6-16-1. - Legislative Intent. 
    The City Council finds and declares that defacing of public or private property by painting, drawing, writing, etching, scratching or carving, by use of paint, spray paint, ink, knife or any similar method, commonly referred to as "graffiti vandalism," constitutes a serious and growing menace, injurious to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the residents of the City; that graffiti vandalism contributes substantially to the spread of gang activity, violence and crime; and that prompt eradication of graffiti vandalism is necessary to control the spread of graffiti vandalism, and promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of the City. It is the intent of the City Council in enacting this chapter to prevent the destruction of public or private property by graffiti vandalism and to recover the costs associated with the cleanup thereof. Furthermore, given the substantial challenges in controlling graffiti vandalism, the City Council enlists, and places responsibility upon parents, legal guardians, retail businesses, and property owners to aid the City in preventing and cleaning up graffiti vandalism. 
(3415) 
6-16-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    City Manager shall mean the City Manager of the City of Westminster. 
    Deface shall mean to alter the appearance of something by removing, distorting, etching, writing, painting, adding to, or covering all or a part of the property. 
    Etching equipment shall mean any tool, device or substance that can be used to make permanent marks on any natural or man-made surface. 
    Graffiti vandalism shall mean any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or symbol that defaces public or private property created by means of painting, drawing, writing, etching, scratching or carving, by use of paint, spray paint, ink, knife, or any similar method. 
    Marker pen shall mean a felt-tip marker, permanent marker, or similar implement containing a fluid that is not water soluble. 
    Minor shall mean any person who has not yet attained the age of 18 years. 
    Owner or property owner shall mean any person having a legal or equitable interest in any real or personal property located within the City boundaries. 
    Paint pen shall mean a tube, marker, or other pen-like instrument with a tip of one-quarter inch in diameter or less that contains paint or a similar fluid and an internal paint agitator. 
    Prohibited graffiti material shall mean any implement capable of creating graffiti vandalism including, but not limited to, spray paint, spray paint nozzle/tip, marker pen, paint pen, glass-cutting tool, or etching equipment. 
    Spray paint shall mean any aerosol container that is made or adapted for the purpose of applying paint or other substance capable of defacing property. 
    Spray paint nozzle or spray paint tip shall mean a nozzle/tip designed to deliver a spray of paint of a particular width or flow from a can of spray paint. 
(3415) 
6-16-3. - Prohibited Acts. 
(A)  Defacement: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any property with graffiti vandalism, except with the written consent of the owner. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to aid, abet, or advise another to deface any property with graffiti vandalism, except with the written consent of the owner. 
(B)  Purchase and Possession of Graffiti Materials: 
(1)  Purchase and Possession by Any Person. It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, procure or possess, or attempt to purchase, procure or possess any prohibited graffiti material with the intent to use such material in the commission of graffiti vandalism. 
(2)  Purchase and Possession by Minor. It shall be unlawful for any minor, except a minor under the direct supervision of the person's parent, legal guardian, school teacher, or a law enforcement officer in the performance of duty, to purchase, procure or possess, or attempt to purchase, procure or possess any prohibited graffiti material. It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of possession under this subsection that the minor possessing the prohibited graffiti material was: 
(a)  Within their home; 
(b)  While at school or enrolled in a class at school that formally required the possession of such material; 
(c)  At their place of employment; or 
(d)  Upon real property with permission from the owner to possess such materials. 
(3)  Contributing to Unlawful Possession. It shall be unlawful for any person, except a law enforcement officer, school teacher or public official in the performance of their duty, to knowingly allow a minor to possess prohibited graffiti materials upon any property, except with the written consent of the owner. It shall be an affirmative defense to charges under this subsection that the minor possessing the prohibited graffiti material was: 
(a)  Within their home; 
(b)  While at school or enrolled in a class at school that formally required the possession of such material; 
(c)  At their place of employment; or 
(d)  Upon real property with permission from the owner to possess such materials. 
(3415) 
6-16-4. - Accessiblity to Certain Prohibited Graffiti Materials. 
(A)  Sale and Furnishing: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a parent, legal guardian, school teacher, or law enforcement officer in the performance of duty, to sell, exchange, give, deliver, loan, or otherwise furnish or cause or permit to be sold, exchanged, given, delivered, loaned or otherwise furnished marker pens, spray paint, and/or shoe polish to any minor, unless the minor is accompanied by their parent or legal guardian and provides written documentation demonstrating the consent of their parent or legal guardian. It shall be an affirmative defense to charges under this subsection that such materials were necessary for the minor to perform an essential job function. 
(B)  Display and Storage: It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling marker pens, spray paint, and/or shoe polish to fail to store such materials in an area continuously observable, through direct visual observation or surveillance equipment, by employees of the retail establishment during the regular course of business. In the event that a retail commercial establishment is unable to store the marker pens, spray paint, and/or shoe polish in an area that is continuously observable, it shall be unlawful for the establishment to fail to store such material in an area not accessible to the public in the regular course of business without employee assistance. 
(C)  Signs Required: It shall be unlawful for any person who sells or offers to sell any marker pens, spray paint, and/or shoe polish to fail to display at all times in a prominent place a printed card to be a minimum height of 14 inches and a width of 11 inches, with each letter to be a minimum of one-half inch in height, which shall read as follows: 
WARNING 
GRAFFITI VANDALISM IS AGAINST THE LAW. IT IS ILLEGAL TO SELL MARKER PENS, SPRAY PAINT, AND/OR SHOE POLISH TO ANY PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN (18) YEARS OF AGE UNLESS ACCOMPANIED BY THEIR PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN AND IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN (18) YEARS OF AGE TO POSSESS OR TO ATTEMPT TO PURCHASE THE SAME. 
FINES AND/OR IMPRISONMENT MAY BE IMPOSED BY THE COURT FOR VIOLATION OF THESE PROVISIONS. 
(3415) 
6-16-5. - Enforcement. 
(A)  Penalties: 
(1)  Criminal Violations . The following provisions of this chapter are hereby deemed criminal violations of this Code punishable by a fine or by confinement in jail, or by both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C.: 
Section 6-16-3(A)-Defacement 
(2)  Civil Violations. All violations of this chapter not listed in paragraph (1), above, are hereby deemed civil infractions of this Code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine pursuant to Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. Each day that a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter continues to exist shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct violation. 
(3)  Restitution. In addition to any punishment specified in this section, the court shall order any violator to make restitution to the victim for damages or loss caused directly or indirectly by the violator's offense when such restitution can be determined by the court. 
(4)  Community Service. In lieu of, or as part of, the penalties specified in this section, a person may be required to perform community service as described by the court, based on the following guidelines: 
(a)  If convicted of committing graffiti vandalism, the defendant should perform at least 30 hours of community service, or should remove at least 5,000 square feet of graffiti vandalism. 
(b)  In the case of a minor living with his/her parent(s) or legal guardian(s) and convicted of committing graffiti vandalism, at least one (1) parent or legal guardian of that minor should be in attendance a minimum of 50 percent of the period of assigned community service. Participation of a parent or legal guardian is not required for any reason deemed appropriate by the court, including, but not limited to, if such participation is detrimental to the minor, or if the parent or legal guardian is a single parent who must care for young children. 
(c)  Reasonable effort should be made to assign the defendant to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult, including community service that involves graffiti removal. 
(5)  Recommended Fines. Recommended minimum fines upon conviction may be imposed as listed below: 
Section 6-16-3(A)-Defacement: 
First offense-$200.00; 
Second offense-$500.00; and 
Third and subsequent offenses-$1,000.00. 
(B)  Parental Responsibility: 
(1)  In the case of a minor living with his/her parent(s) or legal guardian(s) and convicted of a violation under this chapter, the minor's parents or legal guardian shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for payment of all fines, damages, restitution and costs, including attorney's fees and court costs ordered by the court, because graffiti vandalism is a deliberate, willful and malicious act, provided that such liability shall not exceed $2,500.00. 
(2)  The court may not enter an order for payment of all fines, damages, restitution and costs, including attorney's fees and court costs, against the minor's parent or legal guardian unless the court, prior to entering such order for payment, holds a hearing at which the minor's parent or legal guardian is present. 
(3)  If the court finds, after the hearing, that the minor's parent or legal guardian has made diligent, good faith efforts to prevent or discourage the minor from engaging in delinquent activity prohibited by this chapter, or that such order for payment would cause serious hardship to the minor's parent or legal guardian, the court may reduce or eliminate the parent's or legal guardian's responsibility for fines, damages, restitution and costs, including attorney's fees and court costs. 
(3415) 
CHAPTER 17. - RESIDENCY OF SEXUALLY VIOLENT PREDATORS 

6-17-1. - Purpose and Intent. 
(A)  The City Council hereby finds that persons who have been determined to be sexually violent predators, pursuant to Section 18-3-414.5, C.R.S., as amended from time to time, present an extreme threat to the public safety, and, in particular, to children. Sex offenders have a high rate of recidivism, making the cost of sex offender victimization to society at large extremely high. Removing such offenders from regular proximity to places where children congregate and limiting the frequency of contact between this category of sex offenders and children is likely to reduce the risk of a re-offense. 
(B)  This section is intended to serve the City's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the public health, safety and welfare by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers where certain sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residences. 
(3533) 
6-17-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Child care center shall mean a facility that is maintained for the care of five or more children under the age of 18 years for less than 24-hour programs of care, as more specifically defined at §26-6-102(1.5), C.R.S. 
    Park shall mean any publicly owned park, including playgrounds. 
    Permanent residence shall mean a place where a person abides, lodges or resides for five or more consecutive days. 
    Recreation center shall mean a publicly owned recreation center. 
    School shall mean any public, private, parochial, charter or other school attended by students generally under the age of 18, except for home schools. 
    Sexual predator shall mean any person who has been found to be a sexually violent predator pursuant to Section 18-3-414.5, C.R.S. 
    Swimming pool shall mean a publicly owned outdoor water-filled structure used for the purpose of swimming or other water activities, including splash parks. As used in this chapter, "swimming pool" shall not include any water-filled structures located at private, single-family residences. 
    Temporary residence shall mean a place where a person abides, lodges or resides for a period of five or more days in an aggregate calendar year and that is not the person's permanent residence; or a place where a person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of five or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and that is not the person's permanent address. 
(3533) 
6-17-3. - Prohibtions. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for a sexual predator to establish a permanent or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any school, park, recreation center, swimming pool or state-licensed child care center or within 500 feet of the centerline of any public trail established by the City on open space or parklands. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful to let or rent any portion of any property, room, place, structure, trailer or other living space to a sexual predator with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent or temporary residence in violation of this chapter. 
6-17-4. - Exceptions. 
(A)  A sexual predator is not guilty of a violation of this chapter if: 
(1)  The sexual predator had established the permanent or temporary residence prior to the effective date of this chapter; provided, however, that this exception shall not apply if the sexual predator committed and was subsequently convicted of an offense, for which registration under the Colorado Sex Offender Registration Act is required, after the effective date of this chapter; 
(2)  The sexual predator is placed in the residence pursuant to a state-licensed foster care program; or 
(3)  The school, park, swimming pool, state-licensed child care center, recreation center or trail was opened after the sexual predator established the permanent or temporary residence. 
(B)  A person who lets or rents any portion of any property, room, place, structure, trailer or other living space to a sexual predator with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent or temporary residence in violation of this chapter is not guilty of a violation of this chapter if: 
(1)  The person let or rented the property, room, place, structure, trailer or other living space to the sexual predator prior to the effective date of this chapter; 
(2)  The person lets or rents the property, room, place, structure, trailer or other living space to a sexual predator pursuant to a state-licensed foster care program; or 
(3)  The person let or rented the property, room, place, structure, trailer or other living space to the sexual predator prior to the opening of any school, park, swimming pool, state-licensed child care center, recreation center or trail. 
6-17-5. - Measurment. 
    For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation required herein, the measurement shall be made by following a straight line from the centerline of any trail or the outer property line of the property on which the park, school, recreation center, swimming pool or state-licensed child care center is located to the nearest point of the structure or place of permanent or temporary residence, unless the facility and the residence are separated by a natural or man-made barrier that would preclude access from one point to the other. In the case of such physical barrier, the City Manager may determine based upon reasonable evidence that the measurement requirements have or have not been met. If any portion of a dwelling unit used as a temporary or permanent residence falls within the measurement area, the entire dwelling unit is presumed to be the residence. Geographic information system (GIS) data regarding the locations in question shall be prima facie evidence of the actual distance. 
6-17-6. - Penalties. 
    Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a criminal violation of this Code, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
CHAPTER 18. - LITTER 

6-18-1. - Littering. 
(A)  It Shall be Unlawful to Commit Littering. Any person who deposits, throws, or leaves any litter on any public or private property, or in any waters commits littering. 
(B)  It Shall be an Affirmative Defense That: 
(1)  Such property is an area designated by law for the disposal of such material, and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use the property; or 
(2)  The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on such property for that purpose; or 
(3)  Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or he has first obtained written consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or the act is done under the personal direction of said owner or tenant. 
(C)  Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Littering shall mean all rubbish, waste material, refuse, garbage, trash, debris or other foreign substances, solid or liquid, of every form, size, kind and description. 
    Public or private property shall include, but is not limited to, the right-of-way of any road or highway, any body of water or watercourse, including frozen areas or the shores or beaches thereof, any park, playground, building, refuge, conservation or recreation area and any residential, farm or ranch properties or timberland. 
(D)  It is in the discretion of the court upon conviction of any person, and the imposition of a fine under this section, to suspend the fine, upon the condition that the convicted person gather and remove from specified public property, or specified private property, with prior permission of the owner or tenant in lawful possession thereof, any litter found thereon. 
(E)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle in violation of this section, the operator of said motor vehicle is presumed to have caused or permitted the litter to be so thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped therefrom. 
Title VII. - ELECTIONS 
CHAPTER 1. - ELECTIONS 

7-1-1. - Legislative Intent. 
(A)  The purpose of this Chapter is the establishment of procedures for the regular and special elections of the City of Westminster, whether or not those elections are conducted as coordinated elections with Adams and Jefferson Counties. 
(B)  The council intends that interpretations of this Chapter be consistent with the City's home rule authority to regulate its municipal elections under Article XX of the Colorado Constitution. 
(3372) 
7-1-2. - Adoption and Applicability of State Law. 
(A)  Subject to the Charter of Westminster and provisions of this Chapter, City elections will be conducted in accordance with the relevant portions of the Uniform Election Code of 1992, Articles 1 to 13 of Title 1, C.R.S., and the Colorado Municipal Election Code, Article 10 of Title 31, C.R.S., as they may be amended from time to time. As the uniform election code was adopted by the legislature to cover many types of elections, various portions of that code are not applicable to municipal elections. In some instances, the Uniform Election Code and the Colorado Municipal Election Code have differing provisions regarding the same subject. For these reasons, in the event of a conflict of laws or an inconsistent provision therein, these laws shall be applied in the following order of priority: 
(1)  The provisions of the Charter of Westminster; 
(2)  The provisions of the Westminster Municipal Code; 
(3)  The provisions of the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965; and 
(4)  The relevant provisions of the Uniform Election Code of 1992. 
(B)  Notwithstanding the prioritization listed in subsection (A), when a City election is being conducted as a coordinated election, the Colorado Revised Statutes governing coordinated elections will control, to the extent said statutes are applicable to municipal elections. 
(1748 2318 3228 3372) 
7-1-3. - Wards; Precincts; Polling Places. 
(A)  The City shall consist of one ward. 
(B)  The council shall, by resolution, from time to time, establish convenient election precincts, when required in order to conduct a city election. 
(C)  No later than 30 days before an election, other than a mail ballot election or a coordinated election, the city council shall designate, by motion, the official polling places for said election. 
(D)  When required in order to conduct a city election, city precinct boundaries will be reviewed by the election commission after any state redistricting or county reprecincting has occurred. The election commission will then make a recommendation to council if any precinct changes are necessary. 
(1172 1515 1718 1884 2002 2010 2163 2780 3014 3228 3372) 
7-1-4. - Election Official. 
    The City Clerk is the designated election official of the City of Westminster for all purposes specified in the Charter, this Code, or any applicable state statute. 
(3372) 
7-1-5. - Election Commission. 
    The Election Commission, created by charter section 3.10, consists of the City Clerk and four qualified and registered electors of the City, who during their term of office shall not be city officers or employees or candidates or nominees for elective city office. Such four members shall be appointed by the council for a term of two years at the first January council meeting following a regular city election. They shall serve without compensation. The City Clerk shall be chairperson. The Election Commission shall appoint the board of election, judges and clerks for each precinct and have charge of all activities and duties required of it by applicable statute, this Code, and the charter relating to the conduct of elections in the City. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the Election Commission shall prescribe the procedure to be followed. The Election Commission shall provide for ballots and sample ballots, for voting machines or electronic voting equipment, for determination of the winner in event of a tie vote, for canvas of returns, and for issuance of appropriate certificates. 
(3372) 
7-1-6. - Coordinated Elections. 
(A)  City elections shall be conducted, whenever possible, as a coordinated election conducted by Adams County, Jefferson County or both. 
(B)  For all coordinated elections, the City Council shall adopt, by resolution or ordinance as appropriate, the language of ballot issues or ballot questions prior to the date of the City Clerk's required certification of ballot contents to the respective county election official. 
(C)  The City Manager is authorized to sign all intergovernmental agreements regarding coordinated elections with the respective counties. 
(D)  For all coordinated elections, election precincts and polling places shall be determined by the coordinated election official of the respective county. 
(2318 3228 3372) 
7-1-7. - Mail Ballot Elections. 
(A)  Upon the call of an election by the City Council, the City Clerk is authorized to conduct elections by mail ballot. 
(B)  Unless provided otherwise by the charter or this Code, such elections will be conducted pursuant to the requirements of Article 7.5 of Title 1, C.R.S., the Colorado Mail Ballot Election Act, as it may be amended from time to time, except the following provisions thereof: 
(1)  Section 1-7.5-107.3, C.R.S.; 
(2)  Section 1-7.5-109, C.R.S.; and 
(3)  Any provisions of the Act that the City determines are inconsistent with the City's authority over its elections pursuant to Article XX of the Colorado Constitution. 
(3372) 
7-1-8. - Mayor and Councillor Elections. 
(A)  General Conditions: Part 3 of Article 10 of Title 31, C.R.S., shall govern city elections for the Mayor or councillors, except as provided in this Section. 
(B)  Nominating Petitions: Except as provided in (C) below, for all councillor elections except recall elections, nominating petitions for the office of Mayor or councillor may be circulated and signed beginning 91 days prior to the election, and shall be filed with the City Clerk not later than 71 days prior to the election. All candidates must be residents of the City for at least one year immediately prior to the last day for filing nominating petitions. 
(C)  Nominating Petitions for Special Councillor Elections: For elections to fill a vacancy in elective offices pursuant to section 5.7(b) of the Charter, the dates for the filing and circulating of nominating petitions shall be established by the City Council in the resolution setting the special election. 
(D)  Nominated Candidates: Only candidates whose names have been placed in nomination through the process designated in this Chapter are eligible to be placed on the ballot. 
(E)  Vacancies in Nominations: If any candidate dies or withdraws his or her name from nomination prior to the date upon which the City Clerk submits the ballot content to the ballot printer or, in the case of a coordinated election, to the respective county election official, the City Clerk shall use his or her best efforts to cause the candidate's name to be removed from the ballot. 
(F)  Content of Ballot: Every ballot shall contain the names of all duly nominated candidates for offices to be voted for at that election, except those who have died or withdrawn, and the ballot shall contain no other names. The arrangement of the names on the ballot shall be established by lot at any time prior to the certification of the ballot. The City Clerk shall notify the candidates of the time and place of the lot-drawing for the ballot. The lot-drawing shall be held to establish the order of names which is to be identical on both the respective ballots of Adams County and Jefferson County. The drawing shall be performed by the City Clerk or the clerk's designee. 
(G)  Write-in Candidate Affidavit: No write-in vote for any elective officer shall be counted unless an affidavit of intent has been filed with the City Clerk by the person whose name is written in, indicating that such person desires the office and is qualified and eligible to assume the duties of that office if elected. Such affidavit of intent shall be filed by the close of business on the 64th day before a regular municipal election or, for a special election, on the date set in the council resolution for the filing of nominating petitions. 
(H)  Notice: At least ten days before election for the office of Mayor or councillor, the City Clerk shall publish notice in at least one newspaper having general circulation in the City, stating the day and date of the election, the hours during which the polls will be open unless it is a mail ballot election, naming the officers to be elected, and listing the names of those candidates as nearly as possible in the form in which such nominations shall appear upon the official ballot. Additionally, a copy of such notice shall be posted until after the election in a conspicuous place in the office of the City Clerk. 
(3372; Ord. No. 3987 , § 1, 5-13-2019) 
7-1-9. - Elections on Initiated or Referred Measures. 
    The procedures for exercising the initiative and referendum powers reserved to the City's electors by the City Charter and the Colorado Constitution shall be as follows: 
(A)  General Conditions: An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or a referendum on an ordinance enacted by the City Council may be had by petition. Either an initiative or a referendum petition shall be signed by not less than ten percent of the number of persons who were registered electors of the City as of the date of the last regular city election prior to the filing of the petition. In the case of a referendum on an ordinance granting a public utility franchise, said petition shall be signed by not less than five percent of the number of persons who were registered electors of the City as of the date of the last regular city election. No petition shall propose to repeal more than one ordinance nor to initiate an ordinance containing more than one subject. 
(B)  Form of Petition: The City Clerk shall maintain and provide a blank form of petition; however, the clerk shall not review or comment on the proposed wording of the petition's measure nor prepare a summary thereof. An initiative or referendum petition signed by the requisite number of signatures shall be addressed to the council. Said petition may be in sections of one or more sheets fastened securely at the top. All sections of the petition shall be filed as one instrument, with the endorsement of the names and mailing addresses of three registered electors of the City designated as the committee of petitioners filing the same. To each petition section there shall be attached a signed, notarized, and dated affidavit by the circulator of that section, stating the number of signers thereof and the affiant's printed name and address, that the affiant is 18 years of age or older, that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that each signature was made in the presence of the affiant circulator. 
At the top of each section of the petition and at the top of each signature page shall be printed the following warning in bold-faced type: 
WARNING: 
IT IS AGAINST THE LAW: 
    For anyone to sign this petition with any name other than one's own, or to knowingly sign one's name more than once for the same measure, or to sign such petition when not a registered elector. 
    Do not sign this petition unless you are a registered elector. To be a registered elector, you must be a citizen of Colorado and registered to vote in Westminster. 
    Do not sign this petition unless you have read or have had read to you the proposed measure in its entirety and understand its meaning. 
Below the warning shall be printed, at the top of each section of an initiative petition, a short summary of the proposed ordinance and below the summary, the full text of the proposed ordinance. Below the warning and at the top of each section of a referendum petition shall be printed a meaningful summary identifying the matter proposed for repeal, and then set forth the full text of the ordinance or part thereof or Code section proposed to be repealed. 
The signature pages shall consist of the warning and the summary, followed by ruled lines numbered consecutively for registered electors' signatures. If a petition section contains multiple signature pages, all signature lines shall be numbered consecutively, and the section pages shall be numbered consecutively from the first section page through the last. 
(C)  Petition Signatures: Each registered elector signing an initiative or referendum petition shall add the signer's printed name, the date of signing, his or her place of residence by street and number, and the county designation after his or her signature. All signatures on a referendum petition shall be obtained after the effective date of the ordinance proposed for repeal. 
(D)  Filing and Examination of Petition: An initiative petition shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. No signature on an initiative petition may be counted if it was signed more than 180 days from the date of filing. A referendum petition shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk not more than 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance proposed for repeal. Within 15 days of the filing of an initiative or referendum petition, the City Clerk shall ascertain by examination of the petition and the county voter registration records whether the petition is signed and appropriately dated by the requisite number of registered electors and shall attach thereto his or her certificate showing the result of such examination. If the petition as initially filed shows on its face an insufficient number of signatures, the City Clerk shall not be required to canvass the signatures and the petition shall be null and void. If the petition contains a sufficient number of signatures but an insufficient number of registered electors' signatures, the City Clerk shall forthwith notify by first-class and electronic mail, if available, each of the persons designated as a member of the committee of petitioners. The petition may then be amended by the filing of additional petition signatures within 15 days from the filing of the certificate. The City Clerk, within five days after such amendment, shall make like examination of the amended petition and attach thereto a second certificate of the result. If the petition is still insufficient, the City Clerk shall issue a certificate of insufficiency, a copy of which shall be provided to one of the persons designated as the committee of petitioners. If the petition or amended petition is found sufficient, the City Clerk shall submit the same with his or her certificate to the council at its next regular meeting. The City Clerk's determination of sufficiency or insufficiency is final. 
(E)  Council action upon petition: Within 30 days of receipt of the City Clerk's certificate establishing sufficiency of an initiative or referendum petition, the council shall either: 
(1)  Adopt the ordinance as submitted in an initiative petition; 
(2)  Repeal the ordinance, or part thereof, requested for repeal in a referendum petition; or 
(3)  Submit the proposal provided for in the petition to the electors at the next election, occurring not less than 60 days after council's decision to submit the proposal, held in the City for any other purpose or, in the council's discretion, at a special election called specifically for that purpose. 
(F)  Content of Ballot: If an election has been ordered pursuant to subsection (E) above, the council shall fix a ballot title for each initiative or referendum, which ballot title shall correctly and fairly express the true intent and meaning of the measure, in the resolution calling the election. Any person protesting the wording of the ballot title shall file such protest with the City Clerk within seven days of the council's action. The council shall consider said protest at their next regularly scheduled meeting or, at council's discretion, at a special meeting called for that purpose and the council's determination of the ballot title shall be final. 
(3372) 
7-1-10. - Elections on Recall Petitions. 
    The procedure to recall an elective officer of the City shall be as follows: 
(A)  General Conditions: Any elective officer, as that term is defined in Article XXI of the Colorado Constitution, may be removed from office by the qualified electors of the City after the officer has held said office for at least six months. Prior to the filing of any recall petition one or more registered electors of the City shall file with the City Clerk a notarized affidavit, of not more than 200 words, stating the reasons for the recall of the officer sought to be removed. The City Clerk shall, within 48 hours after the filing of said affidavit, mail a copy by registered mail to the officer sought to be recalled, who may file with the City Clerk a sworn statement of not more than 300 words in defense of charges made against him or her. 
(B)  Form of Petition: A petition for the recall of the officer sought to be removed and demanding an election of a successor to the officer named in the petition, signed by the requisite numbers of signatures, as detailed below, shall be addressed to the council. The petition shall include the name of only one person to be recalled. Said petition may be in sections of one or more sheets fastened securely at the top. All sections of the petition shall be filed as one instrument, with the endorsement of the names and mailing addresses of three registered electors of the City designated as the committee of petitioners filing the same. To each petition section there shall be attached a signed, notarized, and dated affidavit by the circulator of that section, stating the number of signers thereof and the affiant's printed name and address, that the affiant is 18 years of age or older, that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that each signature was made in the presence of the affiant circulator. 
At the top of each section of the petition and of each signature page shall be printed the following warning in bold-faced type: 
WARNING: 
IT IS AGAINST THE LAW: 
    For anyone to sign this petition with any name other than one's own, or to knowingly sign one's name more than once for the same measure, or to sign such petition when not a registered elector. 
    Do not sign this petition unless you are a registered elector. To be a registered elector, you must be a citizen of Colorado and registered to vote in Westminster. 
    Do not sign this petition unless you have read or have had read to you the proposed measure in its entirety and understand its meaning. 
Below the warning shall be printed the title: "Petition to recall (name of person sought to be recalled) from the office of (title of office)." Below the title shall be printed a copy of the charges previously filed with the City Clerk. 
(C)  Petition Signatures: Each registered elector signing the petition shall add the signer's printed name, the date of signing, his or her place of residence by street and number, and the county designation, after his or her signature. If the petition seeks the recall of the Mayor, then the petition shall be signed by registered electors entitled to vote for a successor to the incumbent sought to be recalled equal in number to 25 percent of the entire vote cast for the office of Mayor at the last preceding regular election held in the City for that office. 
If the petition seeks the recall of a non-mayoral councillor, then the recall petition shall be signed by registered electors entitled to vote for a successor to the incumbent sought to be recalled equal in number to 25 percent of the entire vote cast at the last preceding regular election held in the City for all non-mayoral candidates, such entire vote being divided by the number of all officers elected to the office of councillor at the last preceding regular election held in the City. 
(D)  Filing and Examination of Petition: The petition shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk not more than 60 days after the affidavit making charges against said officer has been filed. Within 15 days of the filing of said petition, the City Clerk shall ascertain, by examination of the petition and the registration books, whether the petition is signed by the requisite number of registered electors and shall attach thereto his or her certificate showing the result of such examination. If the petition is insufficient, the City Clerk shall forthwith, in writing, notify one or more of the persons designated as the committee of petitioners. The petition may be withdrawn and amended within 15 days from the filing of the certificate. The City Clerk, within five days after such amendment, shall make like examination of the amended petition and attach thereto a certificate of the result. If the petition is still insufficient, the City Clerk shall return it to each of the persons designated as a member of the committee of petitioners, without prejudice to the filing of a new petition for the same person. If the petition or amended petition is found sufficient, the City Clerk shall submit the same with his or her certificate to the council without delay. The City Clerk's determination of sufficiency or insufficiency is final. 
(E)  Call for Election: Upon receipt of the City Clerk's certificate, the council, if the officer sought to be removed does not resign within five days thereafter, shall order an election by resolution, which shall contain the time periods for candidates to file their nomination petitions to succeed the person sought to be recalled. Such election shall be held on a Tuesday fixed by the council not less than 45 nor more than 60 days from the date that the City Clerk's certificate was filed; provided that, if any other city election is to occur within 90 days but more than 60 days from the date of the City Clerk's certificate, the council shall postpone and consolidate the recall election with such other city election. 
(F)  Content of Ballot: On the official ballot at the recall election shall be printed, in not more than 200 words, the reasons set forth in the petition for demanding an officer's recall, and in not more than 300 words there shall also be printed, if desired by the officer, the officer's response in defense as filed with the City Clerk. There shall be printed on the official ballot the words: "Shall (name of person against whom the recall petition is filed) be recalled from the office of (......)?" Following such question shall be the words "Yes" and "No." 
If recall petitions for more than one officer have been certified as sufficient to be placed on the ballot, the officers shall be listed in alphabetical order on the ballot. On such ballot, under the question or questions, there shall be printed, in alphabetical order, the names of those persons who have been nominated as candidates to succeed the person or persons sought to be recalled. Any qualified elector desiring to become a candidate at the recall election shall do so by petition, as required by Sections 3.1 and 5.1 of the Westminster Charter, which petition if presented to the City Clerk shall entitle the petitioner to have his or her name placed on the ballot. The name of the person sought to be recalled shall not appear on the ballot as a candidate for the office. If the majority of those voting on said question of the recall of any incumbent from office shall vote "NO," said incumbent shall continue in said office; if a majority shall vote "YES," such incumbent shall thereupon be deemed removed from such office upon the qualification of his or her successor. 
(G)  Write-in Candidate Affidavit: In a recall election, no write-in vote for any elective officer shall be counted unless an affidavit of intent has been filed with the City Clerk by the person whose name is written in, indicating that such person desires the office and is qualified and eligible to assume the duties of that office if elected. Such affidavit of intent shall be filed by the close of business on the date set for the filing of nominating petitions for the recall election. 
(H)  Vacancy: If a vacancy occurs in said office after a recall election has been ordered, the election to fill the vacancy shall nevertheless proceed as in this Section provided. 
(I)  Notice: At least ten days before a recall election, the City Clerk shall publish notice in at least one newspaper having general circulation in the municipality, stating the day of the election, the hours during which the polls will be open unless it is a mail ballot election, naming the officer whose recall is to be voted upon, and listing the names of those candidates in alphabetical order nominated to succeed the person sought to be recalled. Additionally, a copy of such notice shall be posted until after the election in a conspicuous place in the office of the City Clerk. 
(J)  Effect of Recall: No person who has been recalled or has resigned while recall proceedings were pending against him or her shall serve the City in any capacity within two years after such removal or resignation. 
(3372) 
7-1-11. - Special Elections. 
(A)  Special elections shall be held when called by resolution of the council at least 40 days in advance of such election, or when required by this Code, the charter, or applicable statute. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. 
(B)  The conduct of special elections shall be as nearly as practicable the same as for general elections. 
(297 1748 2780 3372) 
7-1-12. - Penalties for Election Offenses. 
    In addition to any penalties established for violation of this Code, it is the intention of the City Council to authorize the district attorneys of Adams and/or Jefferson County and the Attorney General to prosecute violations of any election offenses occurring within the City, as provided for in Part 15 of Article 10 of Title 31, C.R.S., regarding election offenses. The penalties for violation of these offenses shall be as established, from time to time, by the Colorado General Assembly. 
(1748 2780 3228 3372) 
7-1-13. - Fair Campaign Practices Act. 
    All relevant provisions of the Fair Campaign Practices Act, found at Article 45 of Title 1, C.R.S., as amended from time to time, are herewith adopted, and all candidates and committees in support of or in opposition to any municipal candidates or municipal issues shall file documents and reports required under that Act with the City Clerk. 
(3372) 
Title VIII. - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
CHAPTER 1. - PROPERTY STANDARDS 

8-1-1. - General Intent. 
    This chapter has been enacted to preserve and enhance existing neighborhoods, commercial areas, businesses and the community at-large by regulating and controlling the use and maintenance of all properties within the City of Westminster. The requirements of this chapter are intended to provide the minimum standards applicable to all properties within the City of Westminster; additional requirements for specific properties may exist, including, but not limited to, the Rental Property Maintenance Code (Title XI, Chapter 12 of this Code.) 
(3338) 
8-1-2. - Interpretation. 
    Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with any applicable development plans and restrictions, including, but not limited to, zoning district restrictions, planned unit development restrictions, the contents of any preliminary development plan, official development plan, or final plat, the applicable development plan and restriction shall govern. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with any other provision of this Code, the more restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern. 
8-1-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise 
    Backyard shall mean that portion of a lot between the back line of the structure and extending to the back property line. 
    Building/garage shall mean a building that shall consist of four solid walls and a roof, meet all city building codes and effectively shield its contents from the view of the public. 
    Code enforcement officer shall mean an employee or agent of the city authorized to enforce applicable provisions of the Code. 
    Front yard shall mean that portion of a lot between the front line of the structure and extending to the front property line. 
    Person shall mean the person or entity who has violated the Code or, in the case of property violations, it may also be the property owner, the occupant, or an individual or an entity who, acting as an agent for or in any other legal capacity on behalf of the owner, has authority over property subject to this Code. 
    Premises shall mean any lot, grounds, site, property, plot or parcel of land, including any structures or buildings thereon. 
    Side yard shall mean that portion of a lot between the back line and the front line of the structure. 
    Structure shall mean that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
    Vehicle shall mean any device that is propelled or drawn on land by an engine, motor, or machinery, including automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles, motor homes, camping trailers, motorized campers, tractors, trailers and trains. For the purposes of this section, this term does not include any device customarily moved by human muscular power or those whose primary purpose is for recreation, such as bicycles, ski-doos, snowmobiles, mopeds, dirt bikes, all-terrain vehicles, canoes, boats and go-carts. 
8-1-4. - Compost Piles. 
(A)  Household Trash: It shall be unlawful for a person to compost household trash. 
(B)  Yard Waste: It shall be unlawful for a person to compost yard wastes, except in a compost holding unit that: 
(1)  Shall not exceed five feet in any dimension; 
(2)  Shall be constructed of wood, wire, metal, or plastic, excluding plastic bags; 
(3)  May be a stationary or rotating unit; 
(4)  Shall be located in the backyard, and shall be screened or fenced so that it is not visible from a public right-of-way; 
(5)  Shall be maintained to minimize odors; 
(6)  Shall not be allowed to attract rodents or to become a health or safety hazard; and 
(7)  Shall be located a minimum of three feet from any adjoining property line. 
8-1-5. - Containers: 
(A)  Dumpsters/Roll-Offs: It shall be unlawful for a person in a one- or two-family dwelling to maintain trash dumpsters one cubic yard or larger without prior written authorization from a code enforcement officer. Persons storing or placing trash in a dumpster or roll-off shall do so in such a manner as to prevent the trash from being strewn or scattered. This section shall not apply to one- and two-family dwellings that have a valid building permit issued by the City of Westminster Building Division. 
(B)  Movable Crate/Storage Unit: These units are defined as receptacles, used for temporary storage, which are designed to be moved from one location to another. It shall be unlawful for a person to maintain a movable crate/storage unit on a premises for a period of time exceeding 30 days without prior written authorization from a Code Enforcement Officer. 
(C)  Outdoor Refrigerator, Freezer or Self-Locking Container: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to remain outside of a building/garage any icebox, refrigerator, freezer, or self-locking container. 
8-1-6. - Establishment of Dumping Grounds. 
    The City Manager is authorized and empowered to establish within or without the City limits a dumping ground for the use of the City, its employees and agents. 
8-1-7. - Garage Sales. 
    Garage sales are defined as any type of sales activity, including, but not limited to, neighborhood or block sales, yard sales, estate sales, craft sales, rummage sales or clothing sales. 
(A)  Duration: It shall be unlawful for a person to conduct a garage sale for a period of time exceeding three consecutive days in duration. 
(B)  Frequency: It shall be unlawful for a person to conduct more than one garage sale in any 90-day period. 
8-1-8. - General Property Standards. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to maintain a premises except in compliance with the following requirements: 
(A)  Exterior Maintenance: 
(1)  The exterior finish of all structures shall be maintained in good repair, free of defect and shall be maintained prior to a time when that finish has substantially deteriorated. The exterior finish must consist of materials commonly used and meeting industry standards of acceptable construction. 
(2)  All architectural projections, such as cornices, moldings, lintels, sills and similar projections, shall be maintained in good repair and free of defects. 
(3)  All chimneys, vents, gutters, downspouts, light fixtures, roofing or building accessories shall be structurally sound, in good repair and shall be properly secured to an exterior wall or roof. 
(B)  Windows and Doors: Windows and exterior glazing shall be sound, free from cracks and loose and broken glass and be capable of being secured in a closed position. Doors and windows shall be maintained weather tight, watertight and rodent proof. All screening and awnings shall be maintained in good repair and free from tears, holes, or other imperfections. 
(C)  Fences and Retaining Walls: All fences and retaining walls shall be in good repair, be structurally sound, in an upright position, and the exterior finish in good repair and free of defect. If the fencing contains slats, all slats must be present and complete in length. 
(D)  Landscaping: All landscape areas shall be maintained in compliance with the provisions of Westminster Municipal Code Title XI, Chapter 7, site development standards, as amended. 
(E)  Auxiliary Structures: All auxiliary structures shall be maintained in a state of good repair or removed from the site. Such structures shall include, but not be limited to, tree houses, club houses, well houses, carports, garages, and miscellaneous sheds or structures. These structures shall be constructed of materials consistent for the use of the structure, and shall be structurally sound. Temporary tents/canopies and skateboard ramps shall be restricted to a backyard. 
(F)  Parking Lots: The parking lot(s) of commercial establishments or multi-family buildings shall be kept free from potholes, cracks or other deterioration. No dirt, grass or sod parking areas are allowed. All striping and signage, including, but not limited to, parking signage and fire lane or access signage shall be maintained in good condition and clearly legible. 
8-1-9. - Graffiti. 
    Graffiti is defined as a message, symbol, inscription or drawing painted, scratched or written on any surface. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to remove or eradicate graffiti from a premises within seven days of defacement. The term "graffiti" does not apply to legally permitted signage. 
8-1-10. - Sidewalks. 
(A)  Removal of Snow or Ice: It shall be unlawful for any person to allow snow or ice to remain on any sidewalk open to the public and abutting or adjoining the property controlled, owned or occupied by such person after 24 hours of the last measurable snowfall or snow drift. 
(B)  Obstructions: It shall be unlawful for any person to allow obstructions to remain on any sidewalk, curb or gutter open to the public and abutting or adjoining the property controlled, owned or occupied by such person. For purposes of this section, obstructions include, but are not limited to, piles of materials, vegetation, weeds, portable basketball hoops, structures, or any other physical object located within the width of the sidewalk, curb or gutter or obstructions located less than seven feet above the sidewalk. An exception is made for lawfully parked motor vehicles. 
(C)  Civil Liability: Any person who controls, owns or occupies property that abuts or adjoins any sidewalk open to the public owes a duty to all persons using such sidewalk to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Any person injured by the breach of such duty shall have a cause of action for damages against the person who failed to comply with such duty, it being the express intent of this section to impose civil liability on private property owners for injuries incurred on public sidewalks within the city as a result of a failure by any such private property owner to comply with this chapter. 
8-1-11. - Household Trash, Junk or Debris. 
(A)  Definitions: 
(1)  Household trash is defined to include, but is not limited to, items such as rubbish, trash, waste, refuse, paper, tin cans, bottles, glass, containers, rags, ashes, bones, cloth, or other materials common to household use or objects that may become a breeding place for flies, mosquitoes, or vermin, or that give off unpleasant odors. 
(2)  Junk or debris shall mean any material or object, used or new, that is not presently useable or designed to be used in their existing condition or location, such as scrap metals, rubber pieces, rope, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, bricks, crates, cartons, barrels, boxes, tree limbs, leaves, dead plants and trees, trimmings from plants and trees, grass clippings, tools, fixtures, utensils, lumber, pipe and pipe fittings, machinery or parts thereof, appliances, vending machines, furniture, motor vehicle parts or tires, or any waste material from the premises, including building materials for or produced from remodeling or construction, and material. 
(B)  Household Trash Containers: It shall be unlawful for a person to maintain household trash at a premises except in compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)  All household trash shall be stored wholly-contained and enclosed in a liquid-tight container having a tight-fitting cover. 
(2)  Household trash containers stored outside prior to trash removal service shall be limited to eight in number, and cannot be stored in a front yard, a side yard facing the street or a backyard facing a street. 
(3)  There is no restriction to the number of household trash containers when placed out for household trash removal, provided the containers are put out no sooner than 24 hours prior to scheduled trash removal service. Plastic bags or cardboard boxes are deemed suitable containers only for the purpose of placing household trash out the day of trash removal service. Household trash containers must be returned to their permissible storage area within 24 hours after the scheduled trash removal service. 
(C)  Keeping of Junk or Debris: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, maintain or permit to remain, or store, keep or allow to be stored or kept, any junk or debris on any lot or parcel of land unless such junk or debris is kept in a building/garage, except junk or debris may be stored for a period of time not to exceed 14 days in/on a trailer or in a truck bed, fully covered and secured. 
(D)  Unlawful Dumping: It shall be unlawful for any person to place trash or junk in any trash receptacle located on private property that he does not own or have the legal right to possess, unless the person has written permission from the owner or lessee of the property. 
8-1-12. - Prohibited Vehicles/Vehicle Accessories. 
(A)  Prohibited Vehicles: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to store or keep or permit to be stored or kept any vehicle, or parts thereof, that are inoperable or obviously not in a roadworthy condition, including a vehicle with a flat tire or tires, excessively leaking fluids, broken, damaged or missing head lamps, tail lamps, blinkers, windshield, rear window, windshield wipers, or not bearing proper and current registration plates, unless such vehicle is stored in a building/garage. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for vehicles on any city street or roadway bearing proper and current license plates to remain stationary or unused for more than 15 consecutive days. 
(B)  Recreational Use Vehicles: 
(1)  Shall be defined as a motorized or non-motorized device designed for recreational purposes, such as, but not limited to ski-doos, snowmobiles, mopeds, dirt bikes, all-terrain vehicles, canoes, boats and go-carts. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to store recreational use vehicles unless said vehicles are visibly operable, and are stored in a backyard not facing a street, in a building/garage, or on a trailer that bears proper and current license plates. 
(C)  Camper, Camper Shell or Truck Bed Topper: 
(1)  Shall be defined as any non-wheeled, detachable piece of vehicular equipment that has no independent motor power and that is capable of being placed on a vehicle, but that is not capable of being towed. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for a person to store an un-mounted camper, camper shell or truck bed topper, unless such items are stored in a backyard not facing a street, in a building/garage, or in a side yard not facing a street that is paved with concrete or asphalt or is solidly rocked or graveled. 
8-1-13. - Plant Materials. 
(A)  Weeds: 
(1)  Shall be defined as any useless, troublesome or injurious plant, including all vegetation that has grown to maturity or to a height in excess of 12 inches, but shall not include flower gardens, shrubbery, vegetable gardens, small grain plots and pastures used for feed, fodder or forage, provided the same are adequately weeded and maintained. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, maintain, or permit to remain on any premises, excluding open space property owned by the City, a county, or other public entity any accumulation of weeds on any premises, on or along the sidewalk, street, or alley adjacent to any premises, or between the property line and the curb or middle of the alley, or for ten feet outside the property line if there is no curb. 
(B)  Noxious Plants: 
(1)  Shall be defined as any plant species designated or identified as noxious weeds pursuant to Title 35, Article 5.5, C.R.S., as amended. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, maintain, or permit to remain any noxious plant, regardless of condition of said plant. 
(C)  Turf: 
(1)  Shall be defined as a grouping of grasses that grow in very close proximity to form a living surface at the ground plane. Turf is generally an area of the ground plane intended to be/or could be walked on and, when regularly mowed, forms a dense growth of leaf blades and root. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, maintain, or permit to remain any turf in excess of six inches in height. 
(D)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, maintain, or permit to remain any plant material, including trees, shrubs, groundcovers, vines and turf that does not have a 100 percent ongoing survival rate. 
8-1-14. - Open Wells, Cisterns, and Excavations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, maintain, or permit to remain on any premises any excavation exceeding five feet in depth, or any cistern, well or other excavation used for storage of water, unless they are adequately covered with a locked lid or other covering weighing at least 60 pounds, or are enclosed with a continuous secured fence to a height of at least five feet. This section shall not apply to an active construction project. 
8-1-15. - Interference: 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person, by using or threatening to use, violence, force, or physical interference, or obstacle, to knowingly obstruct, impair, or hinder a code enforcement officer or peace officer in the discharge of the duties as herein prescribed. 
(B)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the Code Enforcement Officer or peace officer was acting in an illegal manner, if the officer was acting in the regular course of assigned duties and in good faith, based upon surrounding facts and circumstances. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to reveal his/her correct name, address, and date of birth when requested to do so by a code enforcement officer or peace officer engaged in any of the duties prescribed herein. 
8-1-16. - Enforcement. 
(A)  Violation: Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine pursuant to Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. Each day that a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter continues to exist shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct violation. 
(B)  Public Nuisance: The condition of any real property in violation of Sections 8-1-4 through 8-1-14, W.M.C., is hereby declared to be a public nuisance that may be abated pursuant to the provisions for the abatement of nuisances established in this Code. 
(C)  Summary Abatement: 
(1)  The follow violations of this chapter may be summarily abated: 
(a)  If a person fails to maintain any icebox, refrigerator, freezer or self-locking container as required by this chapter; 
(b)  If a person fails, neglects or refuses to remove snow or ice from any public sidewalk as required by this chapter; 
(c)  If a person fails, neglects or refuses to remove an obstruction from any sidewalk, curb or gutter as required by this chapter; and 
(d)  If a person fails to maintain plant materials as required by this chapter. 
(2)  In the event that the provisions of this chapter that may be summarily abated are violated, the city manager or his representative may cause notice requiring compliance with the provisions of this chapter to be served to a responsible party, either personally or by mail, or by posting of the property. Posting of the property shall be by a sign not less than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches, with letters not less than one-fourth inch in height. Posting or written notice served personally or by mail upon a responsible party shall be deemed to comply with the notice provisions of this chapter. In the case of violations occurring on private property where the owner of such property is a responsible party, the notice by mail shall be sent to the address shown in the county assessor records for the county in which the property is located. In the case of violations occurring on property for which the responsible party is not the owner, the notice by mail shall be sent to the most recent mailing address available to the City for that responsible party. In any case, the posting of such property by the City shall be deemed adequate notice. Notice shall be effective upon personal service or posting, or if by mail, upon the fifth day after mailing of the notice. 
If the responsible party upon whom said notice is served fails, neglects, or refuses to timely correct the violation within the deadline stated in said notice, the City Manager or his representative may cause the necessary work to be performed at the expense of such responsible party, and the cost of such abatement shall be a first and prior lien on the property, as provided by Title I, Chapter 31 of this Code, and may be assessed and collected pursuant to Section 8-4-5, W.M.C. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, trash or junk may be summarily abated from public property without notice or judicial procedure. 
CHAPTER 4. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT 

8-4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Action to abate a public nuisance shall mean any action brought in the Municipal Court to declare and then restrain, remove, terminate, prevent, abate, or perpetually enjoin a public nuisance. 
    Administrative officer shall mean the City Manager, Community Development Director, Code Enforcement Supervisor, Fire Chief, Chief of Police, or Chief Building Official. 
    Building shall mean any dwelling, office building, store, warehouse, or structure of any kind, whether or not the building is permanently affixed to the ground upon which it is located, and any trailer, semi-trailer, mobile home, or any other vehicle designed or used for occupancy by persons for any purpose. 
    Person shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or agent, servant, or employee of any individual, partnership, corporation, association or other type of organization. 
8-4-2. - Nuisance Defined; Violation Subject to Contempt. 
(A)  The following are deemed to be a public nuisance: 
(1)  Any building, land, substance or personal property, the use or condition of which presents a substantial danger or hazard to the physical health or safety of the public, or used for any purpose that is in violation of the provisions of the official code of the City of Westminster. 
(2)  The conducting or maintaining of any business, occupation, operation, or activity in violation of the provisions of the Official Code of the City of Westminster. 
(3)  Any business, occupation, operation, activity, or any building, land, substance, or personal property, the use or condition of which has been identified as a public nuisance in the Official Code of the City of Westminster, the Colorado Revised Statutes, or the common law. 
(4)  Any parcel of real property, personal property, or motor vehicle within the City where the property owner intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or through criminal negligence: 
(a)  Encourages, allows, facilitates, promotes, permits, or aids in the commission of any proscribed act on the property, or 
(b)  Encourages, allows, facilitates, promotes, permits, or aids in the immediate flight to or from the property of any person who committed any proscribed act, where that flight is partly for the purpose of concealing or avoiding law enforcement contact related to any proscribed act, or 
(c)  Fails to immediately make a good faith effort to prevent any property occupant, and/or the property occupant's guests, invitees, licensees, employees, or agents from re-committing any proscribed act upon the property, through appropriate court action or by otherwise removing and prohibiting the return of any such person, once that property owner has actual knowledge that proscribed acts are occurring on the property, or once that property owner has been provided reasonable notice that proscribed acts are being committed on the property by the property occupants, and/or their guests, invitees, licensees, employees, or agents. 
(d)  The following are proscribed acts for purposes of this Section. Where a proscribed act references a section of the Colorado Revised Statutes (C.R.S.), the activity shall have the same meaning or definition as contained within the C.R.S. but shall not require that the activity was charged or prosecuted to a final judgment before this Section applies. For purposes of this Chapter where a Proscribed Act references a section of the Westminster Municipal Code (W.M.C.), the activity shall have the same meaning or definition as contained within the W.M.C. but shall not require that the activity was charged or prosecuted to a final judgment before this article applies. 
i.  Prostitution, C.R.S. § 18-7-201; soliciting for prostitution, C.R.S. § 18-7-202; pandering, C.R.S. § 18-7-203; keeping a place of prostitution, C.R.S. § 18-7-204; or pimping, C.R.S. § 18-7-206; 
ii.  Professional gambling, C.R.S. § 18-10-102(8); maintaining a gambling premises, C.R.S. § 18-10-102(5); or keeping of a gambling device or record, C.R.S. §§ 18-10-102(3) and 18-10-102(7); 
iii.  Unlawful manufacture, cultivation, growth, production, processing, sale, distribution, storage, use, transportation, or possession of any controlled substance, C.R.S. §§ 18-18-102, 18-18-402, 18-18-403, 18-18-404, 18-18-405, 18-18-406; any imitation controlled substance, C.R.S. §§ 18-18-420(3), 18-18-421, 18-18-422; or any counterfeit controlled substance, C.R.S. § 18-18-423, except for simple possession of less than eight ounces of marijuana; 
iv.  Felony or misdemeanor theft by receiving, C.R.S. § 18-4-410; 
v.  Unlawful manufacture, sale, advertisement, or distribution of drug paraphernalia, C.R.S. §§ 18-18-426, 18-18-427, 18-18-429, 18-18-430; 
vi.  Prostitution of a child, C.R.S. § 18-7-401; soliciting for child prostitution, C.R.S. § 18-7-402; pandering of a child, C.R.S. § 18-7-403; keeping a place of child prostitution, C.R.S. § 18-7-404; pimping of a child, C.R.S. § 18-7-405; or inducement of child prostitution, C.R.S. § 18-7-405.5; 
vii.  Sexual exploitation of children, C.R.S. § 18-6-403; 
viii.  Two or more offenses of disturbing the peace within any 180-day period, 6-2-3 W.M.C.; 
ix.  Unlawful discharge of firearms, deadly weapons, or destructive devices, 6-2-9 W.M.C., or any offense relating to illegal weapons, 6-2-11 W.M.C.; 
x.  Any drive-by crime, C.R.S. § 16-13-301(2.2); 
xi.  Three or more offenses within any one-year period of selling, serving, giving away, disposing of, exchanging, delivering, or permitting the sale, serving, giving or procuring of any malt, vinous, or spirituous liquor, or fermented malt beverage, to or for any person under lawful age or to a visibly intoxicated person, C.R.S. § 12-47-901(1)(a). Each incident, to be counted as a separate offense within the meaning of this Section, must occur on separate dates and rely on discrete facts; 
xii.  The sale at retail of any malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors, or fermented malt beverages in sealed containers, or the manufacture, sale, or possession for sale of any malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors, without holding a valid license in full force and effect to do so under C.R.S. Title 12, Article 47, C.R.S. §§ 12-47-901(1)(f) and (g); 
xiii.  The unlawful transportation or storage of any property that is the subject of a felony theft, misdemeanor theft, or theft by receiving under C.R.S. Title 18; 
xiv.  The storage or concealment of weapons or tools used in the commission of crimes of violence, C.R.S. § 16-11-309, drive-by offenses, C.R.S. § 16-13-301, unlawful discharge of firearms, deadly weapons, or destructive devices, 6-2-9 W.M.C., or any offense relating to illegal weapons, 6-2-11 W.M.C.; 
xv.  Vehicular eluding, C.R.S. § 18-9-116.5, or eluding or attempting to elude a police officer, C.R.S. § 42-4-1413; 
xvi.  Speed contests, C.R.S. § 42-4-1105; 
xvii.  Driving after revocation prohibited, C.R.S. § 42-2-206; 
xviii.  Sexual assaults or attempted sexual assaults, C.R.S. §§ 18-2-101, 18-3-402, 18-3-404, 18-3-405, 18-3-405.3, 18-3-405.5; 
xix.  Indecent exposure, C.R.S. § 18-7-302; 
xx.  Keeping, maintaining, controlling, renting, or making available property for unlawful distribution or manufacture of controlled substances, C.R.S. § 18-18-411; or the unlawful possession of materials to make amphetamine and methamphetamine, C.R.S. § 18-18-412.5; or, the unlawful sale or distribution of materials to manufacture controlled substances, C.R.S. § 18-18-412.7; or possession of one or more chemicals or supplies or equipment with intent to manufacture a controlled substance, C.R.S. § 18-18-405; 
xxi.  Criminal mischief where the aggregate damage exceeds $1,000.00, C.R.S. § 18-4-501; 
xxii.  Impersonation of a police officer, C.R.S. § 18-8-112, 6-5-6, W.M.C.; 
xxiii.  Illegal dumping or littering, 6-18-1, W.M.C., household trash, junk, or debris, 8-1-11, W.M.C.; 
xxiv.  Possession of drug paraphernalia, 6-12-6, W.M.C.; 
xxv.  Disorderly conduct, 6-2-1, W.M.C.; 
xxvi.  Any and all acts prohibited under C.R.S. Title 18, Article 8, Part 2, escape and offenses relating to custody. 
(B)  Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine or imprisonment or both, pursuant to Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. Each day that a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter continues to exist shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct violation. 
(C)  Whenever, in a criminal or non-criminal prosecution under this Code, the Municipal Court finds the existence of a nuisance, the court is authorized to abate the nuisance and assess costs in the same fashion as if a civil abatement proceeding had been commenced under Title VIII, Chapter 4 of this Code. 
(D)  Any violation of any injunction or order issued by the Municipal Court in an action to abate a public nuisance may be punished as a contempt of court or by a fine as specified in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. Unless the violation by its nature cannot be corrected, each day's failure to comply with an injunction or order to abate shall constitute a separate violation, for which an additional penalty may be imposed. 
(1634 1646 1999 2523 3564; Ord. No. 3975 , § 1, 3-25-2019) 
8-4-3. - Complaint of Nuisance, Right of Entry in Emergency. 
(A)  A person may make a complaint of the existence of a public nuisance to a Code Enforcement Officer, a Community Service Officer, a Fire Marshal, a member of City Council, the City Manager or his designee, or the code enforcement supervisor. Such complaint shall include, whenever possible, the nature of the public nuisance, the location, including the address, the name of the owner, occupant, or manager of the property, the duration of the nuisance and the name and address of the complainant. Complaints shall be referred to the appropriate Code Enforcement Officer, Community Service Officer, or Fire Marshal. 
(B)  Whenever an administrative officer has reason to believe that a public nuisance exists, and that such public nuisance constitutes an emergency presenting imminent danger of serious injury to persons or property, the Administrative Officer, his authorized representative, a Fire Marshal, a community service officer or a police officer may immediately enter into any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the City of Westminster for purposes of inspection or abatement. 
(1634 1999 3683) 
8-4-4. - Summary Abatement; Notice to Abate; Action to Abate a Public Nuisance. 
(A)  Whenever a public nuisance exists that constitutes an emergency presenting imminent danger of serious injury to persons or property, an administrative officer may order without notice or judicial action that the public nuisance be summarily abated by removal, destruction or mitigation. The cost of abatement shall be paid by the owner of the property upon which the nuisance existed, pursuant to the procedures established in subsection 8-4-5(B), W.M.C. 
(B)  Unless a specific provision of this Code states otherwise, when a public nuisance does not require summary abatement, a code enforcement, community service or police officer or Fire Marshal may prepare and serve a notice to abate on the owner, manager, occupant or possessor of any property that constitutes the public nuisance or the person conducting or maintaining the business, occupation, operation, or activity that constitutes the public nuisance. Such notice shall: 
(1)  State that, if the nuisance is not abated within seven days, an action may be brought in the Municipal Court to abate the nuisance and that the costs of abatement, plus ten percent of such costs for inspection, and other additional administrative costs, may be assessed against the person found by the court to have caused, allowed to be caused or allowed to continue the public nuisance, and such costs may become a lien upon any property on which the abatement was performed. 
(2)  Be in writing, signed by the official issuing the notice, and be served, either personally or by means of posting on the premises upon which the nuisance exists. If notice is served by posting, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record of the property at his last known address. 
(C)  When a public nuisance has not been voluntarily abated within the time specified in the notice to abate, the following procedure shall apply: 
(1)  The City may bring an action in the Municipal Court to have the nuisance declared as such by the court and for an order enjoining the public nuisance or authorizing its restraint, removal, termination or abatement by the owner or the person who caused the nuisance or the person who allowed the nuisance to be caused or to continue, or an administrative officer, his authorized representative, a police officer, a code enforcement officer, a community service officer or any person under contract with the City to perform such services. 
(2)  The action to declare and abate a public nuisance shall be brought by the City in the name of the people of the City, by the filing of a complaint, which shall be verified or supported by an affidavit. Summons shall be issued and served as in civil cases, and any employee of the City of Westminster who is over the age of 18, may serve the summons and verified complaint upon the respondent. Trial shall be to the court. 
(3)  A notice of appearance shall be served with the summons and complaint. The appearance date shall be not less than 21 days from the date of service of the summons and complaint. The trial shall be held upon the appearance date, unless the court grants a continuance for good cause shown. 
(4)  The respondent shall file a response on or before the appearance date set forth in the notice of appearance. 
(5)  Upon the date and at the time set for appearance and trial, if the respondent has filed no response and fails to appear, and if the City proves that proper service was made on the respondent at least 21 days prior to the appearance date, the court may grant such orders as are requested by the City; except that, the court shall order that enforcement by the City be stayed for ten days and that a copy of the court's order be mailed to the respondent at his last known address. Failure to appear on any other date set for trial shall be grounds for entering a default and judgment thereon against a non-appearing party. For good cause shown, and prior to enforcement, the court may set aside an entry of default and the judgment entered thereon. 
(6)  The judgment of the municipal court may be appealed to the district court. 
(D)  The remedies specified in this section shall be in addition to all other remedies provided by law. 
(1634 1646 1661 1999 3683) 
8-4-5. - Assessment and Collection of Costs of Abatement. 
(A)  A person found by the court to have caused a public nuisance or allowed the nuisance to be caused or to continue shall be liable for the costs specified in subsection 8-4-5(B), W.M.C. Such costs may be collected by the City in a civil action or assessed and filed as a lien against any property on which the abatement was performed as specified in this section. 
(B)  If the costs of abatement have not been otherwise collected, the City Manager shall prepare a statement enumerating the actual costs of abatement and collection plus ten percent of the abatement costs for inspection and other administrative costs. The costs enumerated in this statement shall be a first and prior lien upon the property relating back to the date upon which the abatement was performed. 
    A copy of this statement shall be deposited in the United States mail or personally hand delivered to the owner. The owner may request a hearing before the City Finance Director to contest the amount of the costs. Such request must be made in writing and be filed with the Finance Director within 30 days of the date of mailing or service of the first statement to the owner. The owner shall be given at least two weeks written notice of the date, time and place of any hearing scheduled before the Finance Director. The decision of the Finance Director shall be final. If the statement remains unpaid, the amount shall be certified by the Finance Director to the County Treasurer of the county in which the property is located, as provided by Title I, Chapter 31 of this Code. 
(1634 1680 1805 1999) 
8-4-6. - Specific Nuisances Declared. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, maintain or permit a public nuisance. Public nuisance shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following acts or conditions: 
(A)  Fire Hazards: Dry or dead shrubs, dead trees, combustible refuse, waste, and liquids, or any material growing on a street, sidewalk or upon private property within the City, which by reason of its size, manner of growth and location constitutes a fire hazard to a building, improvement, crop or other property, or when dry, will in reasonable probability constitute a fire hazard. 
(B)  Hazardous Obstructions: An obstacle, landscaping, or thing installed or maintained in the sight triangle reaching a height higher than 30 inches above the adjoining top of the curb at the applicable corner of the street intersection, or 30 inches above the nearest pavement surface where there is no curb, or the existing traveled roadway at the corner in question where there is no curb or pavement. The sight triangle is that area adjacent to street intersections required to be free of visual obstructions as found in the most recent edition of "City of Westminster Standards and Specifications for the Design and Construction of Public Improvements." Hazardous obstructions do not include existing or future permanent buildings otherwise constructed or maintained in accordance with applicable zoning and building regulations, public utility poles, and trees trimmed at the trunk at least eight feet above the level of the ground surface, provided that such trees are spaced so that trunks do not obstruct the vision of motorists. 
(C)  Polluted Water: A swimming pool, pond or other body of water that is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered, or not otherwise maintained, resulting in the water becoming polluted, or any standing or flowing water from a septic tank, cesspool, or sewer service line. For purposes of this section, "polluted water" means water contained in a swimming pool, pond, or other body of water, which contains one or more of the following: bacterial growth, including algae; remains of insects; remains of deceased animals; reptiles; rubbish; feces; refuse; debris; papers; and any other foreign matter or material that because of its nature or location constitutes an unhealthy, unsafe or unsightly condition. 
(D)  Public Burning: The intentional outdoor burning of any material, structure, matter or thing, other than for the purpose of food preparation, unless specifically authorized by appropriate permit. 
(E)  Maintenance of Property: Owning, leasing, occupying, managing or having possession of any premises in this City in such manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon: 
(1)  The premises are a detriment to public health, safety or general welfare; 
(2)  The premises are so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use, or property values of such adjacent properties. 
(3)  The premises are abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed, or left unreasonably in a state of partial construction. 
(4)  Buildings have dry rot, warping, or termite infestation. 
(F)  Parking in Required Front Yard or Side Yard of Residential Property: Parking a vehicle on the front yard or side yard adjacent to the street of a residential property in violation of Section 10-1-12, W.M.C. 
(G)  Vehicles Containing Trash or Junk: A truck or other vehicle that contains trash or junk in the bed or open trunk of the truck or other vehicle, parked on any street or public right-of-way, unless such junk or trash is completely and securely covered. 
(1634 1999 3338 3564) 
CHAPTER 5. - SOLID FUEL BURNING RESTRICTIONS 

8-5-1. - Legislative Intent. 
    The City Council finds and declares that the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Westminster are adversely affected by the degradation of the air quality within the City limits; and further, that solid fuel combustion produces particulate matter and carbon monoxide which is physically harmful, aesthetically unpleasant, and contributes to the degradation of the air quality. The City Council further declares that it is the responsibility of every person owning or operating a solid fuel-fired heating device to be aware of any declaration of a high pollution day issued by the Colorado Department of Health. 
(1742 1999) 
8-5-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Barbecue device shall mean a device that is utilized solely for the purpose of cooking food. 
    High pollution day shall mean a period of time designated as a high pollution day by the Colorado Department of Health. 
    Operation shall mean the burning of solid fuel in a solid fuel-firing heating device. 
    Person shall mean any person or entity that owns or occupies or has legal possession of a structure. 
    Sole source of heat shall mean one or more solid fuel-fired heating devices that constitute the only source of heat in a structure for the purpose of space heating. A solid fuel-fired heating device shall be considered to be the sole source of heat when no other means of space heat is in place. A heating device that is disconnected from its energy source, including, but not limited to, heating oil, natural gas, electricity, or propane, shall be considered to be in place. When the structure is not receiving the electric or natural gas service necessary for utilizing the heating device, it shall not be considered to be in place. 
    Solid fuel shall mean a substance that is neither liquid nor gas. 
    Solid fuel-fired heating device shall mean a device designed for solid fuel combustion located within the interior of a structure and includes, without limitation, solid fuel burning stoves, combination fuel furnaces or boilers that burn solid fuel, or any other devices used for the burning of solid fuel. Solid fuel-fired heating devices do not include barbecue devices. 
(1742 1999) 
8-5-3. - Solid Fuel Prohibition. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have a solid fuel-fired heating device in operation during a high pollution day. It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge under this subsection (A) that a person has obtained an exemption pursuant to Section 8-5-4, W.M.C. 
(B)  The Municipal Court Judge shall take judicial notice of any declaration of a high pollution day issued by the Colorado Department of Health. 
(C)  In order to allow a period for the burn down of existing fires, the Code Enforcement Officer shall wait three hours after the commencement of a high pollution day before enforcing the provisions of subsection (A) of this section. 
(1742 1999) 
8-5-4. - Exemption Criteria; Procedure; Duration. 
(A)  A person may apply to the department of community development to obtain a temporary certificate of exemption based on any of the following criteria: 
(1)  Demonstration of Economic Need. A person may demonstrate economic need to use a solid fuel-fired heating device by demonstrating that he has been determined to be eligible for energy assistance under the low income energy assistance program administered by either Adams or Jefferson County. 
(2)  Sole Source of Heat. To obtain this exemption, a person must demonstrate that the solid fuel-fired heating device is the sole source of heat. 
(3)  Device Meets Emissions Criteria. To obtain this exemption, a person must demonstrate that the solid fuel-fired heating device meets the following criteria: 
(a)  When tested in accordance with the provisions of 5 CCR 1001-6, Appendix A, Colorado Air Quality Control Commission Regulation Number 4, or by an equivalent test, the device emits particulates at a rate that is less than or equal to six and one-tenth grams per hour and emits carbon monoxide at a rate that is less than or equal to 75 grams per hour; or 
(b)  When tested in accordance with the provisions of 5 CCR 1001-6, Appendix B, Colorado Air Quality Control Commission Regulation Number 4, or by an equivalent test, the device emits particulates at a rate that is less than or equal to four and thirty-two hundredths grams per hour and emits carbon monoxide at a rate that is less than or equal to 75 grams per hour. 
(B)  The department of community development shall establish procedures for the issuance of temporary certificates of exemption. 
(C)  An exemption obtained under this section shall be effective for one year from the date it is granted. 
(1742 1999) 
8-5-5. - Enforcement. 
    Any person found guilty of a violation of subsection 8-5-3(A), W.M.C., shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $300.00. 
(1742 1999) 
CHAPTER 6. - AIR POLLUTION CONTROL 

8-6-1. - Open Burning. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or permit to be burned on any open premises owned or controlled by him, or on any public street, alley or other land adjacent to such premises, any rubbish, waste paper, wood, or other flammable material, unless a permit therefor shall first have been obtained from the Westminster Fire Department. 
(B)  The granting of any such permit shall be in accordance with the standards established in Article 11 of the Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the City. Permits shall be required for all open or outdoor fires, including, but not limited to, burning in the course of any agricultural operation in the growing of crops as a gainful occupation, and fires used for instructional or recreational purposes. 
(C)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Fires used for noncommercial cooking of food for human beings, such as barbecues. 
(2)  Smokeless flares, or safety flares for the combustion of waste gases. 
(3)  Flares used to indicate some danger to the public. 
(544 1999) 
8-6-2. - Incinerator Burning. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any combustible refuse in any incinerator within the City, except in accordance with the terms of a permit issued by the Westminster Fire Department for an approved multiple chamber incinerator or in equipment equally effective for the purpose of air pollution control as an approved multiple chamber incinerator. 
(544 1999) 
8-6-3. - Emissions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to fail to comply with the emission standards or air pollution standards established by the Tri-County Health Department or the Jefferson County Health Department, as applicable, or established by the State of Colorado or federal statutes or regulations. If such standards are in conflict, the most restrictive standard shall apply. 
(1999) 
8-6-4. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined or imprisoned or both as specified in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. Each day that a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter continues to exist shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct violation. 
(1999) 
8-6-5. - Gasoline Powered Engines Regulated: General; Purpose. 
    This ordinance is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Westminster through the reduction, prevention and control of air pollution. It is the intent of this ordinance to establish and provide for the enforcement of air quality standards that will assure that ambient air be adequately pure and free from smoke, contamination, pollutants or synergistic agents injurious to humans, plant life, animal life or property, or that interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property or the conduct of business. 
(1051 1999) 
8-6-6. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, and all regulations adopted hereunder, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Air contaminant (pollutant) shall mean any fume, odor, smoke, particulate matter, vapor, gas or any combination thereof, but not including water vapor or steam condensate. 
    Air pollution shall mean the presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or more air contaminants. 
    Ambient air shall mean the surrounding or outside air. 
    Atmosphere shall mean the air that envelops or surrounds the earth. 
    Emission or emit shall mean to discharge, release or to permit or cause the discharge of or release of one or more air contaminants into the atmosphere. 
    Engine shall mean any internal combustion machine, such as is found in motor vehicles that utilize gas or liquid fuel for combustion energy. 
    Nuisance shall mean the doing of or the failure to do something that allows or permits air contaminants to escape into the open air that are or tend to be detrimental to the health, comfort, safety, or welfare of the public, or that causes or tends to cause substantial annoyance, inconvenience, or injury to persons exposed thereto, or causes or tends to cause damage to property. 
    Person shall mean any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, company, contractor, supplier, installer, user or owner and shall include any municipal corporation, State or federal government agency, district or any officer or employee thereof. 
    Shall or must are words that shall be deemed to be mandatory. 
(1051 1999) 
8-6-7. - Emissions from Gasoline Powered Engines. 
    No persons shall emit from any gasoline powered engine any visible air contaminate(s). Such emissions that are a direct result of cold engine start up shall be exempt. 
(1051 1185 1999) 
8-6-8. - Summons for Violation. 
(A)  When a gasoline engine is found to be emitting air contaminants in violation of this section, a summons shall be served on the owner or operator thereof, requiring an appearance in municipal court on the regular court arraignment date next closest to the expiration of 40 days thereafter to answer charges of violation of this ordinance. 
(B)  Within the period set forth above, the person summoned shall either repair the engine to comply with the standards of this ordinance or cease operating the vehicle within the City of Westminster. 
(C)  Presumption: It shall be presumed that any vehicle operating in violation of Section 8-6-7, W.M.C., with respect to visible air contaminants is also emitting non-visible air contaminants. 
(D)  Repair and Testing: If, prior to the court appearance date, the vehicle that is the subject of the summons issued pursuant to Section 8-6-8, W.M.C., is repaired and found to be in compliance with all State vehicle air pollution standards after a test administered by any vehicle test facility of the Colorado Air Pollution Control Commission, the summons shall be dismissed without further proceedings. Such compliance shall be evidenced by an appropriate written document from the test facility. 
(1051 1999) 
8-6-9. - Prohibited Acts. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to operate or to permit operation of any gasoline engine found to be in violation of the standards set forth in Section 8-6-7, W.M.C. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to misrepresent or give any false or inaccurate information or in any other way attempt to deceive a licensed repair garage or the health department in order to avoid compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any licensed repair garage or its agents to misrepresent any fact, falsely certify any repair or in any other way attempt to mislead the health department into believing that air pollution standards are being met. 
(D)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, stop, park, or for the owner or person in charge of any vehicle to cause or knowingly permit to be driven, stopped or parked on any street or highway within the City of Westminster, any vehicle that is required under the laws of the State of Colorado to be inspected pursuant to the automobile inspection and readjustment program, established pursuant to Sections 42-4-306.5 to 42-4-316, C.R.S., as amended, unless such vehicle has been inspected at an authorized inspection station and has attached thereto, in proper position, a valid and unexpired certification of emissions control, as required by the laws of the State of Colorado. 
(1)  In any prosecution of the provisions of this section, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint was driven, parked or stopped in violation of this section, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such driving, stopping or parking, a registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the person who drove, parked, stopped or knowingly permitted to be driven, stopped or parked, such unattended vehicle at the place where, and for the time that such violation occurred. 
(2)  Any person who violates any provision of subsection (D) is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 or more than the amount specified in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(3)  An officer coming upon an unattended vehicle in the City that is in apparent violation of this subsection (D) may place upon such vehicle a penalty assessment notice, indicating the offense and directing the owner or operator of such vehicle to remit a penalty assessment of $25.00 to the City of Westminster. 
(1388 1999) 
8-6-10. - Nuisance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle to emit air contaminants that constitute a nuisance as defined in Section 8-6-6(G), W.M.C. 
(1051 1999) 
8-6-11. - Offenses; Penalty. 
(A)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this section or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each provision violated shall be deemed a separate offense. Each day's violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(B)  Any person guilty of an offense may be fined as specified in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1051 1563 1999 2000) 
8-6-12. - Adoption of State Provisions. 
    The provisions of Sections 25-7-115 through 25-7-118, C.R.S., as amended, inclusive, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as though herein set out in full, so far as applicable. 
(1051 1999 3634) 
8-6-13. - Legislative Intent. 
    The City Council finds and declares that air pollution is a threat to the health and welfare of Westminster citizens and that a major contributor to said pollution is wood smoke. The City Council further finds that new technologies can reduce pollution caused by woodburning and that the Colorado Air Quality Control Commission has established standards utilizing these new technologies for wood burning devices. Therefore, the City Council finds that it is necessary to implement restrictions to reduce wood smoke emissions from wood-burning devices and to encourage the use of less polluting devices by the prohibition of the sale, installation or remodeling of fireplaces that do not meet the standards of the new technology. 
(2092) 
8-6-14. - Restriction on Fireplace Installations. 
(A)  Any new or remodeled fireplace to be installed in any dwelling in the City shall be one of the following: 
(1)  A gas appliance; 
(2)  An electric device; or 
(3)  A fireplace or fireplace insert that meets the most stringent emissions standards for wood stoves established by the Colorado Air Quality Control Commission, or any other clean burning device that is approved by the commission. 
(2092 3683) 
8-6-15. - Restriction on Wood-Burning Devices. 
    No used wood-burning device shall be sold or installed in the City, unless such device meets the most stringent standards adopted by the Colorado Air Quality Control Commission. 
(2092 3683) 
8-6-16. - Certification Required. 
    No person shall install, offer to install, advertise to sell, offer to sell, or sell a new fireplace in the City unless: 
(1)  The particular model of the fireplace or the particular configuration of the fireplace has been certified by the Colorado Air Pollution Control Division; and 
(2)  An emission certification label is attached to the fireplace. 
(3)  Any person who installs or constructs any fireplace shall provide evidence of a certificate issued by the Colorado Air Pollution Control Division for such fireplace. 
(4)  Any person who constructs a site-built fireplace shall demonstrate compliance with the certificate, including an inspection by the building official of the fireplace after installation. 
(2092 3683) 
CHAPTER 7. - WATER REGULATIONS 

8-7-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    City manager shall mean the manager of the City of Westminster, Colorado, or his designee. 
    Consumer or customer shall mean any person, firm or corporation receiving water or wastewater services from the City. 
    Dwelling unit shall mean a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Kgal shall mean a volumetric unit of 1,000 gallons of water or wastewater. 
    Mains shall mean the main pipes and connections forming a part of the City waterworks. 
    Meter shall mean the device, appropriate to the premises served, installed to measure the amount of water passing through it, with an accuracy of between 95 percent and 101 percent of actual quantities delivered. The term shall also include detector devices for water passing through fire service lines. 
    Mobile home shall mean any dwelling unit built on a permanent wheeled chassis exceeding either eight feet in width or 32 feet in length and designed for long-term residential occupancy in a temporary or permanent location that is capable of being towed over public streets or highways as a unit or in sections and duly licensable as such. 
    Multifamily shall mean any residential housing other than single-family detached or single-family attached. 
    Residential irrigation, apartment, townhome/condo, public/quasi-public users shall mean a class of water user that includes homeowner's associations, townhouses (four units or more) and condominiums with master meters, apartments (four units or more) city facilities, and other public agencies, including special districts formed under Colorado law, schools and churches. 
    Service pipe shall mean a branch pipe with its fittings and connections through which water is taken. 
    Single-family attached shall mean a single dwelling unit contained in a free-standing structure that has party walls with other structures in which each unit extends from foundation to roof with open space on at least two sides. 
    Single pass cooling system shall mean air conditioning or air handling systems, including evaporative or refrigerated cooling systems, that deliver used water to a drain or other discharge facility without recycling or further use. 
    Single-family detached shall mean a single dwelling unit contained in a free-standing structure that has no party walls with other structures. 
    Street shall mean any street, avenue, alley, lane or other thoroughfare. 
    Submeters shall mean two or more non-city owned meters installed to measure the amount of water used by individual premises or uses in a multi-premises building that are placed on the private side of the City meter in order to facilitate individual premises billing or encourage water conservation. 
    Utilities service rules shall mean the adopted rules and programs governing the operation and use of the City's water distribution and wastewater collection systems. 
    Water infrastructure service commitment shall mean 20 gallons per minute of water flow. 
    Water resources service commitment shall mean 140,000 gallons of annual water use. 
    Water tap shall mean an opening or connection in the mains through which water is taken. 
    Water utility infrastructure charge shall mean the fee for fixed infrastructure and recurring costs not related to volumetric water production costs. 
(592 828 959 2080 2257 2634 2836 2956 3306 3546; Ord. No. 3924 , § 2, 3-12-2018; Ord. No. 3951 , § 1, 10-8-2018; Ord. No. 3950 , § 1, 10-10-2018) 
8-7-2. - Tap Permit Required. 
(A)  No water tap shall be made on any water main, either public or private, or any other portion of the waterworks of the City without first securing approval therefor. The application for a water tap permit shall be made in writing upon a form furnished by the City and shall clearly state the tap size, address, and person applying for the tap and any other information as the City may reasonably require. 
(B)  Service lines and water meter pits may be installed as part of water main construction, if prior approval has been received from the City. The installation of these service lines and meter pits are subject to inspection and approval by the City and shall be in accordance with adopted City standards and specifications. Every applicant for a tap permit shall be required to obtain a building permit prior to the installation of a water meter by the City. 
(C)  Payment of the water tap fee shall be made upon the date that a building permit is issued, and payment of such fee shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the establishment of a permanent water account. The amount of such fee shall be calculated according to the fee schedule in effect at the time payment is made. Payment of the water tap fee for an irrigation system, or for any other installation or construction not requiring issuance of a building permit, shall be made at the time of the water tap utility permit application. When the calculated water tap fee, based on the tap fee schedule in effect at the time of the water meter installation, is different than the water tap fee paid at the time of the issuance of the utility permit, the difference in such fees must be paid prior to the installation of the water meter. Water taps may not be made without a utility tap permit. 
(D)  For existing units that do not require a certificate of occupancy, if the tap fee paid for the tap permit is lower than the tap fee in effect at the time the water meter is to be set, an additional fee equal to the difference between the fee paid and the fee then in effect shall be paid prior to the installation of the water meter. 
(E)  All newly constructed buildings and irrigation systems within the City of Westminster that require water service must connect to the City's water supply system. Private or alternate water supplies are not allowed. 
Any property within the City serviced by a private water source must connect to the City's water supply system upon a change of use of the property that requires a change in the land use designation. 
(1311 2197 2257 2397 2634 2956 3306 3546) 
8-7-3. - Water Tap Fees and Credits. 
(A)  Fee Calculation: 
(1)  An applicant for a water tap shall pay the fees set forth hereinafter, the total of which shall be known as the "water tap fee," or those components that are applicable to the type of tap required by this chapter. The water tap fee or portions thereof are due and payable upon issuance of the water tap utility permit unless earlier paid as provided in subsection 8-7-2(C), W.M.C. The water tap fee may consist of the following individual fees: 
(a)  Water resources service commitment fee, being the share of the cost to provide adequate raw water supply to be utilized by the tap; 
(b)  Water infrastructure service commitment fee, being the share of the utility system related to treating and distributing water to be utilized by the tap; 
(c)  Meter connection fee, being the actual city cost for installation of a meter with electronic remote readout device, when applicable; inspection of the tap, service line and meter pit installation; meter testing, when applicable; account and billing activation and other administrative procedures; and 
(d)  When applicable, a fire connection fee, being that charge associated with a tap providing fire protection. 
(2)  Water taps, water tap lines, and meters for the same service shall normally be the same size. If otherwise approved and/or required by the City, the tap and meter may be of different sizes, in which case the fee for the meter size shall be paid. Water taps cannot be issued prior to building and/or tap entitlement approval. Any exceptions must be approved by the City Manager, i.e., conversion from well to the City water system, pursuant to Section 8-7-15, W.M.C. 
(3)  The base components of the 2019 water tap fees are as follows: 
Water resources service commitment fee 
(per 140,000 gallons of annual water use) $13,835.00 Water infrastructure service commitment fee $11,525.00 Meter connection fee This connection fee is based on installed meter size and assessed on a per meter basis. See connection fee chart below. Fire connection fee $200.00  
(4)  The connection fees based on meter size are as follows: 
Meter Size (Inches) Connection Charge 
Non-Single Family Connection Charge 
Single Family* ?" N/A $402.00 3/4" $460.00 $448.00 1" $479.00 $467.00 11/2" $287.00 $846.00 2" $359.00 N/A 3" $432.00 N/A 4" $505.00 N/A 6" $576.00 N/A 8" $649.00 N/A  
* Single-family attached and detached connection fees for meters up to one and one-half inch include the cost of the water meter, which is supplied by the City. All other connection fees do not include the cost of the water meter, which is supplied by the consumer at the consumer's cost. 
(5)  Each year, the water tap fee and its individual components in subsection (3) shall be automatically increased in accordance with the annual construction cost index for construction costs as of December of each year, as reported in the construction economics section of the Engineering News-Record (ENR) as published weekly by BNP Media. The annual construction cost index shall be at all reasonable times available at the City Department of Public Works and Utilities. The meter connection fee in subsection (4) may also be adjusted separately at any time, when necessary, to reflect the full cost of said connection to the City. 
(6)  The water resources service commitment fee and water infrastructure service commitment fee components of the water tap fee for City-owned facilities may be implemented at rates below 100 percent at the direction of the City Manager or his designee. 
(B)  Residential Water Taps: The following regulations apply to residential water taps: 
(1)  The single family residential water tap fee is based on a standard one-quarter inch meter size and is assessed on a per-dwelling-unit basis. 
(2)  The outdoor water tap component for any single family home is based on the irrigable area at an annual irrigation demand of 12 gallons per square foot. Non-irrigable areas must be permanently installed hardscapes that cannot be planted in the future. Unplanted, mulched areas are not considered hardscapes. 
(3)  Water taps for indoor residential multifamily buildings are charged based on number of rooms available for bedrooms in the building, regardless of the actual use of the room. 
(4)  Separate irrigation taps are required for all multifamily and residential common area irrigation and are charged based on the irrigated area and the type of landscape material as described in subsection 8-7-3(D)(4). 
Residential indoor water tap fee costs (per residential unit) Residential Type Bathrooms Bedrooms 2019 Tap Fee Single Family 4 or less n/a $15,039.00 Single Family Over 4 n/a $18,047.00 Multifamily n/a Per bedroom $6,016.00  
(5)  The residential tap fees shall be calculated as listed in the above table plus any applicable fire connection charge. If a tap and meter larger than the standard one inch meter is requested for reasons other than to meet residential fire sprinkler demand for any residential unit, the tap fees shall be calculated using the nonresidential treated water investment calculation and SC factor in subsection (C)(2) below. 
(6)  Tap fees for clubhouses, swimming pools, and other common buildings or structures shall be assessed as provided hereinafter under subsections (C) or (D) below. 
(C)  Nonresidential Water Taps: The following regulations apply to nonresidential water taps: 
(1)  The City shall review and evaluate each applicant's requested water tap and meter size, and may adjust the requested tap and/or meter size, if it determines the projected water usage will be greater than that requested. 
(2)  Every meter size has a corresponding water infrastructure service commitment factor (SC factor). The water infrastructure service commitment fee portion of the tap fee shall be calculated by multiplying the water infrastructure service commitment fee, in subsection (A)(3) above, by the respective SC factor in the following chart: 
Meter Size (Inches) Water Infrastructure SC Factor ?? 1.0 3/4? 1.5 1? 2.5 11/2? 5.0 2? 8.0 3? 17.5 4? 30.0 6? 62.5 8? 90  
(3)  The water resource fee portion of the tap fee shall be calculated based upon the estimated annual consumption, business type, and tap size required using methods and estimates developed by the public works and utilities department to determine the appropriate water resources service commitments required, which shall be multiplied by the water resources service commitment fee in subsection (A)(3) above. 
(D)  Irrigation Water Taps: The following regulations apply to taps for irrigation: 
(1)  Separate irrigation taps and meters shall be required for: 
(a)  All residential developments, other than a development whose land area consists entirely of single-family detached lots; and 
(b)  All nonresidential developments having any irrigated landscaped areas. 
(2)  Irrigation tap fees are required based on the area and type of landscaping. Landscape types are defined as either high-water, moderate-water or low-water, as determined by the community development department. 
(3)  An irrigation water tap shall be used only for irrigation purposes. Each irrigation water tap shall be assigned a service address and billing account in the name of the property owner or manager. 
(4)  The irrigation tap fee consists of the meter connection fee plus the following square footage fees based upon landscape type: 
(a)  Irrigation tap fees (residential and nonresidential). 
Type of landscape Annual water demand 
in an average year Cost per square foot High water demand Over 10 gallons per square foot $2.47 Medium water demand Over 3 up to 10 gallons per square foot $1.24 Low water demand Up to 3 gallons per square foot $0.62  
(E)  Fire Protection: 
(1)  For any size tap that is determined by the City Manager, or his designee, to provide solely fire protection, only the fire connection charge, in the amount provided for in subsection (A)(3) of this section, shall be collected. The applicant for a fire protection tap shall furnish all materials and labor as specified by the City, including any device required to detect any use of water for purposes other than fire protection. 
(F)  Construction Water Metering: If any water is required for construction purposes, construction water meters must be installed, deposits collected as per Section 8-7-11, W.M.C., and water usage billed at commercial rates as per subsection 8-7-7(D), W.M.C. It is prohibited to install any by-pass or jumper to provide water service without the installation of a water meter pursuant to Section 8-7-12, W.M.C. 
(G)  Provision of Materials and Labor: For all water taps, the applicant shall furnish all labor and all materials as specified by the City, except as provided by this paragraph. The City shall provide the applicant with a list of required materials and approved suppliers at the time of application. The City shall provide all five-eighths inch by three-quarter standard one inch single family meters. All other meter sizes shall be provided by the applicant as specified by the City at applicant's sole cost and must be tested for accuracy by the City before installation. After payment of all required fees and charges, the City shall install all meters. 
(H)  Tap Credits: 
(1)  Upon issuance of a tap permit for the first new service tap, a tap fee credit shall be given in an amount to be calculated by subtracting the cost of the current water resources fee and treated water investment fee of the original tap from the current value of the water resources fee and treated water investment fee of the first new service tap. 
(2)  Water infrastructure service commitment credits shall be calculated based on the tap size of the former tap. Water resources service commitment credits shall be calculated based on the most recent ten-year average annual water consumption through the former water tap. 
(3)  The amount of credit shall be fixed at the issuance of the first new service tap and may be used for payment for additional service taps that are used on the same property. 
(4)  When a credit is used for full or partial payment for a new water tap, all other applicable charges shall be assessed using the then current fee schedule in effect. 
(5)  In no instance shall cash refunds be granted. 
(6)  No credit shall be given for the meter connection fee or fire connection fee portions of the water tap fee. 
(7)  If any tap is installed and completed without receiving a utility permit and the proper inspection and approval by the City, no tap fee credit shall be given. 
(8)  If a demolition or vacation of a unit results in an abandonment of an associated water tap as defined in Section 8-7-5, W.M.C., no tap fee credit shall be granted at the time a new tap permit is issued. 
(9)  Any water resources or infrastructure service commitments associated with water taps to serve buildings demolished in established urban renewal areas may be transferred as tap credits to an urban renewal authority or the City for use in approved redevelopment projects within that same urban renewal area. 
(1129 1217 1311 1365 1456 1527 1664 1788 2097 2123 2257 2298 2440 2634 2956 3281 3306 3546 3646 3683 3712; Ord. No. 3851, §§ 1, 2, 9-26-2016 ; Ord. No. 3951 , § 2, 10-8-2018) 
8-7-4. - Specifications. 
(A)  The City will specify all materials that the applicant is to furnish pursuant to adopted city standards and specifications. All work furnished by the applicant shall be performed by, or under the supervision of, a master plumber. Meters shall be located only within public rights-of-way, public easements, or city easements. Location and grade shall be subject to approval by the City. 
(B)  Authorization to install any tap or meter may be withheld by the City if the applicant is in violation of any law of the City or in default in any agreement with the City, related to the provision of utility service. It shall be unlawful to use, or permit to be used, any water tap installation until the meter has been set or approved by the City. Upon approval, the entire installation, including the water meter, shall become the property of the City, regardless of the size of the meter. 
(C)  Except as may be provided elsewhere in this paragraph, each separate structure shall have a separate water tap and water meter. A separate tap and meter must be installed for each single-family detached and single-family attached unit. An exception may be granted by the City Manager if an additional structure is an accessory use of the principal structure and the accessory use does not exceed one water resources service commitment. If any additional accessory water fixtures require the upsizing of an existing water tap, any associated water tap fees will be due. 
(D)  A separate tap must be installed for each premises, unit or structure served, except where two or more premises, units or structures are located on a single subdivided lot under single or condominium ownership, in which case one tap may be permitted. In this instance, all units must be individually metered or submetered. An exception may be granted if an additional structure is an accessory use of the principal structure and the accessory use by itself does not exceed one water resources service commitment. If any additional accessory water fixtures require the upsizing of an existing water tap, any associated water tap fees will be due. 
(E)  The provisions of this paragraph and Section 8-7-3, W.M.C., notwithstanding, new developments other than single-family detached or single-family attached shall provide private water meters for each individual unit, commonly referred to as submeters, to encourage water conservation, equitable distribution of utility expenses, and timely correction of plumbing problems. Submeters shall be the property of the owner, who shall be responsible for maintenance, repair and use of submeters. 
(F)  All meters shall be kept in good repair by the city and shall be and remain the property of the city and under its control. No meter shall be set so that there shall be more than two feet of exposed unmetered service pipe. 
(A2634 2956 3306 3546; Ord. No. 3924 , § 3(1), 3-12-2018; Ord. No. 3951 , § 3, 10-8-2018) 
8-7-5. - Modification of Water Taps. 
    A water tap, once installed, is associated with the building and property that it serves. No person shall disconnect, modify or change said tap in any way, except as provided below and in compliance with the Utilities Service Rules: 
(A)  Change in Use Constituting Expansion: A change in use is subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  A change in use must be reviewed by the City's building division using the applicable plumbing code. Such review will include a fixture unit count evaluation, a water velocity evaluation, and an AWWA guidelines review. A change in use is presumed to occur when: 
(a)  The use of the served property is changed to a different use category for zoning or land use purposes; or 
(b)  Any modifications to the landscape are made that require an ODP, ODP amendment, or ODP waiver; or 
(c)  Any building or plumbing modifications that require a permit are made to the served property; or 
(d)  A new or additional water use is introduced on the served property; or 
(e)  A water tap is relocated and applied to a different use or building on the served property; or 
(f)  A water tap is relocated to a different property. 
(2)  If the review of the change in use determines the need for a larger water tap and/or meter than previously purchased for the property, or additional water resources, the use will be considered an "expansion of use" and the provisions stated in paragraph (3) below apply. 
(3)  When an expansion of use occurs, a water tap fee in an amount equal to the difference between the current water tap fee for the existing tap and the current water tap fee for the new tap, including the connection fee, serving the new location and/or use shall be paid. 
(B)  Building Demolition: 
(1)  When any building currently having a water tap is demolished and a building permit for a new building on the same parcel is issued within three years of the last registered water consumption and the new building maintains the same use with the same pattern and amount of water use as the pre-existing building, no new water tap fee shall be required. The new building shall be regarded as being served by the tap in service prior to demolition of the pre-existing building. However, if the new building requires a water meter installation, the then currently applicable connection fee shall be paid by the property owner. 
(2)  When any building currently having a water tap is demolished and no new building permit on the same parcel is issued within three years of the last registered water consumption, abandonment will be presumed pursuant to subsection (C) below. 
(C)  Abandonment: 
(1)  Water resources and infrastructure service commitments are associated with a tap. Abandonment of any tap will result in the forfeiture of the associated service commitments. 
(2)  Any building having a water meter not registering usage for more than 36 consecutive months, and for which payment of the non-volumetric billed charges has not been made continuously, shall constitute an abandonment of the associated water tap and service commitments and the meter may be removed by the City in its discretion. Notification of the effective date of the abandonment of the water tap shall be mailed to the last known address of the property owner or manager. Any subsequent water usage by that building shall require purchasing new service commitments and the purchase of a new water tap. 
(3)  Upon abandonment of a tap, the property owner may be responsible for removing the existing service line from the meter pit to the corporation stop at the water main, if the City determines such removal is necessary to preserve the integrity of the main. An appropriate street cut permit shall be required to assure proper inspection and reconstruction of the street. In the event the service line is not appropriately removed, the City may remove the same and charge the cost thereof to the real property formerly served and may collect said charges in the same manner provided for in Section 8-7-9, W.M.C. 
(1788 2634 2956 3306; Ord. No. 3924 , § 3(2), 3-12-2018; Ord. No. 3951 , § 4, 10-8-2018) 
8-7-6. - Applicability of Chapter; Rules Governing Subdivisions. 
(A)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all applicants. In the case of subdivisions, housing developments, or other areas where water mains and installations must be extended from the existing water mains to the area of use, the applicant must provide and install the necessary water mains, fire hydrants, valves and fittings for the extension, in addition to complying with all of the provisions of this chapter. All such extension installations shall be made under the inspection and supervision of the City. Upon completion and final approval by the City, all such water mains, fire hydrants, valves and fittings incorporated in the extension shall become the property of the City. 
(B)  This formula shall be applied to property owners or developers on each side of the main. The City of Westminster will be responsible for the fractional cost of that portion of any water main that exceeds 16 inches in diameter. 
(1311 1430) 
8-7-7. - Water Rate Schedule. 
(A)  Except for fire hydrant use for municipal purposes and water used by the utilities division of the public works and utilities department, all water delivered from the City water system shall be metered, including water used by the City or departments thereof, and the charge therefor shall be as hereinafter set forth. Per Section 8-7-8 below, water meters are to be read to the nearest 1,000 gallons. Any meter reading containing a portion of 1,000 gallons shall be rounded down to the nearest 1,000 gallons. 
(B)  Residential: Three dwelling units or less, served by one meter, primarily used for residential occupancy shall, in 2019, be charged a $10.96 per month water utility infrastructure charge, and shall, in 2020, be charged a $13.05 per month water utility infrastructure charge plus: 
Monthly Volume of Water Used 2019 Charge per 1,000 gallons (kgal) 2020 Charge per 1,000 gallons (kgal) 1,000-6,000 gallons: defined as the first 6,000 gallons of water use in one month. $3.57 $3.96 7,000-20,000 gallons: defined as the monthly water use above the first 6,000 gallons of water use in one month. $7.35 $8.15 Over 21,000 gallons: defined as all water use above the first 20,000 gallons of water use in one month. $11.62 $12.88  
(C)  Residential Irrigation, Townhome/Condominium (Consisting of Four Units or More), Public/Quasi-Public Users: Shall, in 2019, be charged a monthly water utility infrastructure charge based on the meter size as listed in Schedule A plus the monthly charge per kgal listed below, and shall, in 2020, be charged a monthly water utility infrastructure charge based on the meter size as listed in Schedule A plus the monthly charge per kgal listed below. 
Monthly Volume of Water Used 2019 Charge per 1,000 gallons (kgal) 2020 Charge per 1,000 gallons (kgal) 1,000 gallons of water use (kgal) $7.11 $7.55  
Non-irrigation accounts for multiple residential units consisting of four units or more that are not individually metered and that are classified as town homes or condominiums and can demonstrate that they are 80 percent owner occupied on a complex wide basis shall, in 2019, be charged a monthly water utility infrastructure charge based on the meter size as listed in Schedule A plus the monthly charge per kgal listed below, and shall, in 2020, be charged a monthly water utility infrastructure charge based on the meter size as listed in Schedule A plus the monthly charge per kgal listed below, for all water delivered through the meter. The Director of Finance is authorized to prescribe and accept such forms of documentation as the Director may deem sufficient to demonstrate an applicant's eligibility for the rate described in this paragraph. For purposes of this section, a town home or condominium is a residential unit physically attached to another residential unit and separately owned. 
Monthly Volume of Water Used 2019 Charge per 1,000 gallons (kgal) 2020 Charge per 1,000 gallons (kgal) 1,000 gallons of water use (kgal) $6.39 $7.04  
(D)  Commercial: Commercial users shall, in 2019, be charged a monthly water utility infrastructure charge based on meter size as listed in Schedule A plus the monthly charge per kgal listed below, and shall, in 2020, be charged a monthly water utility infrastructure charge based on meter size as listed in Schedule A plus the monthly charge per kgal listed below. All consumption above the amount in kgal sold to the customer based on the signed service commitment agreement (provided at the time that the tap fee is sold), or an average of the previous ten years' water use if no service commitment agreement was created, shall be charged a monthly surcharge per kgal in addition to the rate per kgal listed below: 
Monthly Volume of Water Used 2019 Charge per 1,000 gallons (kgal) 2020 Charge per 1,000 gallons (kgal) Per 1,000 gallons (kgal) $7.32 $7.78 Surcharge per 1,000 gallons (kgal) $8.67 $9.54  
A customer may choose to continue to pay the surcharge on a monthly basis or may contact City staff to purchase additional water resources. 
Schedule A Meter Size Code Meter Size Number of Water Infrastructure Service Commitments 2019 Monthly Water Utility Infrastructure Charge 2020 Monthly Water Utility Infrastructure Fixed Charge 1 ?" × 3/4" 1 $10.96 $13.05 2 3/4" × 3/4" 1.5 $16.75 $19.33 3 1" 2.5 $23.64 $27.78 5 11/2" 5 $38.88 $47.18 6 2" 8 $55.72 $69.19 7 2" × ?" 8 $55.72 $69.19 8 3" 17.5 $115.35 $144.39 9 3" × 3/4" 17.5 $115.35 $144.39 10 4" 30 $154.14 $208.59 11 4" × 1" 30 $154.14 $208.59 12 6" 62.5 $270.06 $388.70 13 6" × 11/2" 62.5 $270.06 $388.70 14 6" × 3" 62.5 $270.06 $388.70 15 8" 90 $415.63 $582.72 e 10" 145 $616.48 $891.62 20 10" × 12" × 6" 215 $404.46 $436.82  
(E)  Continuance of Customer Charges: Monthly customer charges shall be assessed in all cases including where no water is consumed until such time as City personnel are specifically requested to discontinue water service at the meter, pursuant to Section 8-7-10, W.M.C. 
(F)  Rebate: A rebate in an amount to be set by the City Manager or his designee shall be given to low-income residential users who submit an application on a form prescribed by the Finance Director. 
(1)  For purposes of this paragraph, "low income" shall be 60 percent of the current area median income (AMI). 
(2)  The Director of Finance is authorized to prescribe and accept such forms of eligibility as the Director may deem sufficient to demonstrate an applicant's eligibility for the rebate provided for in this section. 
(3)  Such rebate will be paid in the form of a credit applied to the water account of the eligible residential user. 
(G)  Out-of-City Customers: A surcharge of 25 percent will be added to all charges and fees related to the provision of water service to customers located outside the City limits, unless provided otherwise by contract or agreement with the City. 
(1320 1364 1467 1659 1743 1819 1954 1960 2025 2080 2169 2179 2367 2460 2635 2968 3145 3298 3306 3438 3545 3546 3654 3683 3742; Ord. No. 3858, § 1, 10-24-2016 ; Ord. No. 3950 , § 2, 10-10-2018) 
8-7-8. - Computation of Rate. 
(A)  The schedule of water rates shall be applied to water used or consumed as determined by the water meter readings that are made by the City, except as provided in Section 8-7-7, W.M.C. 
(B)  Water meters are to be read to the nearest 1,000 gallons. Any meter reading containing a portion of 1,000 gallons shall be rounded down to the nearest 1,000 gallons. The City will charge $30.00 to test a residential water meter upon the customer's request. Test of commercial and industrial meters by customer request will be as listed in Schedule B. This fee will be waived if the meter is over-registering. If the meter is over-registering, the customer will receive a credit for excess charges on the prior 12 months' consumption. If city records indicate a meter change or accuracy test during the 12 months, the credit will apply from the date of the meter change or test. 
Schedule B Meter Model Meter Size Test Charge 25 5/8 ? $30.00 35 3/4? $40.00 70 1? $75.00 120 11/2? $130.00 160 Turbo 11/2? $170.00 170 2? $180.00 200 Turbo 2? $210.00 450 Turbo 3? $460.00 Meters Over 3? >3? $460.00  
(C)  The City will charge $25.00 to reread a water meter at the customer's request. This fee will be waived if the first reading was incorrect. The City will charge $25.00 for all service trips, including a trip to check the water meter for evidence of a leak. This fee will be waived if a leak is found at the meter or on the City's portion of the distribution system. 
(1788 2968 3545) 
8-7-9. - Delinquent Payments and Service Charges; Lien on Property. 
(A)  Statements for the rates and charges for the water service shall be dated and sent out to users at regular intervals. Water meters shall be read within a time frame of 27 to 33 days. In the event a water bill is not paid by the 45th day following the date of the bill, the City Manager, or his designee, shall be authorized to forthwith disconnect service; and the water so disconnected shall not again be reconnected until the delinquent bill and a disconnect charge for turning the water off ("turn-off") and for turning the water on ("turn-on") along with any other outstanding charges, fees, and penalties have been paid. Assessment of non-consumption based fees and charges will continue during any shutoff period. 
    The number of turn-offs and turn-ons for an account accumulate over the most recent 12-month period. If an unauthorized water turn-on occurs at a property, an additional turn-off/on fee shall be applied and elevate to the next level or remain at the maximum. Once at the maximum turn-off/on fee level, the fee level will not be reduced until a 12-month period without turn-offs occurs. An additional turn-off/on fee shall be applied when the City turns off any unauthorized water turn-on. Damaged equipment charges are as listed. Additionally, labor is charged at the then current rate for actual hours of the installation. The charges for finals (service transfers), damaged equipment, and turn-offs and turn-ons during the 12-month period are as follows: 
Action/Damage Residential All Other Classifications First turn-off/on fee $30.00 $30.00 Second turn-off/on fee $60.00 $60.00 All additional turn-off/on fee $90.00 $100.00 Account final $25.00 $25.00 Damaged lock $15.00 $15.00 Damaged can $35.00 $35.00 Damaged pin $10.00 $10.00 Damaged ?? × 3/4? meter body $37.00 N/A Damaged transponder $180.00 $180.00 Damaged service line plugs $16.00 $16.00  
Equipment damaged, but not listed above, will be charged at actual cost to repair and/or replace, plus any labor required at the then current rate for actual hours of the installation. 
(B)  Any account paid with a check subsequently returned by the bank will be charged a service charge equal to the service charge assessed by Section 1-8-3, W.M.C. The City may require the customer to make any subsequent payments using cash, certified or bank check, credit card, or money order. 
(C)  The City shall have as security for the collection of such water service charges and penalties a lien upon the real property served by such water service, which lien shall become effective immediately upon the supplying of such water and shall not be discharged until the payment is made of all the water service bills, penalties and charges as herein provided. Such liens shall be governed by Title I, Chapter 31 of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(1)  The lien shall include all charges prescribed by this Code relating to the provision of water services, together with the cost of collecting such charges, including court costs and attorneys' fees. The lien shall be first and prior to all other liens, claims, titles, and encumbrances, whether prior in time or not, except liens for general taxes, and shall remain a lien upon the real property served by the water connection from the date such charges and the cost of collecting them, if any, become due, until they are paid. 
(2)  The City may enforce the lien against the property or the liability against the property owner in any action at law or an action to enforce the lien. If any person in possession of any premises, building, lot, house, or other dwelling unit pays the entire charges due and owing, the payment relieves the property owner from such liability and the premises from the lien. However, the City is not required to look to any person other than the owner of the premises, building, lot, house, or other dwelling unit for the payment of the charges. 
(1032 1355 2179 2836 2956 3306 3496; Ord. No. 3950 , § 3, 10-10-2018) 
8-7-10. - Inactive Accounts; Reactivation. 
    An account may be declared inactive if a request is made in writing by the customer to the City. Upon being declared inactive, the City shall remove the water meter. Inactive accounts will not accrue monthly fees. The customer or current property owner shall have 36 months to reactivate their account, at which time the meter shall be reinstalled and the customer shall pay the then currently applicable connection fee. If the account is not reactivated within 36 months, abandonment will be presumed and subsection 8-7-5(B), W.M.C., shall apply. 
(3306; Ord. No. 3924 , § 4, 3-12-2018) 
8-7-11. - Temporary Construction Meter; Deposit Required. 
    The Department of Public Works and Utilities shall collect a deposit fee in an amount equivalent to the value of the metering device. Water use through such meter may be billed as needed based on consumption patterns. 
(953 1892 2968 3306; Ord. No. 3924 , § 5, 3-12-2018; Ord. No. 3950 , § 4, 10-10-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3924 , § 5, adopted March 12, 2018, revised the catchline of § 8-7-11 from "When Deposit Required" to read as herein set out. 
8-7-12. - Unauthorized Use or Tampering Prohibited. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any meter, or to connect to, use, or take any water from the City water or reclaimed water systems without a valid water utility permit and prior payment of all required fees and user charges. Prohibited use shall include, but shall not be limited to, the use or acquisition of water from fire hydrants, any unauthorized connections to the water system, any unauthorized turn on of a water meter turned off by the City, and straight through or bypass pipes at the water meter pit. 
(B)  The charge for unauthorized use of water is a charge of $500.00 for the first occurrence, $750.00 for the second occurrence, and $1,000.00 for the third and additional occurrences within any 12-month period to the owner of the property, or, in the case of a fire hydrant, the entity or individual benefiting from the unauthorized water use, and is in addition to any other charge by the City for water service, including estimated labor as described in Section 8-7-9, W.M.C. Any reasonable expense incurred by the City as a result of unauthorized use or meter tampering will be charged at actual cost for equipment and materials, plus any labor required at the then current rate for the action. 
    All charges for unauthorized use of water and expenses incurred by the City in response shall be assessed to the property owner as lienable amounts as described in subsection 8-7-9(C), W.M.C. The charges increase based on the number of occurrences at all properties under the same ownership within the City. 
(C)  In billing the property owner or entity benefiting from the water use for water used without authorization, the City may use any reasonable method to determine the amount of water so used including, but not limited to, previous account history, the account history of similar accounts, pipe size and water pressure. 
(D)  No new tap and/or meter installations will be allowed for any property where there are outstanding unpaid utility fees or charges for any properties within the City under the same ownership. The City may terminate a person's water service for a prohibited use of the water system. 
(E)  Advisement to the property owner of charges or expenses for payment shall include the procedure to schedule a hearing if requested. If a hearing is requested, it shall be scheduled as soon as practical before the City Manager or his designee. 
(1251 3306) 
8-7-13. - Duty of Consumer. 
(A)  It shall be the duty of the water consumer to use all necessary precautions to keep the meter from freezing and from injury and, if the meter shall be injured by freezing or by carelessness of the consumer, then such consumer shall pay all necessary cost of repairs occasioned by such injury, and failure to pay such cost of repairs shall warrant and authorize the city in turning off the water. 
(B)  No person owning or possessing, or responsible for the maintenance of, the property on which a meter or fire hydrant is located shall obstruct the meter or fire hydrant in any manner so that access to the meter or fire hydrant is prevented. If such obstruction is not removed within the period of time prescribed in the notice required in subsection (C) below, the owner or possessor shall be deemed to have consented to the City's entry onto the property for the purpose of removing the obstruction and gaining access to the meter or fire hydrant. All costs incurred in the removal of the obstruction shall be charged to the water consumer, owner or possessor as prescribed in subsection (D) below. For the purposes of this section, the word "obstruct" shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Failure to maintain landscaping around the meter pit or fire hydrant so as to provide at least three feet of unobstructed access to the meter or fire hydrant from the public right-of-way and at least five feet of vertical clearance above the meter pit or fire hydrant; 
(2)  Failure to maintain landscaping that exceeds four inches in height if said landscaping is located within six inches of the meter pit or fire hydrant; 
(3)  Allowing any landscaping to cover the meter pit lid or fire hydrant; or 
(4)  Placement of a fence or retaining wall in such a location that the fence or wall will obstruct access to the meter pit or fire hydrant from the public right-of-way. 
(C)  If the City Manager finds that any person has failed to comply with any of the requirements of subsection (B) of this section, the City Manager shall notify the water consumer, owner or possessor of the property by hand delivery or certified mail that he shall be required to comply within 15 days of the date of delivering or mailing the notice. In the event of an emergency or shutoff for non-payment, the City may require immediate compliance and assess all charges and expenses to the property owner as described in Sections 8-7-9 and 8-7-12, W.M.C. 
(D)  If the person so notified fails to comply with the requirements of the notice, the manager may cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof together with an administrative fee to the person so notified. Such costs and fees shall be added to the charges for water service, and failure to pay such charges shall warrant and authorize the City in shutting off the water. 
(1311 1936 2956 3306 3683; Ord. No. 3924 , § 6, 3-12-2018) 
8-7-14. - Buildings Occupied by More Than One Tenant; Owner to Pay; Exceptions. 
    Owners or agents in charge of business blocks or other buildings occupied by more than one tenant using water from the same service pipe shall be required to apply the water rate for the whole of such buildings, unless a separate meter is installed for each tenant. 
(592) 
8-7-15. - Variance; City Manager Authority. 
    The City Manager or the manager's designee may vary the requirements of Sections 8-7-2, 8-7-4, or 8-7-5, W.M.C., for a particular property, upon a finding that good cause exists to grant said variance. Any such request for a variance shall be in writing and shall state the grounds for said request, and any variance granted will be in writing signed by the City Manager or the manager's designee stating the basis therefor. 
(3306) 
8-7-16. - Using Water from Another Connection Prohibited; Additional Fee. 
    It shall be unlawful for any consumer to permit water to be taken through his service pipe for the use of any person whose premises are not connected for the use of water from the City's mains, unless the consumer shall pay to the City one additional minimum fee for each premises so accommodated, except as provided herein. 
(3306) 
8-7-17. - Pollution of Water Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or cast any substance into any reservoir, well, trench, pipe or drain used in and necessary for the construction, maintenance or operation of the City waterworks system that may tend to fill up such reservoir or well or to obstruct the flow of water in such trench, pipe or drain, or to pollute the water therein. 
(592) 
8-7-18. - Use of Water: Superintendent to Supervise. 
    No water shall be used from the fire hydrants except for the extinguishment of fire or other municipal use and then only under the supervision of the City. The council reserves the right to cause the water to be shut off from the mains when they deem it necessary. The City may, for the purpose of cleaning the same, shut off the water at any time; provided that, before the water shall be turned off from any school or other public buildings, the City shall notify the occupant or person in charge of such building. 
(1311) 
8-7-19. - Use of Water During Fire. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use water for anything except domestic purposes while the Fire Department is using water for the purpose of extinguishing a fire. During a period of one hour from and after the sounding of a fire alarm through the use of a fire siren, it shall be unlawful for any person to use water for anything except domestic purposes. 
8-7-20. - When Tapping Prohibited. 
    No water taps upon water mains of the City shall be permitted for domestic purposes unless the property for which the tap is made and the residence thereon shall have bath and toilet facilities within the residence so constructed as to comply with all of the requirements of the City regulating the disposal of sewage. 
(592 3683) 
8-7-21. - Acquisition of Water Rights. 
(A)  No municipal water and sewer service will be provided to any undeveloped tract of land within the City if the owner of such land now or hereafter owns water rights that might be acquired and used by the City, unless the land owner agrees to sell such water rights to the City at a price not to exceed the then prevailing fair market price. 
(B)  If for any reason the City does not wish to acquire the water rights under conditions of subsection 8-7-21(A), W.M.C., the City Manager shall notify the owner of such rights in writing. The owner will then be free to sell such rights on the open market. 
(C)  There is hereby imposed upon the owner of any undeveloped tract within the City the affirmative duty to reveal to the City all such water rights as he may own. 
(906 917 1311 3683) 
8-7-22. - Reserved. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 3683.) 
8-7-23. - Credit for Overcharge. 
    The City Manager or their designee may give credit to any utility customer that has been overcharged at any point in the preceding 12 months. 
(1032 2956; Ord. No. 3950 , § 5, 10-10-2018) 
8-7-24. - Water Shortage or Drought. 
(A)  The City Council may adopt by resolution a Drought Management Plan, which authorizes the City Manager to declare a drought or water shortage emergency and to implement a response consistent with the Drought Management Plan. Upon the declaration of a drought or water shortage emergency, and pursuant to the Drought Management Plan, the City Manager's authority shall include, but not be limited to, the ability to order and enforce the following: 
(1)  Limiting lawn watering to certain days of the week or times during the month. 
(2)  Prohibiting wasteful water use as determined by City Council and further described in subsections 8-7-25(A), and 8-12-16(A) W.M.C. 
(3)  Prohibiting noncommercial car washing and/or sidewalk and driveway washing. 
(4)  Prohibiting new lawns from being planted or installed. 
(5)  Rationing the amount of water that can be used by each customer, household and/or business. 
(6)  Prohibiting any outside irrigation use of water. 
(7)  Implementing a major public information program on the need to conserve water. 
(8)  Any other similar restrictions the City Manager deems necessary. 
(B)  Any person, corporation, partnership or association who violates any of the provisions of a long-term water conservation plan as adopted by resolution shall be punished by a fine or penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or the installation of a flow restrictor device to limit usage. 
(C)  Any person subject to a charge for violation of this section may appeal on a form designed by the City of Westminster. The City Manager, or such other decision maker as may be appointed by the City Manager, shall conduct the hearing. 
(D)  Should the City Manager declare a drought or water shortage emergency pursuant to the Drought Management Plan, the City Manager shall, as soon as practicable, inform the City Council of the declaration, and provide supporting information. The City Manager shall thereafter provide such periodic updates as the City Council sees fit and appropriate. 
(E)  The City Council may, at any time, override and reverse the City Manager's declaration of a drought or water shortage emergency by resolution. 
(1223 1311 2956 2971 3546; Ord. No. 3980 , § 1, 4-22-2019) 
8-7-25. - Waste of Water. 
(A)  Waste of Water is Prohibited: Waste of water is defined as the intentional or non-intentional use of water for a non-beneficial purpose, and includes: 
(1)  Continuous application of water to any lawn, turf, sodded, or landscaped area resulting in the pooling or flowing of water into drainage or storm drainage facilities; 
(2)  Failure to repair any irrigation system that is leaking; 
(3)  The use of hoses for washing of vehicles and other outdoor uses, other than irrigation, that are not equipped with a shutoff valve that is normally closed and necessitates hand pressure on the valve to permit the flow of water; and 
(4)  Single-pass cooling systems. 
Notwithstanding the enforcement provisions set forth in this section, the City Manager, or his designee, may order a shut off of water service to a property if the City Manager, or his designee, reasonably finds that an extreme waste of water is occurring on the premises. 
(B)  The director of public works and utilities is hereby authorized to enforce this section. The person billed for water service to a property, whether owner or occupant, shall be responsible for compliance with subsections (A) and (B) within 30 days of the violation notice, unless otherwise specified by the director of public works and utilities, and shall be subject to the following actions and penalties: 
(1)  Upon a first violation, the person billed will be advised in writing of the violation and issued a warning for the violation. The warning shall be in effect for a period of one year from the date of issue. 
(2)  A second violation within a one-year period shall result in the person billed being advised in writing of the violation and a charge of $50.00 will be added to the water bill for the property. Advisement shall include the procedure to schedule a hearing, if requested. 
(3)  A third or additional violation within a one-year period shall result in the person billed being advised in writing of the violation and a charge of $100.00 will be added to the water bill for the property. Advisement shall include the procedure to schedule a hearing, if requested. In addition, the City Manager, or his designee, may order a suspension of service to the property until all outstanding fines are paid. Restoration of service shall occur as detailed in Section 8-7-9, W.M.C. 
(4)  Upon any notice(s) of violation of this section, a copy of such notice shall also be mailed to the owner(s) of the real property served, if the owner's address differs from the subject property address. 
(C)  If a hearing is requested, it shall be scheduled as soon as practical before the City Manager or his designee. 
(2956 3546) 
8-7-26. - Meter Set Installation Reinspection Fee. 
    Water tap fees provide for customary inspection of the meter set only once. Where additional inspections are made necessary by incomplete or faulty work or incorrect posting, a fee will be charged for any additional inspections, as specified in the Utilities Service Rules. No additional inspections will be made until said fees are paid. 
(1453 2968 3306; Ord. No. 3924 , § 7, 3-12-2018) 
8-7-27. - Cross Connection and Backflow Control. 
(A)  Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Auxiliary water supply shall mean any water supply on or available to the premises other than the approved public potable water supply, including water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source, such as a well, spring, or stream. 
    Back pressure shall mean backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or other means that could create pressure within the system greater than the supply pressure. 
    Backflow prevention device shall mean a device or other means designed to prevent backflow or back-siphonage, as follows: 
(1)  Air gap shall mean the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the edge of the vessel from which water overflows, which shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top of the rim of the vessel and, in no case less than one inch. When an air gap is used at the service connection to prevent the contamination or pollution of the public potable water system, an emergency bypass shall be installed around the air gap system and an approved reduced pressure principle device shall be installed in the bypass system. 
(2)  Reduced pressure principle device shall mean an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve between the two check valves, tightly closing shut-off valves on either side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check and relief valves. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves at a level less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the two check valves shall be less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. In case of leakage of either of the check valves, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. 
(3)  Double check valve assembly shall mean an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. 
    Back-siphonage shall mean the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    Check valve shall mean a self-closing device that is designed to permit the flow of fluids in one direction and to close if there is a reversal of flow. 
    Cross-connection shall mean any physical arrangement connecting a public water supply, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device that contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage, or other waste of liquid of unknown or unsafe quality that may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply as a result of backflow. The term includes bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, and other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of which, backflow could occur. A controlled cross-connection means a connection between a potable water system and a non-potable water system that includes an approved backflow prevention device that has been properly installed that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
    Industrial fluids system shall mean any system containing a fluid or solution that may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply, including: polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and "used waters" originating from the public potable water system that may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies; circulated cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters; oils, gases, glycerine; paraffins; caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used for industrial, fire-fighting, or other purposes. 
    Vacuum breaker, atmospheric nonpressure type shall mean a vacuum breaker designed so as not to be subjected to static line pressure or installed where it would be under pressure for not more than 12 hours in any 24-hour period. 
    Vacuum breaker, pressure type shall mean a vacuum breaker designed so as not to be subjected to static line pressure. 
    Water service connection shall mean the terminal end of a service connection where the City loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. The term shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
    Water supply system shall include two parts: the utility system and the customer system. The utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the utility, up to the point where the customer's system begins. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution system. The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the utility distribution system that are utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use. 
(B)  Regulations: 
(1)  No water service connection shall be installed or maintained by the City unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulations and this Code, as required by the City Manager or his designee. Service of water to any premises may be discontinued by the City, pursuant to subsection 8-7-28(B) of this chapter, if a backflow prevention device required by this section is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed, or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service shall not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(2)  The customer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the City Manager to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. 
(3)  The type of approved backflow prevention device necessary shall be determined according to the existing degree of hazard as set forth in paragraph (4) of this subsection. Such a device shall be installed at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served. Such a device shall be installed before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist: 
(a)  The premises have an auxiliary water supply that is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and that is not acceptable as an additional source as determined by the City Manager; 
(b)  Any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled on the premises in a fashion that creates an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, including the handling of process waters and waters origination from the utility system that have been subject to deterioration in quality; 
(c)  The premises have internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled or intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or the entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist. 
(4)  The type of protective device required under paragraph (3) of this subsection shall depend upon the degree of hazard that exists, as follows: 
(a)  In any premises that has an auxiliary water supply that is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. 
(b)  In any premises where there is water or any other substance that would be objectionable if introduced into the public water system, but would not be hazardous to health, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly. 
(c)  In any premises where there is any material that is dangerous to health that is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. Examples of premises where these conditions may exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries, and plating plants. 
(d)  In any premises where there are "uncontrolled" cross-connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device at the service connection. 
(e)  In any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow or back-siphonage from the premises by the installation of a backflow prevention device in the service line. An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed in each service to the premises. 
(f)  All facilities with a high hazard rating may be required by the City Manager or his designee to submit, for approval, plans showing all cross-connection control devices to be installed before a tap permit is granted. 
(5)  Any backflow prevention device required pursuant to this section shall be of a model and size approved by the City Manager or his designee. In order to be approved, the device shall: 
(a)  Be manufactured in full conformance with the current standards established by the American Water Works Association; 
(b)  Comply with all of the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California; and 
(c)  Be certified to be in full compliance with the standards set forth in this paragraph by a testing laboratory that has been approved by the City Manager or his designee. 
(6)  The customer-user at any premises where backflow devices are installed shall have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. In those instances where the City Manager deems the hazard to be great enough, he may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the customer-user and shall be performed by a state-certified inspector/tester. Backflow prevention devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer-user whenever they are found to be defective. Records of tests, repairs and overhauls shall be kept for a period of two years and made available to the City Manager or his designee. A copy of the annual inspection is to be sent to the City. 
(C)  Cross-Connections: No cross-connection between a public water system and any secondary water system shall be permitted. No person shall permit or maintain a cross-connection between a public water supply and any secondary water system, unless said connection is protected by means of an approved backflow prevention device. 
(D)  Specific System Requirements: The requirements for irrigation systems, fire systems, and any vehicles or equipment taking water from the City's water utility system are set forth in the Utilities Service Rules. 
(E)  Backflow Assembly Service Fees: The consumer at any premises where system containment backflow control assemblies are installed shall be charged a monthly backflow control service fee based on backflow assembly size as listed below: 
Backflow Size      Monthly Service Fee 
10" ..... $2.50 
8" ..... $2.00 
6" ..... $1.50 
3" & 4" ..... $1.00 
1 1/4" to 2 1/2" ..... $0.75 
1/2" to 1" ..... $0.50 
    Single-family detached dwelling units with irrigation backflow prevention assemblies are exempted from the service fees, unless fertilization occurs through the irrigation system connected to the backflow assembly in which case the fees shall apply. 
(1711 2126 3306 3683; Ord. No. 3849, § 1, 9-26-2016 ; Ord. No. 3924 , § 8, 3-12-2018) 
8-7-28. - Violations and Penalties. 
(A)  The cost to clean up a contamination of the City's water supply, up to and including the waterline replacement, shall be the sole responsibility of the person causing the contamination. 
(B)  The City shall notify the owner, or authorized agent of the owner, of the building or premises in which there is found a violation of this chapter. The notice shall set a specific time for the owner to have the violation removed or corrected. If the owner fails to correct the violation in the specified time, the City Manager may, if in his judgement an imminent health hazard exists, request that the water service to the building or premises be terminated. Additional fines or penalties may also be invoked following termination of service. 
(C)  Any person, corporation, partnership or association who is found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment or both such fine and imprisonment pursuant to the limits established in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. Any violation of this chapter shall be a criminal offense. Each and every 24-hour continuation of any violation shall constitute a district and separate offense. 
(1711 1803 2126) 
CHAPTER 8. - SANITARY SEWERAGE 

8-8-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Average monthly water consumption (AWC), which is based on the average monthly water consumption per user billed during the sewer rate calculation period (January through March). 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Centigrade, expressed in parts per million. 
    Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the service sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    City Manager shall mean the Manager of the City of Westminster, Adams and Jefferson Counties, Colorado, or his designee. 
    Dwelling unit shall mean a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Floatable oil shall mean oil, fat, or grease in a physical state, such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
    FOGG shall mean fats, oils, grease and grit. 
    FOGG retention device shall mean any grease trap/interceptors, sand and oil trap/interceptors, or hair trap/interceptors intended to reduce the TSS and BOD into the collection system. 
    Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
    Industrial Wastes shall mean the wastewater from industrial processes, trade, or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
    Kgal shall mean a volumetric unit of 1,000 gallons of water or wastewater. 
    Metro district shall mean the Metro Wastewater Reclamation District, located at 6450 York Street, Denver, Colorado, 80229. 
    Metro facilities fee shall mean that portion of the sewer tap fee intended to cover expenses associated with the metro wastewater reclamation district treatment facilities. 
    Mobile home shall mean any dwelling unit built on a permanent wheeled chassis exceeding either eight feet in width or 32 feet in length and designed for long-term residential occupancy in a temporary or permanent location that is capable of being towed over public streets or highways as a unit or in sections and duly licensable as such. 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen-ions in grams per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven and a hydrogen-ion concentration of 10 -7 . 
    POTW shall mean publicly owned treatment works. 
    Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch, (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Sanitary sewer shall mean a publicly controlled sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Service sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the sanitary sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Sewage shall mean the spent water of the community. 
    Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
    Single-family detached shall mean a single dwelling unit contained in a free-standing structure that has no party walls with other structures. 
    Slug shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater that in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five (in case of heavy metals-Three times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and may adversely affect the wastewater facilities). 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a drain or sewer for conveying water, ground water, drainage water, or unpolluted water from any source, excluding sewage and industrial wastes. 
    Storm water shall mean the surface runoff from rainfall and other storm events. 
    Tap shall mean an opening or connection between the service sewer and the sanitary sewer through which sewage is discharged. 
    Total suspended solids (TSS) shall mean total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" published by the American Public Health Association, and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
    Transport facilities fee shall mean that portion of the sewer tap fee intended to cover expenses associated with the collection and transport of wastewater, including pipes, pumps, lift-stations and related facilities. 
    Treatment facilities fee shall mean that portion of the sewer tap fee intended to cover expenses associated with the City of Westminster treatment facilities. 
    Unpolluted water shall mean water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
    Utilities Service Rules shall mean the adopted rules and programs governing the operation and use of the City's water distribution and wastewater collection systems. 
    Wastewater shall mean the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any incidental groundwater, surface water, and storm water that may be present. 
    Wastewater facilities shall mean the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, convey, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
    Wastewater treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. 
    Watercourse shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or intermittently. 
(1131 2030 2634 2955; Ord. No. 3850, § 1, 9-26-2016 ; Ord. No. 3924 , § 9, 3-12-2018; Ord. No. 3950 , § 6, 10-10-2018) 
8-8-2. - Use of Sanitary Sewers Required. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any wastewater, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful to construct, or reconstruct any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater when the site is within 400 feet of an existing sanitary sewer with sufficient capacity. 
(D)  The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is not located or may in the future be located a sanitary sewer of the City, is hereby required, at the owner(s)' expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 30 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said sanitary sewer is within 400 feet of the site. 
(E)  The maintenance of any open or overflowing septic tank, cesspool, toilet, sink or open drainage from any plumbing or sanitary fixture within the City is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as provided in this Code. 
(1131 1252 2030) 
8-8-3. - Sanitary Sewers, Service Sewers and Connections. 
(A)  No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use or commence use, alter, or disturb any sanitary sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a utility tap permit from the City Manager. The application for a utility tap permit shall be made in writing upon a form furnished by the City containing the information required by the Utilities Service Rules. 
(B)  No one shall be entitled to purchase or pay for a utility tap permit prior to issuance of a building permit for the premises for which the tap is to be used; provided, however, that the foregoing restriction may be waived by the City Manager upon a finding that the proposed utility permit will not require the issuance of a building permit. 
(C)  All costs and expense incidental to the installation, connection and maintenance of the service sewer, from and including the tap on the sanitary sewer, shall be borne by the owner(s). The City will specify all materials that the owner is to furnish pursuant to adopted City standards and specifications. The sewer tap and service line shall be installed in accordance with adopted City standards and specifications. The owner(s) shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the service sewer. 
(D)  It shall be the duty of the owner to use all necessary precautions to assure that there is no ground or surface water infiltration into or exfiltration from his service sewer. If such infiltration is found to be present, the owner shall, at his own cost, correct the condition upon order of the City Manager. Yard, roof or parking area drains or non-sanitary sewage sump pump discharge lines shall not be connected to the sanitary system. 
(E)  All connections to the sanitary sewer system shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code, adopted City standards and specifications, the Utilities Service Rules, and other applicable rules and regulations of the City and the Denver Metro district. 
(F)  No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a service sewer or building drain that, in turn, is connected directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer, unless such connection is approved by the City Manager for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(G)  The installation of any tap may be withheld by the City if the applicant is in violation of any law of the City or in default in any agreement with the City related to the provision of utility service. It shall be unlawful to use, or permit to be used, any sewer tap installation until the work is approved by the City. Upon approval, the maintenance of the service sewer shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(H)  When required by the City Manager, the owner(s) of any property serviced by a service sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the service sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes, in accordance with Chapter 8-10, W.M.C. 
(I)  The installation of new, replaced or rehabilitated wastewater infrastructure shall require the final acceptance by the City prior to the inclusion of any such piping and appurtenances into the wastewater operations and maintenance program. 
(1131 1252 2030 2634 3306; Ord. No. 3924 , § 10, 3-12-2018) 
8-8-4. - Use of the Sanitary Sewers. 
(A)  The discharge of wastes listed in this subsection into the sanitary sewer system, whether directly or indirectly, is prohibited, and where investigation reveals the presence in the system of such wastes emanating from any lot, land, building, or premise, the owner, lessor, renter, or occupant of same shall, at his own expense, treat, neutralize or in any other way prepare the non-acceptable wastes to the satisfaction of the city manager, in order to convert the same into acceptable wastes. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to the waste treatment system from any source: 
(1)  Any solid or viscous material that could cause an obstruction to flow in the sewers or could interfere in any way with the treatment process, including as examples of such materials but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, significant proportions of ashes, wax, paraffin, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, lint, feathers, tars, plastics, wood and sawdust, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurries, beer distillery slops, grain processing wastes, grinding compounds, acetylene generation sludge, chemical residues, acid residues, food processing bulk solids, snow, ice, and all other solid objects, material, refuse and debris not normally contained in sanitary sewage. 
(2)  Sludge or other material from sewage or industrial waste treatment plants or from water treatment plants, unless agreed to by the City Manager. 
(3)  Water accumulated in excavations or accumulated as the result of grading, water taken from the ground by well points, or any other drainage associated with construction. 
(4)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit or exceeding any lower limit fixed by the City to prevent odor nuisance where the volume of discharge represents a significant portion of the flow through a particular sewer. 
(5)  Any water or waste having a five-day BOD, which may contain more than 1,000 parts per million (PPM) by weight as averaged during any 12-hour period. 
(6)  Any water or waste having a pH lower than five and one-half or higher than ten or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to the sewerage system. 
(7)  Any water or waste containing grease or oil or other substances that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(8)  Any water or waste containing emulsified oil or grease exceeding 75 ppm of freon-soluble matter. 
(9)  Any waste with phenolic compounds over ten ppm, expressed as phenol. 
(10)  Any waste with sulfides over ten ppm, expressed as hydrogen sulfide. 
(11)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(12)  Any cyanides or compounds capable of liberating hydrocyanic acid gas over two ppm, expressed as hydrogen cyanide from any individual outlet. The discharge of any cyanides in lesser amounts shall be permitted only upon evidence of satisfactory and continuous control of the concentration and the volume of the discharge. 
(13)  Any water or waste that contains a corrosive, noxious, or malodorous gas or substance that, either singly, or by reaction with other wastes, is capable of causing damage to the system or to any part thereof, of creating a public nuisance or hazard, or of preventing entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair; included in this prohibition are pollutants that create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 60 degrees Centigrade (140 degrees Fahrenheit) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. 261.21. 
(14)  Any pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker and safety problems. 
(15)  Any waste that contains concentrated dye waste or other waste that is either highly colored or could become highly colored by reacting with any other waste. 
(16)  Any water or waste containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, facility or sludge, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to create a public nuisance, or to create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant, which substances include iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances, such that the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment plant exceeds the limits established by the City Manager to comply with current metro district, state or federal regulations. 
(17)  Any water or waste containing suspended solids of such character or quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials in the sewerage process. 
(18)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the City Manager to comply with current state or federal regulations. 
(19)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both that constitute a "slug" as defined herein. 
(20)  Any material or substance not specifically mentioned in this section that is in itself corrosive, irritating to human beings and animals, toxic, noxious, or that by interaction with other wastes could produce undesirable effects, including deleterious action on the system or on any part thereof, could adversely affect any treatment process, could constitute a hazard to humans or to animals, or could have an adverse effect upon the receiving stream. 
(B)  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the sanitary sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (A) of this section, and which in the judgment of the City Manager may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the City Manager may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes, 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the sanitary sewers, 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of Section 8-8-5, W.M.C. 
If the City Manager permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Manager. 
(C)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the City Manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City Manager and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal that are subject to review by the City Manager. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner(s) must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(D)  Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any water or waste, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at their expense. 
(E)  The city manager may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this chapter. These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period. 
(2)  Chemical analysis of wastewaters. 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting wastewater volume and quality. 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or other materials important to sewer use control. 
(5)  A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location. 
(6)  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities. 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the municipal sewer. 
(F)  All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall, where applicable, be monitored using analytical procedures specified in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, "Guidelines establishing test procedures for the analysis of pollutants." For pollutants for which analytical procedures are not included in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, analysis is to be performed in accordance with the latest edition of either the "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", or the "ASTM", Annual Book of Standards or the "Methods for Chemical Analysis of Waters and Wastes", published by the environmental protection agency. Sampling methods, location, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the City Manager. 
(G)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment; except that such wastes accepted under these agreements or arrangements shall not (1) violate any federal minimum pretreatment standards and requirements or (2) violate any user discharge limits promulgated by the metro district. 
(1131 1140 1621 2030 3381) 
8-8-5. - Service and User Charges Within the City of Westminster and Shaw Heights; Lien on Property. 
(A)  [Reserved.] 
(B)  Rate Schedules: 
(1)  Single-family residential equivalent (SFRE). A single-family residential equivalent is based on a three-quarter inch water service tap and meter and is equal to one single-family unit, which means a building or structure used or designed to be used as only one residential unit (including a detached dwelling [single-family house] and a mobile home); each residential unit in a duplex; and each residential unit having water service separately connected to the water main or private water distribution system in a building or structure with three or more residential units. Residential single-family and single-family attached units with other than three-quarter inch water service taps and meters due solely to meet residential fire sprinkler demand shall be considered one SFRE. All residential five-eighths inch by three-quarter inch residential taps and meters currently installed, shall be considered one SFRE. 
(2)  Non-single-family residential equivalent. All connections that are not single-family residential units, or are single-family residential units with larger than a five-eighths by three-quarter inch water meter service, except as noted above, shall have the number of single-family residential equivalents (SFRE's) determined through the size of the water service taps serving the building, structure, or premise, and in certain cases (determined by the water service tap size) shall use the alternate calculation method, including estimated quantities of flow, BOD, SS, and TKN to be discharged to the system. 
(3)  Accessory use equivalent. Tap fees for clubhouses, swimming pools, and other recreation or accessory uses in single-family detached, single-family attached, and multi-family developments are not included in the individual unit sewer tap fees listed herein. Tap fees for these uses and the uses in (2) above shall be calculated at the rates listed in the following SFRE Table: 
Water Tap Size in Inches SFRE ? x 3/4 1.0 3/4 2.0 1 4.8 11/2 11.0 2 20.0 3 43.0 4 86.0 6 or larger Use alternate calculation method in (5) below  
(4)  Base components. The following sewer tap fee calculation method shall be in effect for all tap fee payments made on or after January 1, 2019: 
Sewer tap fees shall be based on two of three components. Costs of the 2019 base components of the sewer tap fee per SFRE are as follows: 
Transport facilities fee ..... $2,158.00 
Treatment facilities fee ..... $4,270.00 
Metro facilities fee ..... $4,270.00 
The residential transport facilities fee shall be calculated as the base transport facilities fee times the number of units times the service commitment (SC) factor associated with the dwelling type as defined below. The nonresidential transport facilities fee shall be calculated as the base transport facilities fee times the number of SFREs. 
Residential Connection Single-Family Detached Mobile Home Space Single-Family Attached Unit Multifamily Unit SC Factor 1.0 1.0 0.7 0.5  
Each year, the transport facilities fee shall be automatically increased in accordance with the annual construction cost index for construction costs as of December of each year, as reported in the construction economics section of the Engineering News-Record (ENR) as published weekly by BNP Media. The annual construction cost index shall at all reasonable times be available at the City Department of Public Works and Utilities. 
The treatment facilities fee shall be calculated as the current base treatment facilities fee times the number of SFREs. In addition and at any time, the treatment facilities fee shall be adjusted to reflect the City of Westminster's treatment facilities costs. 
The metro facilities fee shall be calculated as the current base sewer connection charge set by the Metro District, multiplied by the number of SFREs. In addition and at any time, the metro facilities fee shall be adjusted in accordance with any changes to the base sewer connection charge set by the Metro District. 
(5)  Alternate calculation method. A new sewer connection, which serves multiple new water service taps with a combined service commitment of greater than or equal to 205, shall have its number of service commitments determined in the same manner that connections for service taps for water meters six inches or larger are determined. 
For service taps for water meters six inches or larger, the number of service commitments for calculating the sewer tap fee shall be determined from the following formula: 
SFREs = Flow x (F) / 148+ BOD x (B) / 0.314+ SS x (S) / 0.3209+ TKN x (T) / 0.0494 
Where: flow = estimated flow in gal/day (peak month); BOD = estimated biological oxygen demand in lbs/day (peak month); SS = estimated suspended solids in lbs/day (peak month); TKN = estimated total nitrogen in lbs/day (peak month). 
At minimum, the following values shall be used in the above formulas: 
Tap Size Flow BOD SS TKN 6" 32,264 68.62 69.96 10.76 8" 48,396 102.92 104.94 16.14 10" 76,516 162.73 165.92 25.53  
The City shall make the final determination of the estimated flow, BOD, SS and TKN used to determine the number of service commitments for each new connection, which is subject to the above formula. 
The City shall review applicant's determination of water tap size and may adjust sewer tap fee charges, if the projected water use is more than the maximum service commitment for the corresponding water meter size listed. 
(6)  Reactivation charge. A reactivation charge shall be charged to any reactivated connection that has not registered metered water use for a period of ten years. The reactivation charge is due for each SFRE for each year beyond ten years that the connection has been inactive. The reactivation charge shall be adjusted as part of the base sewer tap fees to equal the metro district charge for reactivation, in the event the metro district charge is revised. 
Reactivation Charge ..... $120.00 per year beyond ten years 
(C)  Payment of the sewer tap fee shall be made no earlier than the date upon which the application is approved for a building permit and no later than the date upon which the water meter(s) are installed for the property. In any event, payment of such fee shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. When the calculated sewer tap fee, based on the tap fee schedule in effect at the time of the water meter installation, is different than the tap fee paid at the time of the issuance of the utility permit, the difference in the sewer tap fee must be paid to the city prior to the installation of the water meter. 
    Payment of the sewer tap fee for any other installation or construction not requiring issuance of a building permit shall be at the time of sewer tap utility permit application. 
    Where additional units are to be served by a sanitary sewer previously installed and currently serving the original units, the sewer tap fee for said additional units shall be at the current rates. 
(D)  The rates for user charges hereinafter set forth are based generally upon the quantity and quality of sewage collected and they are subject to change periodically as circumstances require. Sewer rates are charged based on the average monthly water consumption (AWC), which is based on the average monthly water consumption per user billed during the sewer rate calculation period (January through March). If the water consumption for any month during the AWC calculation period is less than 2,000 gallons, the calculation amount used will be 2,000 gallons. If the water consumption for any month during the AWC calculation period is over 2,000 gallons, the actual water consumption will be used in the AWC calculation process. 
    The AWC is multiplied by the rate per 1,000 gallons (kgal) for that class of property (residential or nonresidential) to calculate the monthly sewer charge. 
    Sewer Rate Schedule. The monthly sewer charge is calculated by multiplying the AWC times the rate per customer category: 
Type of Customer 2019 Charge per 1,000 gallons (kgal) 2020 Charge per 1,000 gallons (kgal) Residential $6.96 $7.84 Nonresidential $7.37 $8.15  
    Any new occupant of an existing property shall be charged the property's current sewer rate through the AWC sewer rate calculation period. 
    Newly constructed single family residential units shall be charged based on the average AWC of all single family homes billed by the City. Any new multi-unit accounts shall be charged the average AWC for existing multi-family units billed by the City. 
    New commercial accounts shall be charged based on the indoor water service commitments purchased divided by 12 to establish an initial AWC. 
    For all customers, a new AWC will be calculated based on actual usage during the next AWC calculation period. 
    Commercial users shall be allowed to install a separate meter to record evaporative and non-wastewater production water use, or wastewater production, as the City directs, during the AWC sewer rate calculation period, of which consumption will not be assessed a sewer use charge. The monthly sewer charge for commercial users may be appealed to the Utility Billing Division for user charges resulting from the average monthly water billed during the period of January through March and may be adjusted if the water billed during the months of July through September is less than the meter readings taken during the standard AWC sewer rate calculation period. 
    For all residential and commercial accounts, for the first month of ownership sewer charges shall be prorated based on the number of days remaining in the property's billing cycle. For all accounts, individual reviews of indoor water consumption may be made on a case-by-case basis to assess adjustments to consumption charges. 
(E)  The City will determine average numeric criteria for the quality and quantity of sewage collected from commercial users. The City will assess a surcharge rate for nonresidential users discharging waters and wastes with quality characteristics greater than the average commercial user. Such users will be assessed a surcharge sufficient to cover the costs of treating such users the higher strength wastes. 
(F)  FOGG Retention Device Inspection Fee: Each customer with a FOGG retention device shall be charged $2.00 per month per device for the implementation of the FOGG inspection program, pursuant to Section 8-10-14, W.M.C. 
(G)  Statements for sewer service charges shall be dated and sent out to users at regular intervals. Such statements shall be added to and made a part of the water bill, if customers receive water service from the City or by separate billing if water service is not provided by the City. 
(H)  Delinquent sewer bills shall be collected in the same manner as delinquent water charges, including the discontinuance of water service for nonpayment of sewer charges. Any payments received for combined water and sewer bills that are for less than the sum of water and sewer bills shall be first applied to the sewer charge and any remainder to the water charge. 
    For customers not receiving City water service, these same provisions shall apply, except that, instead of discontinuance of water, a $10.00 late charge shall be added to the next bill at the time of billing to cover additional accounting charges. If a sewer charge is not paid in nine months, a lien shall be recorded against the property for the balance then due, plus a $25.00 filing fee. If the lien is not paid in 15 months, the service line shall be disconnected from the City's main and plugged. Service shall not be restored until the account is paid in full, plus the actual cost to the City of disconnecting the service line. Reconnection shall be the responsibility of the owner. If such disconnection is required, the City shall notify the Health Department and agency furnishing water to the premises of the action to be taken. 
(I)  The City shall have as security for the collection of such sewer service charges and penalties a lien upon the real property served by sewer service, which lien shall become effective immediately upon the supplying of such sewer service and shall not be discharged until the payment is made of all the sewer service bills, penalties and charges as herein provided. Such liens shall be governed by Title I, Chapter 31 of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(1)  All charges prescribed by this Code relating to the provision of sewer service, together with the cost of collecting such charges, including court costs and attorneys' fees, are a lien that is first and prior to all other liens, claims, titles, and encumbrances, whether prior in time or not, except liens for general taxes, and shall remain a lien upon the real property served by the sewer connection from the date such charges and the cost of collecting them, if any, become due, until they are paid. 
(2)  The City may enforce the lien against the property or the liability against the property owner in any action at law or an action to enforce the lien. If any person in possession of any premises, building, lot, house, or other dwelling unit pays the entire charges due and owing, the payment relieves the property owner from such liability and the premises from the lien. However, the City is not required to look to any person other than the owner of the premises, building, lot, house, or other dwelling unit for the payment of the charges. 
(J)  Owners or agents in charge of business blocks or other buildings occupied by more than one tenant using water from the same service pipe and/or discharging sewage through the same service sewer shall be required to pay the same rate for the whole of such building, unless a separate water meter is installed for each tenant. 
(K)  These rates and charges are established so that each user class pays its proportionate share of the costs of wastewater treatment services, and the City Manager is hereby directed to annually review the charge structure to assure that proportionality between user classes is maintained and to recommend modifications as appropriate. Each user shall be notified annually by the City of its user charges. 
(L)  Reduction of Tap Fee: A nonresidential customer requesting a reduction in the assignment of the tap fee may apply for such reduction to the building division. The request must provide calculations showing the actual sewage discharge level. If approved, the reduction in tap fee may only be reduced to the next lowest full water tap size. 
(1131 1312 1320 1430 1455 1528 1788 1819 1900 1954 2025 2030 2080 2097 2123 2166 2197 2460 2634 2635 2836 2955 2968 3145 3281 3298 3306 3438 3496 3545 3654 3683 3742; Ord. No. 3850, § 2, 9-26-2016 ; Ord. No. 3851, § 3, 9-25-2016 ; Ord. No. 3858, § 2, 10-24-2016 ; Ord. No. 3951 , § 5, 10-8-2018; Ord. No. 3950 , §§ 7, 8, 10-10-2018) 
8-8-6. - Protection From Damage. 
    It shall be unlawful to maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment that is part of the wastewater facilities. 
(A2030) 
8-8-7. - Powers and Authority of Inspectors. 
(A)  The City Manager and other duly authorized representatives bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the municipal wastewater collection system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If the owner or occupant refuses to consent to such inspection, the City Manager may apply to the municipal court for an administrative search warrant. 
(B)  The City Manager or other duly authorized representatives are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes that have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. Any confidential material received by the City shall be kept confidential by the City upon request of the industrial user to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
(C)  While performing the necessary work on private properties, the City Manager or a duly authorized representative shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. The City shall provide insurance coverage against liability for injury or death of City representatives while on the premises of the company, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in subsection 8-8-4(E), W.M.C. 
(D)  The City Manager and other duly authorized representatives of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement. 
(A2030 3381) 
8-8-8. - Penalties. 
(A)  Any person(s) found to be violating the provisions of this chapter, except Section 8-8-6, W.M.C., shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation. The offender shall permanently cease all violations. 
(B)  Any person found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined and/or imprisoned for each violation as specified in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C., and may also be subject to civil remedies provided by Chapter 4 of Title IX of this Code. Any violation of this section shall be a criminal offense. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(C)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(D)  All persons connected to a sanitary sewer owned and maintained by the city outside of the boundaries of the city shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement procedures authorized by this chapter, to the extent such enforcement is authorized by law and pursuant to any applicable contracts with the interested counties or other governmental agencies. 
(1252 1563 1803 2030) 
8-8-9. - Compliance. 
    Any person(s) having a connection to the sanitary sewer system upon the effective date of this ordinance shall have ten days thereafter within which to comply with the requirements hereof. 
(1252 1563 1803 2030) 
8-8-10. - Reserved. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2030) 
8-8-11. - Annual Audit. 
    At the end of each calendar year, an audit shall be made of revenues and disbursements associated with the wastewater collection and treatment system. The audit shall be based on a full calendar year and shall be approved and signed by the City Clerk. 
8-8-12. - Credit for Overcharge. 
    The City Manager or their designee may give credit to any utility customer who has been overcharged at any point in the preceding 12 months. 
(1131 2030; Ord. No. 3950 , § 9, 10-10-2018) 
8-8-13. - Sewer Tap Fee Credits. 
(A)  Upon issuance of a tap permit for the first new service tap, a tap fee credit shall be given in an amount to be calculated by subtracting the cost of the current sewer tap fee of the original tap from the current value of the sewer tap fee of the first new service tap. 
(B)  The amount of credit shall be fixed at the issuance of the first new service tap and may be used for payment for additional service taps that are used on the same property. 
(C)  In no instance shall cash refunds be granted. 
(D)  If any tap is installed and completed without receiving a utility permit and the proper inspection and approval by the City, no tap fee credit shall be given. 
(E)  If a demolition or vacation of a unit results in an abandonment of an associated sewer tap as defined in Section 8-8-14, W.M.C., no tap fee credit shall be granted at the time a new tap permit is issued. 
(F)  Any service commitments associated with sewer taps to serve buildings demolished in established urban renewal areas may be transferred as tap credits to an urban renewal authority or the City for use in approved redevelopment projects within that same urban renewal area. Sewer service commitment credits shall be calculated based on the tap size of the former water tap. When a credit is used for full or partial payment for a new sewer tap, all other applicable charges shall be assessed using the then current fee schedule in effect. 
(G)  In any case where sewer tap fees are paid by the City to the metro district for sewer service at a location, the use of SFRE credits may be limited in use and amount by the agency due payment. In no case shall the city issue credits more than the amount issued by the metro district. 
(1252 1788 2030 3306) 
8-8-14. - Modification of Sewer Taps. 
    A sewer tap, once installed, is associated with the building and property that it serves, and no person shall disconnect, modify or change said tap in any way, except as provided below and in compliance with the Utilities Service Rules: 
(A)  Change in Use Constituting Expansion: A change in use is subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  A change in use must be reviewed by the City's building division using the applicable plumbing code. Such review will include a fixture count evaluation, a water velocity evaluation, and an AWWA guidelines review. A change in use is presumed to occur when: 
(a)  The use of the served property is changed to a different use category for zoning or land use purposes; or 
(b)  Any modifications to landscape are made that require an ODP, ODP amendment, or ODP waiver; or 
(c)  Any building or plumbing modifications that require a permit are made to the served property; or 
(d)  A new or additional water use is introduced on the served property; or 
(e)  A water tap is relocated and applied to a different use or building on the served property; or 
(f)  A water tap is relocated to a different property. 
(2)  If the review of the change in use determines the need for a larger water tap and/or meter than previously purchased for the property, the use will be considered an "expansion of use" and the provisions stated in paragraph (3) below apply. 
(3)  When an expansion of use occurs, a sewer tap fee in an amount equal to the difference between the current sewer tap fee for the existing tap and the current sewer tap fee for the new tap serving the new location and/or use shall be paid. 
(B)  Building Demolition: 
(1)  When any building currently having a sewer tap is demolished, and a building permit for a new building on the same parcel is issued within three years of the last registered water consumption, and the new building maintains the same use with the same pattern and amount of water use as the pre-existing building, no new sewer tap fee shall be required. The new building shall be regarded as being served by the tap in service prior to demolition of the pre-existing building. 
(2)  When any building currently having a sewer tap is demolished, and no new building permit on the same parcel is issued within three years of the last registered water consumption, abandonment will be presumed pursuant to subsection (C) below. 
(C)  Abandonment: 
(1)  Sewer service commitments or SFREs are associated with a tap. Abandonment of any tap will result in the forfeiture of the associated service commitments. 
(2)  Any building having a water meter not registering usage for more than 36 consecutive months, and for which payment of the monthly water meter charge has not been made continuously, shall constitute an abandonment of the associated sewer tap service commitment and SFREs. Notification of the effective date of the abandonment of the sewer tap shall be mailed to the last known address of the property owner or manager. Any subsequent sewer usage by that building shall require receiving a new service commitment and the purchase of a new sewer tap. 
(3)  Upon abandonment of a tap, the property owner shall be responsible for properly abandoning, or for the cost of abandoning, the sewer tap and service sewer. Such service sewer shall be sealed with a stopper and filler material at the tap as specified by the City. No person shall commence or complete said abandonment work without first obtaining a permit under the building regulations of this Code. An appropriate street cut permit shall be required to assure proper inspection and reconstruction of the street. In the event the sewer tap and service sewer is not appropriately abandoned, the City may appropriately abandon the sewer tap and service sewer and charge the cost thereof to the real property formerly served and may collect said charges in the same manner provided for in Section 8-7-9, W.M.C. 
(3306; Ord. No. 3924 , § 11, 3-12-2018) 
8-8-15. - Change in Sewer Use. 
    Any change in customer sewer use that results in an additional assessment by the metro wastewater district shall result in those assessments being charged to the customer by the City. 
(2955 3306) 
CHAPTER 9. - COMBINED UTILITIES 

8-9-1. - Systems Combined. 
    By virtue of and in full conformity with Article XI of the Home Rule Charter of the City of Westminster, as amended, and with the provisions of Title 31, Article 35, Part 4, C.R.S., as amended, the waterworks system and utility and the sanitary sewer system and utility, both being owned and operated by the City, shall be and the same are hereby combined and shall hereafter be jointly operated as a single water and sanitary sewer system and utility. 
(A2030) 
8-9-2. - Reserved. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2030) 
8-9-3. - Revenue Bond. 
    The City shall hereafter be authorized to issue revenue bonds of said joint water and sanitary sewer system and utility, pledging for the payment thereof the joint revenue of said joint system, in accordance with the provisions of the charter of said City. 
8-9-4. - Charter compliance. 
    In the accomplishment of the combining of said waterworks and sanitary sewer systems into a joint system, and in the issuance of any revenue bonds of said joint system, due care shall be taken and adequate provisions shall be made for compliance with the requirements of Article IX, Section 9.7 of the Charter of said City creating the "Water Bond Sinking Fund" and providing for the payment into said fund of certain monies. 
8-9-5. - Reserved. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2030) 
CHAPTER 10. - INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT 

8-10-1. - General Provisions-Definitions. 
(A)  Purpose and Policy: This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the City of Westminster and enables the City to comply with all applicable State and Federal Laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code Section 1251 et seq.) and the general pretreatment regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the City of Westminster pretreatment program; and 
(6)  To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. This chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(B)  Administration: Except as otherwise provided herein, the City Manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the City Manager may be delegated by the City Manager to other City personnel. 
(C)  Abbreviations: The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
BMP - Best Management Practice 
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations 
EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
gpd - gallons per day 
IU - Industrial User 
mg/l - milligrams per liter 
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIU - Significant Industrial User 
TSS - Total Suspended Solids 
U.S.C. - United States Code 
(D)  Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Act or the Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq. 
    Authorized representative of the user shall mean: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
(a)  The President, Secretary, Treasurer, or a Vice-President of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
(b)  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate another authorized representative, if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the City. 
    Best management practices or BMPs shall mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in subsections 8-10-2(a)(1) and 8-10-2(a)(2), W.M.C. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees Centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    Categorical industrial user shall mean an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. 
    City shall mean the City of Westminster. 
    Daily maximum limit or daily maximum shall mean the maximum allowable discharge of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. 
    Environmental protection agency or EPA shall mean the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Existing source shall mean any source of discharge that is not a "new source." 
    Grab sample shall mean a sample that is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge shall mean the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. 
    Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit shall mean the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference shall mean a discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Local limit shall mean effluent limitation developed for industrial users by the City Manager to specifically protect the publicly owned treatment plant (POTW) from interference and pass through, based on site-specific design and disposal limits and conditions of the POTW. Local limits are developed to assure that IU discharges to POTWs do not cause the POTW to violate its permit limits, upset the POTW's biological, chemical or physical treatment processes, prevent the disposal of biosolids (sludge), impact worker health and safety or harm the collection system infrastructure. 
    Medical waste shall mean isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
    Monthly average limit or monthly average shall mean the arithmetic mean of the effluent samples collected during a calendar month or specified 30-day period. 
    New source shall mean: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(a)  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
(b)  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(c)  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification, rather than a new source, if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(b) or (c) above, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment; 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(a)  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
(i)  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment, or 
(ii)  Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities that is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment, or 
(b)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment that are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts that can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
    Noncontact cooling water shall mean water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
    Pass through shall mean a discharge that exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person shall mean any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
    pH shall mean a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
    Pollutant shall mean dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, toxicity, or odor). 
    Pretreatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment requirements shall mean any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standards or standards shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. The term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and best management practices. 
    Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges shall mean absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in subsection 8-10-2(A), W.M.C. 
    Publicly owned treatment works or POTW shall mean a treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1292), that is owned by the City. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances that convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the municipality, as defined in Section 502(4) of the Act, that has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such treatment works. 
    Septic tank waste shall mean any sewage from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
    Sewage shall mean human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
    Significant industrial user (SIU), except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4) of this section, shall mean: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
(a)  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
(b)  Contributes a process wastestream that makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
(c)  Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  The City may determine that an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical industrial user, rather than a significant industrial user, on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The industrial user, prior to the City's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(b)  The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in subsection 8-10-6(N)(2), W.M.C., together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and 
(c)  The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater. 
(4)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this part has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
    Slug load or slug discharge shall mean any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. 
    State shall mean the State of Colorado. 
    Storm water shall mean any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
    Suspended solids shall mean the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    User or Industrial User shall mean a source of indirect discharge. 
    Wastewater shall mean liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, that are contributed to the POTW. 
    Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant shall mean that portion of the POTW that is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
(3381 3639) 
8-10-2. - General Sewer Use Requirements-Pretreatment Standards. 
(A)  Prohibited Discharge Standards: 
(1)  General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater that causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW, whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(a)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(b)  Wastewater having a pH less than five and one-half or more than ten, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment. Limitations on pH are instantaneous discharge limitations; 
(c)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts that will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference; 
(d)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration that, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(e)  Wastewater having a temperature that will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius); 
(f)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(g)  Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(h)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(i)  Wastewater that imparts color that cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit; 
(j)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail toxicity testing; 
(k)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes, except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(l)  Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, and subsurface drainage, unless specifically authorized by the City Manager; 
(m)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(n)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(o)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the City Manager and in accordance with subsection 8-10-3(D), W.M.C. 
(B)  National categorical pretreatment standards: The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. Users must comply with applicable categorical standards. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the City Manager may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with subsections 8-10-2(B)(4) and (B)(5), W.M.C. 
(2)  When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the City Manager may convert the limits to equivalent limitations, expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration, for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users. 
(3)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the City Manager shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(4)  When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that the City convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the City Manager. The City may establish equivalent mass limits only if the industrial user meets all of the conditions set forth in subsections 8-10-2(B)(4)(a)(i) through 8-10-2(B)(4)(a)(v), W.M.C., below. 
(a)  To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the industrial user must: 
(i)  Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use during the term of its control mechanism; 
(ii)  Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, and not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment; 
(iii)  Provide sufficient information to establish the facility's actual average daily flow rate for all wastestreams, based on data from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility's long-term average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-term average production rate must be representative of current operating conditions; 
(iv)  Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not appropriate to control the discharge; and 
(v)  Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards during the period prior to the industrial user's request for equivalent mass limits. 
(b)  An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must: 
(i)  Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits; 
(ii)  Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use of a continuous effluent flow monitoring device; 
(iii)  Continue to record the facility's production rates and notify the City Manager whenever production rates are expected to vary by more than 20 percent from its baseline production rates determined in subsection 8-10-2(B)(4)(a)(iii), W.M.C. Upon notification of a revised production rate, the City Manager must reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and 
(iv)  Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to subsection 8-10-2(B)(4)(a)(i), W.M.C., so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit. 
(c)  When developing equivalent mass limits, the city manager: 
(i)  Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the industrial user by the concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit conversion factor; 
(ii)  Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and 
(iii)  May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent control mechanism terms if the industrial user's actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to subsection 8-10-2(F), W.M.C. The industrial user must also be in compliance with subsection 8-10-13(C), W.M.C., regarding the prohibition of bypass. 
(5)  The City Manager may convert the mass limits of the categorical pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414 and 455 to concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to individual industrial users. The conversion is at the discretion of the City Manager. When converting such limits to concentration limits, the City Manager must use the concentrations listed in the applicable subparts of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455 and document that dilution is not being substituted for treatment as prohibited by subsection 8-10-2(F), W.M.C. 
(6)  The City Manager must document how the equivalent limits were derived for any changes from concentration to mass limits or vice versa and make this information publicly available. 
(7)  Once incorporated into its control mechanism, the industrial user must comply with the equivalent limitations developed in this subsection 8-10-2(B), W.M.C., in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived. 
(8)  Where categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average, limitations, the same production or flow figure shall be used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitation. 
(9)  Any industrial user operating under a control mechanism incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production based standard shall notify the City Manager within two business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the City Manager of such anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its control mechanism that were based on the original estimate of the long-term average production rate. 
(C)  State Pretreatment Standards: (Reserved) 
(D)  Local Limits: 
(1)  The City Manager is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c). 
(2)  The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. 
(3)  Daily Maximum Discharge Limits: No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following maximum limits. These limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. The City Manager may impose mass-based limitations in addition to the concentration-based limits below: 
0.13 mg/l arsenic (total) 
0.10 mg/l cadmium (total) 
4.63 mg/l chromium (total) 
1.26 mg/l chromium (VI) 
2.69 mg/l copper (total) 
0.77 mg/l lead (total) 
0.0005 mg/l mercury (total) 
0.84 mg/l molybdenum (total) 
1.82 mg/l nickel (total) 
0.13 mg/l selenium (total) 
0.91 mg/l silver (total) 
8.44 mg/l zinc (total) 
(4)  Pollutant Loadings: The following are the total cumulative pollutant loadings allowed from all commercial dischargers. The City Manager may limit the discharge of pollutants from commercial dischargers as necessary to meet the following daily allowable loadings: 
0.07 lbs/day arsenic (total) 
0.05 lbs/day cadmium (total) 
2.52 lbs/day chromium (total) 
0.69 lbs/day chromium (VI) 
1.47 lbs/day copper (total) 
0.42 lbs/day lead (total) 
0.053 lbs/day mercury (total) 
0.46 lbs/day molybdenum (total) 
0.99 lbs/day nickel (total) 
0.07 lbs/day selenium (total) 
0.49 lbs/day silver (total) 
4.60 lbs/day zinc (total) 
(5)  The City Manager may develop best management practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, to implement local limits and the requirements of subsections 8-10-2(A) and 8-10-2(D), W.M.C. 
(E)  City's Right of Revision: The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(F)  Dilution: No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation, unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The City Manager may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(3381 3639) 
8-10-3. - Pretreatment of Wastewater. 
(A)  Pretreatment Facilities: Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in subsection 8-10-2(A), W.M.C., within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the City Manager, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the City Manager for review, and shall be acceptable to the City Manager before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the City of Westminster under the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  Additional Pretreatment Measures: 
(1)  Whenever deemed necessary, the City Manager may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate domestic sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The City Manager may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(3)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the City Manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or solids; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interceptors shall be of type and capacity approved by the City Manager, and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired by the user at their expense. Cleaning and maintenance requirements may be specified by the City Manager. 
(4)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(C)  Accidental Discharge/Slug Discharge Control Plans: The City Manager shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control slug discharges. The City Manager may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the City Manager of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by subsection 8-10-6(F), W.M.C.; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(D)  Hauled Wastewater: 
(1)  Domestic wastewater from privately owned recreational vehicles may be introduced into the POTW only at locations, and at times, designated by the City Manager. 
(2)  The discharge into the POTW of hauled septic tank waste, hauled commercial waste or hauled industrial waste is prohibited. 
(E)  Sector Control Programs: The City Manager may establish sector control programs to control specific pollutants as necessary to meet the objectives of this chapter for users that engage in similar activities and discharge similar pollutants. The City Manager shall establish policies for each sector control program. Users subject to these sector control programs may be required to install and operate wastewater pretreatment systems and/or implement best management practices and may be required to apply for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(3381 3639) 
8-10-4. - Wastewater Discharge Permits. 
(A)  Wastewater Analysis: When requested by the City Manager, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request or within such other time period specified by the City Manager. The City Manager may periodically require users to update this information and may specify the format of the information submitted. 
(B)  Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement: 
(1)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the City of Westminster, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to subsection 8-10-4(C), W.M.C., may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(2)  The city manager may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(3)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Sections 8-10-10 through 8-10-12, W.M.C. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and State pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(C)  Wastewater Discharge Permitting: Existing Connections: Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit, who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this ordinance and who wishes to continue such discharges, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with subsection 8-10-4(F), W.M.C., within 30 days of the requirement, or within such other time period specified by the City Manager. 
(D)  Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New Connections: Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit, who proposes to begin discharging into the POTW, must obtain such permit prior to beginning such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with subsection 8-10-4(F), W.M.C., must be filed at least 30 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(E)  Types of Wastewater Discharge Permits: At the discretion of the City Manager, the City Manager may issue either individual wastewater permits or general wastewater discharge permits to control significant industrial user discharges to the POTW. General permits may be used if the following conditions are met. All facilities to be covered by a general permit must: 
(1)  Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations; 
(2)  Discharge the same types of wastes; 
(3)  Require the same effluent limitations; 
(4)  Require the same or similar monitoring; and 
(5)  In the opinion of the City Manager, are more appropriately controlled under a general permit than under individual discharge permits. 
(F)  Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents: 
(1)  All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The City Manager may require users to submit all or some of the following information as part of a permit application. 
(a)  Identifying information. 
(i)  The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(ii)  Contact information, description of activities, facilities, and plant production processes on the premises; 
(b)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(c)  Description of operations. 
(i)  The standard industrial classification(s) and a brief description of the nature of the operation(s) carried out by the user. This description should include each process used, each product produced by type, amount, rate of production and a schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(ii)  Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility that are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(iii)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(iv)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(v)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(d)  Time and duration of discharges; 
(e)  The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit; 
(f)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(g)  Measurement of pollutants. 
(i)  The categorical pretreatment standards and/or local limits applicable to each regulated process. 
(ii)  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the City Manager, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. 
(iii)  Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. 
(iv)  The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection 8-10-6(J), W.M.C. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the City Manager or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard. 
(v)  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection 8-10-6(K), W.M.C. 
(h)  Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, based on subsection 8-10-6(D)(2), W.M.C. 
(i)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the City Manager to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(2)  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(G)  Signatures and Certifications: 
(1)  All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and user certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the certification statement in subsection 8-10-6(N)(1), W.M.C. 
(2)  If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the City Manager prior to, or together with, any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(3)  A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user by the City Manager pursuant to subsection 8-10-1(D), W.M.C., must annually submit the signed certification statement in subsection 8-10-6(N)(2), W.M.C. 
(H)  Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions: The City Manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. The City Manager will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit and may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. The City Manager may also issue a zero discharge permit to a user. Zero discharge permits prohibit the discharge of wastewater from all, or from specific, commercial or industrial processes of a user. 
(I)  Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration: A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the City Manager. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(J)  Wastewater Discharge Permit Conditions: A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the City Manager to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
(a)  A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance date, expiration date and effective date; 
(b)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable; 
(c)  Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
(d)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include representative sampling, an identification of pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law. 
(e)  A requirement for industrial users subject to the reporting requirements in subsection 8-10-6(D), W.M.C., to include the results of any monitoring of regulated pollutants done by the industrial user that exceeds the frequency required by the City, if such monitoring uses procedures prescribed by subsection 8-10-6(J), W.M.C. 
(f)  The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with subsection 8-10-6(D)(2), W.M.C. 
(g)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(h)  Requirements to notify the POTW immediately of any changes to its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge and requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the City Manager to be necessary. 
(i)  Any grant of a monitoring waiver by the City Manager. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
(a)  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(b)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
(c)  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions, including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
(d)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
(e)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
(f)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices; 
(g)  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those that become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
(h)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City Manager to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(K)  Permit Appeal Process: The permittee may petition the City Manager to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The provisions and effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the City Manager fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the district court within 30 days. 
(L)  Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification: The City Manager may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of, or a grant of, a variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; or 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(M)  Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation: The City Manager may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the City Manager of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the City Manager of changed conditions pursuant to subsection 8-10-6(E), W.M.C.; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the City Manager timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; or 
(12)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. 
All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(N)  Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance: A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with subsection 8-10-4(F), W.M.C., a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(3381 3639) 
8-10-5. - Regulation of Waste Received From Other Jurisdictions. 
(A)  If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the City Manager shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality. 
(B)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (A), above, the City Manager shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
(3)  Such other information as the City Manager may deem necessary. 
(C)  An intermunicipal agreement, as required by subsection (A), above, shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance that is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits that are at least as stringent as those set out in subsection 8-10-2(D), W.M.C. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City of Westminster's ordinance or local limits; 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(3)  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the City Manager; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the city manager; 
(4)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the city manager with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(5)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
(6)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
(7)  A provision ensuring the City Manager access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the City Manager; and 
(8)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement. 
(3381) 
8-10-6. - Reporting Requirements. 
(A)  Baseline Monitoring Reports: 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the City Manager a report that contains the information listed in sub-subsection (2), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the City Manager a report that contains the information listed in sub-subsection (2), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
(a)  All information required in subsections 8-10-4(F)(1)(a), 8-10-4(F)(1)(b), 8-10-4(F)(1)(c), 8-10-4(F)(1)(f) and 8-10-4(F)(1)(g), W.M.C. 
(b)  Measurement of pollutants. 
(i)  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the City Manager, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. 
(ii)  The user shall take a minimum of one sample representative of daily operations to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(iii)  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e), in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit, along with supporting data, shall be submitted to the City; 
(iv)  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with subsection 8-10-6(J), W.M.C. 
(v)  The City Manager may allow the submission of a baseline report that utilizes only historical data, so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; 
(vi)  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
(c)  Compliance Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative as defined in subsection 8-10-1(D)(2), W.M.C., and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(d)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection 8-10-6(B), W.M.C. 
(e)  Signature and Report Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with subsection 8-10-6(N)(1), W.M.C., and signed by an authorized representative as defined by Section 8-10-1, W.M.C. 
(B)  Compliance Schedule Progress Reports: The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by Section 8-10-6(A)(2)(d), W.M.C.: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the City Manager no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the City Manager. 
(C)  Reports on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline: Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the City Manager a report containing the information described in subsections 8-10-4(F)(1)(f) and (g) and 8-10-6(A)(2)(b), W.M.C. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in subsection 8-10-2(B), W.M.C., this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. 
    All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 8-10-6(N)(1), W.M.C. All sampling will be done in conformance with subsection 8-10-6(K), W.M.C. 
(D)  Periodic Compliance Reports: 
(1)  All significant industrial users must submit reports no less than twice per year (in June and December or on other dates specified by the city manager), indicating the nature, concentration, and flow of pollutants in the discharge that are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the City Manager or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. The City Manager may require reporting more frequently than twice per year. 
(2)  The City may authorize an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the industrial user. This authorization is subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility, provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater. 
(b)  The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective period of the permit, but in no case longer than five years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent control mechanism. 
(c)  In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes. 
(d)  The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance with subsection 8-10-1(D)(2), W.M.C., and include the certification statement in subsection 8-10-6(N)(1), W.M.C. 
(e)  Non-detectable sample results may only be used as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR Part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis. 
(f)  Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the City Manager must be included as a condition in the user's permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver must be maintained by the City Manager for three years after expiration of the waiver. 
(g)  Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user's permit by the City Manager, the industrial user must certify on each report with the statement in subsection 8-10-6(N)(3), W.M.C., that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of the industrial user: 
(h)  In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present based on changes that occur in the user's operations, the user must immediately notify the City Manager and comply with the monitoring requirements of subsection 8-10-6(D)(1), W.M.C., or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the City Manager. 
(i)  This provision does not supersede certification processes and requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(3)  All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 8-10-6(N)(1), W.M.C. 
(4)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(5)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the City Manager, using the procedures prescribed in subsection 8-10-6(K), W.M.C., the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(E)  Reports of Changed Conditions: Each user must notify the City Manager of any significant changes to the user's operations or system that might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change. A significant change for the purposes of this paragraph is an increase in the volume of wastewater of 20 percent or more, an increase in pollutant concentration or pollutant mass of 20 percent or more, or the addition of any new regulated pollutant. 
(1)  The City Manager may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under subsection 8-10-4(F) of this chapter. 
(2)  The City Manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(F)  Reports of Potential Problems: 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the City Manager, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability that may be imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in sub-subsection (1), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(4)  Significant industrial users are required to notify the City Manager immediately of any changes at its facility affecting potential for a slug discharge. 
(G)  Reports from Unpermitted Users: All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the City Manager as the City Manager may require. 
(H)  Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting: If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the POTW within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the City Manager within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the City performs sampling at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the City performs sampling at the user's facility between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the City receives the results of this sampling. 
(I)  Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste: 
(1)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance that, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information, to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under subsection 8-10-6(E), W.M.C. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections 8-10-6(A), 8-10-6(C), and 8-10-6(D), W.M.C. 
(2)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (A), above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(5)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(J)  Analytical Requirements: All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the City Manager or other parties approved by EPA. 
(K)  Sample Collection: Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. The City Manager shall require that frequency of monitoring necessary to assess and assure compliance by the user with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(1)  Except as indicated in sub-subsection (2) and (3) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the City Manager. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the City, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides, the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the City, as appropriate. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(3)  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in subsections 8-10-6(A) and 8-10-6(C), W.M.C., a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the City Manager may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by subsection 8-10-6(D), W.M.C., the City shall require the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(L)  Date of Receipt of Reports: Written reports delivered by mail or other carrier will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. Other reports will be deemed submitted on the date of receipt. 
(M)  Record Keeping: Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with best management practices established under subsection 8-10-2(D)(3), W.M.C. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the City, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city manager. 
(N)  Certification Statements: 
(1)  Certification of Permit Applications, User Reports and Initial Monitoring Waiver. The following certification statement is required to be signed and submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance with subsection 8-10-4(H), W.M.C.; users submitting baseline monitoring reports under subsection 8-10-6(A), W.M.C.; users submitting reports on compliance with the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under subsection 8-10-6(C), W.M.C.; users submitting periodic compliance reports required by Section 8-10-6(D), W.M.C., and users submitting an initial request to forego sampling of a pollutant based on subsection 8-10-6(D)(2), W.M.C. The following certification statement must be signed by an authorized representative as defined by subsection 8-10-1(D)(2), W.M.C.: 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
(2)  Annual Certification for Non-Significant Categorical Industrial Users. A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user by the City Manager pursuant to subsections 8-10-1(D)(31)(c) and 8-10-4(H)(3), W.M.C., must annually submit the following certification statement signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in subsection 8-10-1(D)(2), W.M.C. This certification must accompany an alternative report required by the City Manager: 
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR _______, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, during the period from _______, _______ to _______, _______ [months, days, year]: 
(a)  The facility described as ___________[facility name] met the definition of a non-significant categorical industrial user as described in subsection 8-10-1(D) [40 CFR 403.3(v)(2)]; 
(b)  The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements during this reporting period; and 
(c)  The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. 
This compliance certification is based upon the following information. 
_____
_____
(3)  Certification of Pollutants not Present. Users that have an approved monitoring waiver based on subsection 8-10-6(D)(2) must certify on each report with the following statement that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of the user. 
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40 CFR _______ [specify applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of ___________ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report under Section 8-10-6, W.M.C. 
(3381 3639) 
8-10-7. - Compliance Monitoring. 
(A)  Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling: The City Manager shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the City Manager ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, whether announced or unannounced, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the City Manager will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The City Manager shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The City Manager may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. The City Manager may specify the frequency of required calibrations. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the City Manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)  Delays in allowing the City Manager access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(B)  Search Warrants: If the City Manager has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the City designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the City Manager may seek issuance of a search warrant from the municipal court. 
(3381) 
8-10-8. - Confidential Information. 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the City Manager's inspection and sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Manager, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state and federal law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report that might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data, as defined by 40 CFR 2.302, will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(3381) 
8-10-9. - Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance. 
    The City Manager shall publish at least annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the users that, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be applicable to any significant industrial user that meets any of the criteria in subsections (A) through (H) below and any other user that meets the definition in subsections (C), (D) or (H) below. Significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(A)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(L); 
(B)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(L), multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(C)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement, as defined by subsection 8-10-1(D), W.M.C., (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the City Manager determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(D)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the City Manager's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(E)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(F)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(G)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(H)  Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices, that the City Manager determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(3381 3639) 
8-10-10. - Administrative Enforcement Remedies. 
(A)  Notification of Violation: When the City Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City Manager may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. The notice of violation may include specific required actions and may require the user to submit an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the City Manager to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(B)  Consent Orders: The City Manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections 8-10-10(D) and 8-10-10(E), W.M.C., and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(C)  Show Cause Hearing: The City Manager may order a user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the City Manager and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user, specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 14 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user, as defined in subsection 8-10-1(D). A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(D)  Compliance Orders: When the City Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City Manager may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge, directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued, unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(E)  Cease and Desist Orders: When the City Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the City Manager may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(F)  Administrative Fines: 
(1)  When the City Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City Manager may fine such user an amount not to exceed $1,000.00. Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(2)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall be assessed and accrue interest in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8 of Title I, Westminster Municipal Code, entitled "penalties and interest," as it may be amended from time to time. 
(3)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the City Manager to reconsider the fine, along with full payment of the fine amount, within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the City Manager may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The City Manager may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(4)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(G)  Emergency Suspensions: The City Manager may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, or threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City Manager may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The City Manager may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Manager that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in subsection 8-10-10(H), W.M.C., are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the City Manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under Sections 8-10-10(C) or 8-10-10(H), W.M.C. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(H)  Termination of Discharge: In addition to the provisions in subsection 8-10-4(M), W.M.C., any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in Section 8-10-2, W.M.C. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection 8-10-10(C), W.M.C., why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the City Manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(3381) 
8-10-11. - Judicial Enforcement Remedies. 
(A)  Injunctive Relief: When the City Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City Manager may petition the district court through the City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The City Manager may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(B)  Civil Penalties: 
(1)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the City for a maximum civil penalty of $1,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(2)  The City may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City. 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(C)  Criminal Prosecution: 
(1)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. 
(2)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW that causes personal injury or property damage shall be subject to the penalty provisions of state law. This penalty shall be in addition to any other civil cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(3)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. 
(D)  Remedies Nonexclusive: The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The City Manager may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the City's enforcement response plan. However, the City Manager may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the City Manager is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(3381) 
8-10-12. - Supplemental Enforcement Action. 
(A)  Liability Insurance: The City Manager may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(B)  Payment of Outstanding Fees and Penalties: The City Manager may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder. 
(C)  Water Supply Severance: Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(D)  Public Nuisances: A violation of any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the City Manager. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the Westminster Municipal Code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the City for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
(3381) 
8-10-13. - Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations. 
(A)  Upset: 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of sub-subsection (3), below, are met. 
(3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(a)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(b)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(c)  The user has submitted the following information to the City Manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days containing the following information: 
(i)  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
(ii)  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
(iii)  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(5)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(6)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(B)  Prohibited Discharge Standards: A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in subsection 8-10-2(A)(1), W.M.C., or the specific prohibitions in subsections 8-10-2(A)(2)(c) through 8-10-2(A)(2)(j), W.M.C., if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the City was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(C)  Bypass: 
(1)  For the purposes of this section: 
(a)  "Bypass" shall mean the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(b)  "Severe property damage" shall mean substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities that causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources, which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  A user may allow any bypass to occur that does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of sub-subsections (3) and (4) of this section. 
(3)  Bypass notifications. 
(a)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the City Manager, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(b)  A user shall submit oral notice to the City Manager of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The City Manager may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis, if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(4)  Bypass. 
(a)  Bypass is prohibited, and the City may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(i)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(ii)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass that occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
(iii)  The user submitted notices as required under subsubsection (3) of this section. 
(b)  The City Manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the City Manager determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (C)(4)(a) of this section. 
(3381) 
8-10-14. - Pretreatment Charges and Fees. 
(A)  The City may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the City's pretreatment program that may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications, including the cost of processing such applications; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures, including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(5)  Fees to recover administrative and legal costs associated with the enforcement activity taken by the City to address IU noncompliance; and 
(6)  Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
(B)  These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the City. 
(3381) 
CHAPTER 11. - STORMWATER QUALITY 

8-11-1. - Purpose and Policy. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures to protect and enhance the quality of water discharged into the City's storm drainage system by: 
(A)  Requiring measures that prevent erosion and the loss of sediment and other pollutants from construction sites. 
(B)  Requiring protection of soil surfaces before, during and after construction. 
(C)  Establishing stormwater quality design requirements for the development and redevelopment of property. 
(D)  Requiring the use of temporary and permanent best management practices (BMPs) to achieve a reduction in the pollutant loading of stormwater runoff. 
(E)  Establishing maintenance requirements for developers, builders, business owners and landowners. 
(F)  Prohibition of illicit discharges into the City's storm sewer system. 
(G)  Establishment of remediation and enforcement procedures. 
(2335 3391) 
8-11-2. - General Requirements. 
(A)  Any person who undertakes or causes to be undertaken any activity that involves disturbance of the surface of land shall ensure that soil erosion, sedimentation, increased pollutant loads and changed water flow characteristics resulting from the activity are controlled, so as to minimize pollution of receiving waters. The requirements of this chapter are minimum standards and a person's compliance with the same shall not relieve such person from the duty of enacting all measures necessary to minimize pollution of receiving waters. 
(B)  All temporary erosion control facilities and all permanent facilities intended to control erosion of any earth disturbance operation shall be installed before any earth disturbance operations take place. 
(C)  Any earth disturbances shall be conducted in such a manner to effectively reduce soil erosion and resulting sedimentation, and should not exceed the erosion expected to occur for the site in its totally undeveloped state. 
(D)  All persons engaged in earth disturbances shall design, implement, and maintain acceptable soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in conformance with the erosion control technical standards adopted by the City. 
(E)  All earth disturbances shall be designed, constructed and completed in such a manner so that the exposed area of any disturbed land shall be limited to the shortest possible period of time. 
(F)  Sediment caused by accelerated soil erosion shall be removed from runoff water before it leaves the site of the earth disturbance. 
(G)  Any temporary or permanent facility designed and constructed for the conveyance of water around, through, or from the earth disturbance area shall be designed to limit the water flow to a non-erosive velocity as defined in the City's "Storm Drainage Design and Technical Criteria Manual". 
(H)  Temporary soil erosion control facilities shall be removed once final stabilization has been achieved. 
(I)  Permanent soil erosion control measures for all slopes, channels, ditches, or any disturbed land area shall be completed within 14 calendar days after final grading, the final earth disturbance has been completed, or in accordance with a city-approved phasing plan. When it is not possible to permanently stabilize a disturbed area after an earth disturbance has been completed or where significant earth disturbance activity ceases, temporary soil erosion control measures shall be implemented within 14 calendar days. All temporary soil erosion control measures shall be maintained until final stabilization is achieved. 
(3391) 
8-11-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Applicant shall mean a landowner or agent of a landowner who has filed an application for a land disturbance permit or a storm water management plan. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) shall mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage of leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. 
    Builder shall mean a person who undertakes construction activities. 
    Business owner shall mean a person who owns title to a commercial property. 
    City inspector shall mean the person or persons authorized by the city manager to inspect a site for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
    City manager shall mean the city manager of the City of Westminster or the manager's designee. 
    Compliance date shall mean the final deadline by which an owner or applicant is required to correct a violation of a prohibition or limitation or to meet a stormwater quality standard or requirement as specified in a compliance schedule, industrial discharge permit or federal, state or local regulation adopting an applicable stormwater quality standard. 
    Compliance order shall mean an administrative order that directs an owner or applicant to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or of a permit or administrative order issued hereunder, by a specific date. The order may include a compliance schedule involving specific actions to be completed within specific time periods. 
    Compliance schedule or schedule of compliance shall mean an enforceable schedule specifying a date or dates by which an owner or applicant must comply with a stormwater quality standard, a stormwater quality requirement or a prohibition or limitation and which may include increments of progress to achieve such compliance. 
    Construction activities shall mean clearing, grading, excavation, and other ground disturbance activities. Construction does not include routine maintenance performed by public agencies or their agents to maintain original line grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility. 
    Construction materials shall mean any material intended for or used in the construction of structures or buildings, including, without limitation, concrete, concrete block, brick, cement, plastic, glass, asphalt, timber, lumber, wood, plywood, fiberboard, shingles, pipe, cable, wire, conduit, duct, insulation, drywall, tile, cabinetry, appliances, fixtures, or like materials. 
    Construction site operator shall mean a person who has been designated by the developer to perform routine inspections of BMPs and who is responsible for ensuring that the structural integrity of the BMPs are maintained and that the BMPs perform as designed. 
    Critical BMPs shall mean those BMPs such as, but not limited to, sediment ponds and dewatering structures, silt fence, wattles, vehicle tracking pads and inlet filters that are installed to keep sediment and pollutants from leaving a construction site and discharging into receiving waters of the United States. 
    Developer shall mean a person who undertakes land disturbance activities. 
    Development shall mean any activity, excavation or fill, alteration, subdivision, change in land use, or practice, undertaken by private or public entities that affect the discharge of stormwater runoff. The term "development" does not include the maintenance of stormwater runoff facilities. 
    Disturbed area shall mean that area of the land's surface disturbed by any work activity upon the property by means including, but not limited to, grading; excavating; stockpiling soil, fill or other materials; clearing; vegetation removal; removal or deposit of any rock, soil, or other materials; or other activities that expose soil. Disturbed area does not include the tillage of land that is zoned agricultural or the tillage of a parcel zoned PUD (planned unit development) within the area identified for agricultural uses. 
    Drainageway (waterway) shall mean a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, that gathers or carries surface water. 
    Final stabilization is reached when all ground surface disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and uniform vegetative cover has been established with an individual plant density of at least 70 percent of pre-disturbance levels, or equivalent permanent, physical erosion reduction methods have been employed. 
    Homeowners association (HOA) shall mean the entity responsible for management and maintenance of those elements of a residential subdivision owned in common by its homeowners. 
    Illicit discharge shall mean any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff, or the exceptions listed in subsection 8-11-8(A), W.M.C. 
    Land disturbance activity shall mean any activity that changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity that bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse. 
    Land disturbance permit shall mean a permit issued by the City allowing an owner or applicant to conduct any significant land disturbance. 
    Landowner shall mean the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. This term includes banks or lending institutions that have obtained control of land as a result of foreclosure, receivership, bankruptcy or like actions. 
    Landscape materials shall mean any material used in or derived from the landscape or improvements to the landscape of real property, including, without limitation, trees, branches, shrubs, plants, vegetation, brush, yard trimmings, leaves, side, dead plant material, soil, or dirt, sand, gravel, rock, stone, boulders, mulch, fencing, paving materials, or like materials. 
    MS4 shall mean a municipal separate storm sewer system. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system shall mean a conveyance or system of conveyances, including, but not limited to, roads with drainage system, municipal streets, inlets/catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains: 
(1)  Owned or operated by a state, city, town, county, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under state law, such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or a designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the Clean Water Act that discharges to state waters; 
(2)  Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; 
(3)  That is not a combined sewer; and 
(4)  That is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW). 
    Non-critical BMPs shall mean those BMPs such as, but not limited to, silt fence, wattles, diversions, vehicle tracking pads, or inlet filters that are installed to minimize the impacts of construction by nonstructural and structural devices within the subject construction site. 
    Official development plan (ODP) shall mean the planning document approved by the Westminster City Council that identifies improvements and other responsibilities associated with the development and/or redevelopment of parcel(s) of land. 
    Permanent BMPs shall mean those BMPs such as, but not limited to, a vegetated swale, wetland, or water quality structure, to be installed and regularly maintained in order to ensure long-term water quality benefits. 
    Post construction BMP shall mean any structural or non-structural permanent BMP that maintains or restores hydraulic conditions to minimize the discharge of pollutants. 
    Public property shall mean any public street, right-of-way, road, highway, place, alley, sidewalk, easement, park, square, median, parkway, boulevard or plaza within the city limits that is dedicated to public use, or owned or maintained by the City. 
    Receiving waters shall mean a river, lake, stream, drainage ditch or other watercourse. 
    Stop work order shall mean an order issued by the City that requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
    Stormwater shall mean precipitation-induced surface runoff. 
    Stormwater construction permit shall mean a permit issued by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment Water Quality Control Division. This program is referred to as the Colorado Discharge Permit System, or CDPS, and regulates stormwater discharges from construction activities under the CDPS general permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activities. 
    Stormwater management plan shall mean a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities. 
    Stormwater runoff shall mean that part of snowfall, rainfall or other precipitation that is not absorbed, transpired, evaporated, or left in surface depressions, and that then flows controlled or uncontrolled into a watercourse or body of water. 
    Surety shall mean a letter of credit or cash in the amount of 115 percent of the cost of constructing or installing all items associated with the land disturbance permit. The surety will guarantee the completion of all terms and conditions of the land disturbance permit, as well as payment of any fines and interest assessed due to non-compliance with any section of the land disturbance permit or this chapter. 
    Temporary BMPs shall mean those temporary BMPs such as, but not limited to, silt fence, wattles, vehicle tracking pads, inlet filters, diversions, sediment ponds and dewatering structures, to be installed and regularly maintained until the site is sufficiently stabilized. 
    Urban drainage and flood control district or UDFCD shall mean the district created by Section 32-11-101, et seq., C.R.S. 
    Vegetative cover shall mean grasses, shrubs, bushes, trees, ground cover and other plants. 
    Watercourse shall mean the natural or human-made channel, ditch, conveyance, or the standing body of water into which stormwater is discharged. 
(3391 3659 3683) 
8-11-4. - Adoption of Stormwater Quality Guidelines. 
    The City hereby requires the implementation of structural or non-structural measures to reduce or maintain the quality of stormwater on a temporary or permanent basis. Such measures will be designed and installed based on guidelines presented in Volume 3-Best Management Practices, Urban Storm Drainage Criteria manual, most recent edition, published by the urban drainage and flood control district. 
(2335 3391 3659) 
8-11-5. - Land Disturbance Permit Requirements. 
(A)  An owner or applicant shall be required to obtain a land disturbance permit prior to conducting any land disturbance activity that: 
(1)  Covers an area equal to or greater than one acre, or 
(2)  Covers an area less than one acre if the site is part of a larger common plan of development, or 
(3)  Involves earthwork affecting more than 200 cubic yards of material, or 
(4)  Involves environmentally sensitive areas, as determined by the City Manager, or 
(5)  Involves grading on any property that possesses physical characteristics or features that increase the potential for erosion, such as highly erodible soils, natural drainage channels or swales, or slopes in excess of eight percent. 
(B)  The land disturbance permit application and the specific criteria therefor are available from the engineering division in the Department of Community Development. Applicants shall file a complete application and pay the application fee specified in Section 11-1-6, W.M.C., which fee is non-refundable. 
(C)  Prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit, unless a landowner has entered into a public or private improvement agreement addressing the same, the landowner shall enter into a land disturbance agreement with the City and provide a financial guarantee for completion of the land disturbance activities, unless either or both of these requirements is waived by the City Engineer for good cause. 
(3391 3564 3659 3683) 
8-11-6. - Stormwater Management Plan. 
(A)  Every development, redevelopment or construction project that receives a land disturbance permit requires the preparation of a stormwater management plan (SWMP) to include temporary and permanent best management practices (BMPs) designed to reduce the pollutant loading on the stormwater system. Any stormwater management plan prepared for a property in the City pursuant to the laws and regulations of the State of Colorado shall be prepared in accordance with the standards and specifications contained in the City of Westminster Storm Drainage Design and Technical Criteria Manual and submitted to the City for its review and approval. 
(B)  Upon approval of a SWMP, the landowner, or its agent designated in writing, is responsible for performing all inspections in compliance with the regulations of the State of Colorado Water Quality Control Division. 
(C)  Both during and after completion of every development, redevelopment or construction project that has received approval of a SWMP, the landowner, its successors, heirs or assigns shall be responsible for maintaining and repairing any and all temporary and permanent drainage improvements provided for in the approved SWMP and as provided below in Section 8-11-7, W.M.C. 
(2335 3391 3659) 
8-11-7. - Maintenance Requirements. 
    Developers, builders, business owners, homeowners' associations and landowners, respectively, shall be responsible for ensuring that all best management practices (BMP) identified on a project's approved construction drawings, its official development plan, its land disturbance permit and its stormwater management plan (SWMP) are properly installed, repaired, perpetually maintained and are in good working order as hereafter provided. 
(A)  Landowners and/or their developers shall be responsible for ensuring that: 
(1)  Any temporary and/or permanent post-construction BMPs that were installed are being properly maintained and are in good working order; 
(2)  The site is fully developed and final stabilization has been reached; 
(3)  Any deficiencies noted by the City prior to the expiration of the warranty period for public improvements have been corrected; and 
(4)  When individual lots have been sold to a builder, the landowner and/or developer shall disclose and explain, if necessary, the stormwater runoff quality requirements of the SWMP with the builder prior to or at time of closing. 
(B)  Builders shall be responsible for ensuring that: 
(1)  Any temporary and/or permanent post-construction BMPs that were installed prior to lot purchase from developer and/or landowner are being properly maintained and are in good working order; 
(2)  Final stabilization as completed by the developer is maintained or repaired, if damaged by the builder; 
(3)  Any temporary and/or permanent post-construction BMPs necessary for the building site(s) have been properly installed, maintained and remain in good working order up to and until the property has been sold, unless builder has a signed agreement with the landowner wherein the landowner accepts the complete maintenance responsibility until the land is sold; and 
(4)  Stormwater runoff quality requirements of the SWMP for individual site(s) are disclosed and explained to the purchaser at time of closing, unless builder has a signed agreement with the landowner wherein the landowner accepts this disclosure responsibility. 
(C)  Business owners, homeowners' associations and landowners shall be responsible for ensuring that: 
(1)  Any temporary BMPs installed prior to lot purchase from developer, owner, and/or builder are properly maintained and remain in good working order until the lot is stabilized; 
(2)  Final stabilization has been achieved and maintained; 
(3)  If not installed prior to individual lot purchase, temporary and/or permanent BMPs will be installed within ten days from date of purchase at the base of all gutter downspouts and around the perimeter of the site where needed to prevent sediment from moving off site and maintained until final stabilization has been achieved on the property; and 
(4)  Permanent post-construction stormwater runoff quality measures constructed or installed on their property as shown on the approved SWMP, the official development plan and/or construction plans are properly maintained in perpetuity. 
(D)  All temporary stormwater runoff quality control measures shall be removed within 14 calendar days after final stabilization has been achieved and the temporary measures are no longer needed. 
(E)  Should any developer, builder, business owner, homeowners' association or landowner fail to adequately maintain the permanent post-construction stormwater runoff quality control measures or fail to remove the temporary measures, the City Manager or his representative may summarily cause the necessary work to be performed at the expense of such responsible party, and the cost of such abatement shall be a first and prior lien on the property as provided by Title I, Chapter 31 of this Code, and may be assessed and collected pursuant to Section 8-4-5, W.M.C. 
(F)  Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, and such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(3391 3564 3659) 
8-11-8. - Illicit Discharges. 
(A)  Prohibition of Illegal Discharges: It is unlawful and constitutes a public nuisance for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged or spilled any substance other than naturally occurring stormwater runoff into the City's stormwater drainage system. 
(1)  Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants to the stormwater system and to waters of the United States when properly managed to ensure that no potential pollutants are present; and, therefore, they shall not be considered illegal discharges unless determined to cause a violation of the Clean Water Act or this chapter: 
(a)  Potable water line flushing; 
(b)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater and other discharges from potable water sources; 
(c)  Landscape irrigation and lawn watering; 
(d)  Diverted stream flows; 
(e)  Rising groundwater; 
(f)  Groundwater infiltration to the stormwater drain system; 
(g)  Uncontaminated foundation and footing drains; 
(h)  Uncontaminated water from crawlspace pumps; 
(i)  Air conditioning condensation; 
(j)  Natural springs; 
(k)  Individual residential car washing; 
(l)  Flows from naturally existing riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(m)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; 
(n)  Water incidental to street sweeping (including associated sidewalks and medians) not associated with construction; and 
(o)  Discharges necessary to protect public health and safety, such as flows from emergency firefighting activities. 
(2)  Waiver: The City Manager may exempt occasional, incidental non-stormwater discharges that the manager determines to be uncontaminated and acceptable for return to the stormwater drain system and the receiving waters. 
(3)  This prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES or CDPS permit or under a CDPHE-issued low risk discharge policy or guidance letter, provided that the discharge is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, order and/or other applicable laws and regulations. 
(B)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to relieve any person discharging or causing to be discharged or allowing to be discharged water into the storm drainage system from any liability for damage caused by the volume or quality of water thus discharged. 
(C)  Prohibition of Illicit Connections: 
(1)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(D)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, store, maintain, allow to accumulate, or permit any other person to place, store, maintain, or allow to accumulate on any public property or right-of-way any stockpile, pile, storage, accumulation of construction materials and/or landscape materials, or any roll-off dumpster, unless such person is an employee, official, or contractor of the city acting within the scope of his or her municipal functions. 
(E)  Enforcement: In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, should any person discharge or cause to be discharged or spilled or maintain a condition upon any property that may result in the discharge of any substance other than naturally occurring stormwater runoff into the City's stormwater drainage system, except for the exceptions listed in subsection 8-11-8(A), W.M.C., above, the City Manager may enjoin the illicit discharge immediately and summarily cause all necessary cleanup work to be performed at the expense of such responsible party, and the cost of such abatement shall be a first and prior lien on the property as provided by Title I, Chapter 31 of this Code, and may be assessed and collected pursuant to Section 8-4-5, W.M.C. Alternatively, the City may make a demand on the surety to pay for these expenses. 
(3391 3564 3659) 
8-11-9. - Land Disturbance Permit Remediation Procedures. 
(A)  City Inspector. If a City Inspector, or any other authorized City representative, determines that eroded soils are leaving a disturbed area, the City Inspector or authorized representative may, in writing, direct the business owner, landowner or such owner's agents or representatives on the site to repair, replace and/or install any sediment and/or erosion controls that were proposed for the site, or require additional sediment and/or erosion controls be installed, if deemed necessary by the City Inspector or authorized representative to minimize said sediment from migrating off site, including the issuance of stop work orders and/or suspension or revocation of any permit. It shall be unlawful for any business or landowner or such owner's agents or representatives to fail to take all necessary measures to comply with such written directive and take all measures necessary to prevent soil erosion from migrating off site. 
(B)  Right of Entry: 
(1)  The City Inspector, or any other authorized City representative, shall have the right to enter the premises of any owner or applicant to determine whether the owner or applicant is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any land disturbance permit or order issued hereunder. Owner or applicant shall allow the City Inspector or authorized representative ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, whether announced or unannounced, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(2)  If the City Inspector or authorized representative has been refused access to the property and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the City designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the City Inspector or authorized representative may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Municipal Court. 
(C)  Compliance Orders. Whenever the City determines that any activity is occurring that is not in compliance with a land disturbance permit and/or the requirements of this chapter, the City may issue a written compliance order to the construction site operator. The schedule shall contain specific actions the construction site operator must complete, including dates for the completion of the actions. It shall be unlawful for any construction site operator to fail to comply with any compliance order requirement. 
(D)  Suspension and Revocation of Permit. The City may suspend or revoke a construction site land disturbance permit for violation of any provision of this chapter, violation of the permit, and/or misrepresentations by the permittee or the permittee's agents, employees, or independent contractors. 
(E)  Stop Work Orders. Whenever the City determines that any activity is occurring that is not in compliance with an approved permit and/or the requirements of this chapter, the City can order such activity stopped, upon service of written notice upon the person responsible for or conducting such activity. Such person shall immediately stop all activity until authorized in writing by the City to proceed. If the appropriate person cannot be located, the notice to stop work shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the area where the activity is occurring. The notice shall state the nature of the violation. The notice shall not be removed until the violation has been cured or authorization to remove the notice has been issued by the City. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with a stop work order. 
(F)  Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this chapter. Exercise of any such remedy shall not be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a violator. 
(3391 3564 3683) 
8-11-10. - Administrative Enforcement Remedies. 
(A)  Notification of Violation: When the City Manager finds that an owner or applicant has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a land disturbance permit or order issued hereunder, or any other stormwater quality standard or requirement, the City Manager may serve upon that owner or applicant a written or electronic notice of violation. The notice of violation may include specific required actions and may require the owner or applicant to submit an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the owner or applicant of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Where the violation is an illicit discharge, the discharge must be immediately corrected. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the City Manager to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(B)  Consent Orders: The City Manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any owner or applicant responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the owner or applicant to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections 8-11-10(D) and 8-11-10(E), W.M.C., and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(C)  Show Cause Hearing: The City Manager may order an owner or applicant who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a land disturbance permit or order issued hereunder, or any other stormwater quality standard or requirement, to appear before the City Manager or designated representative and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the owner or applicant specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the owner or applicant show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 14 days prior to the hearing. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the owner or applicant. 
(D)  Compliance Orders: When the City Manager finds that an owner or applicant has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a land disturbance permit or order issued hereunder, or any other stormwater quality standard or requirement, the City Manager may issue an order to the owner or applicant responsible for the discharge, directing that the owner or applicant come into compliance within a specified time. If the owner or applicant does not come into compliance within the time provided, storm sewer service may be discontinued, unless adequate best management practices are installed and properly maintained. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and best management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the storm sewer. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the owner or applicant. 
(E)  Cease and Desist Orders: When the City Manager finds that an owner or applicant has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a land disturbance permit or order issued hereunder, or any other stormwater quality standard or requirement, or that the owner's or applicant's past violations are likely to recur, the City Manager may issue an order, including a stop work order, to the owner or applicant directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the owner or applicant to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the owner or applicant. 
(F)  Administrative Fines: 
(1)  When the City Manager finds that an owner or applicant has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a land disturbance permit, a stormwater management plan, an order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any other applicable stormwater quality standard or requirement, the City Manager may fine such owner or applicant in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation per day. 
(2)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall be assessed and accrue interest in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8 of title I, W.M.C., entitled "penalties and interest," as it may be amended from time to time. The City may also collect unpaid fines and interest by placing a demand on the surety provided with the land disturbance permit. 
(3)  Owners or applicants desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the City Manager to reconsider the fine, along with full payment of the fine amount, within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the City Manager may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the owner's or applicant's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the owner or applicant. The City Manager may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(4)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the owner or applicant. 
(G)  Emergency Suspensions: The City Manager may immediately suspend an owner's or applicant's discharge, after informal notice to the owner or applicant, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any owner or applicant notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of an owner's or applicant's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City Manager may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the storm sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the receiving waters, or endangerment to any individuals. The City Manager may allow the owner or applicant to recommence its discharge when the owner or applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Manager that the period of endangerment has passed. 
(2)  An owner or applicant that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the City Manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsection 8-11-10(C), W.M.C. 
(H)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(3391 3659 3683) 
8-11-11. - Judicial Enforcement Remedies. 
(A)  Injunctive Relief: When the City Manager finds that an owner or applicant has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a land disturbance permit, a stormwater management plan, an order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any other stormwater quality standard or requirement, the City Manager may petition the District Court through the City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that restrains or compels the specific performance of the land disturbance permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the owner or applicant. The City Manager may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the owner or applicant to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against an owner or applicant. 
(B)  Civil Penalties: 
(1)  An owner or applicant who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a land disturbance permit, a stormwater management plan, an order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any other stormwater quality standard or requirement shall be liable to the City for a maximum civil penalty of $1,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of an illicit discharge or a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(2)  The City may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City. 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the owner's or applicant's violation, corrective actions by the owner or applicant, the compliance history of the owner or applicant, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against an owner or applicant. 
(C)  Criminal Prosecution: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter, a land disturbance permit, or order issued hereunder. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to introduce any substance into the MSA that causes personal injury or damage. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to make any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, land disturbance permit, or order issued hereunder. 
(4)  Any violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be a criminal violation, which shall be punishable by fine, imprisonment, or both, pursuant to the provisions of Section 1-8-1, W.M.C., as the same may from time to time be amended. 
(D)  Remedies Nonexclusive: The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The City Manager may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant owner or applicant. Enforcement of stormwater quality violations will generally be in accordance with the City's enforcement response plan. However, the City Manager may take other action against any owner or applicant when the circumstances warrant. Further, the City Manager is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant owner or applicant. 
(3391 3564 3659 3683) 
8-11-12. - Supplemental Enforcement Action. 
(A)  Liability Insurance: The City Manager may decline to issue a certificate of occupancy or reissue a revoked land disturbance permit to any owner or applicant who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous land disturbance permit, a stormwater management plan, or an order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any other stormwater quality standard or requirement, unless the owner or applicant first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the MS4 caused by their illicit discharge. 
(B)  Payment of Outstanding Fees and Penalties: The City Manager may decline to issue a certificate of occupancy or reissue a revoked land disturbance permit to any owner or applicant who has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this chapter, a previous land disturbance permit, or order issued hereunder. 
(C)  Water Supply Severance: Whenever an owner or applicant has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a land disturbance permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other stormwater quality standard or requirement, water service to the owner or applicant may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the owner's or applicant's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(D)  Public Nuisances: A violation of any provision of this chapter, a land disturbance permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other stormwater quality standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the City Manager. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the Westminster Municipal Code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the City for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
(3391 3683) 
CHAPTER 12. - RECLAIMED/NON-POTABLE WATER REGULATIONS 

8-12-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Agronomic rate shall mean the rate of application of nutrients to plants that is necessary to satisfy the plants' nutritional requirements, while strictly minimizing the amount of nutrients that run off to surface waters or that pass below the root zone of the plants. 
    Commercial user shall mean a person who uses non-potable water in the operation of a business patronized by the public, or who provides services to the public. 
    Direct reuse shall mean the use of reclaimed domestic wastewater that, after treatment, has not been discharged into waters of the state. 
    High-water landscape shall mean landscape that requires greater than ten gallons per square foot annually. 
    Industrial user shall mean a person who uses reclaimed water for industrial processes or in the construction process. 
    Irrigation system shall mean the facilities, piping and other equipment used by a landscape irrigation user. 
    Landscape irrigation shall mean irrigation of areas of grass, trees, and other vegetation that are accessible to the public, including, but not limited to, parks, greenbelts, golf courses, and common areas at apartment, townhouse, commercial/business parks, and other similar complexes. 
    Landscape irrigation user shall mean a person who uses non-potable water for the purpose of landscape irrigation. 
    Low-water landscape shall mean landscape that requires three gallons of water per square foot or less annually and is watered using water saving irrigation technologies, such as drip, micro spray, or subsurface. 
    Mains shall mean the main pipes and connections forming a part of the City reclaimed/non-potable waterworks. 
    Meter shall mean the device, appropriate to the premises served, installed to measure the amount of water passing through it, with an accuracy of between 95 percent and 101 percent of actual quantities delivered. 
    Moderate-water landscape shall mean landscape that requires more than three, but less than ten, gallons of water per square foot annually. 
    Non-potable water shall mean water used for purposes other than human consumption that is not treated to potable water standards. This includes water from ditches, lakes, ponds, or the reclaimed treatment system. 
    Person shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, association, state or political subdivision thereof, federal agency, state agency, municipality, commission, or interstate body. 
    Point of compliance shall mean a point identified by the treater in the non-potable water treatment or transmission system after all treatment has been completed, prior to dilution and blending. 
    Reclaimed water shall mean that water that originates from the City's reclaimed water treatment facility and is distributed through the reclaimed water distribution system for the express purpose of non-potable uses. 
    Reclaimed water treatment facility shall mean a facility that receives wastewater from a domestic wastewater treatment facility with secondary treatment and provides such additional treatment to enable the wastewater to meet the standards for approved uses. 
    Restricted access shall mean controlled and limited access to the areas where reclaimed water is being used and meets the category 1 standards as defined in the Colorado Code of Regulations ("C.C.R.") Section 84.7. 
    Restricted use shall mean landscape irrigation with reclaimed domestic wastewater that meets the requirements of C.C.R. Sections 84.6.B., 84.7, and 84.8. 
    Service commitment shall mean the average annual water service provided to one single-family detached dwelling unit (currently 140,000 gal./yr.). 
    Service pipe shall mean a branch pipe with its fittings and connections through which water is taken. 
    Street shall mean any street, avenue, alley, lane or other thoroughfare. 
    Tap shall mean an opening or connection in the mains through which water is taken. 
    Transmission system shall mean the treater's facilities that transport treated non-potable water between the treater and users. 
    Treater shall mean a person who treats and provides reclaimed water to an applicator/user for the purpose of landscape irrigation, commercial or industrial use. The treater and the applicator/user may be the same entity. 
    Unrestricted access shall mean uncontrolled access to the areas where reclaimed water is being used and meets the category 2 standards as defined in C.C.R. Section 84.7. 
    Unrestricted use shall mean landscape irrigation with reclaimed domestic wastewater that meets the requirements of C.C.R. Sections 84.6.A and 84.7. 
    User shall mean the owner of the property upon which the non-potable or reclaimed water is to be utilized for landscape irrigation, fire protection, commercial, or industrial uses. 
    User plan to comply shall mean the information and documentation a user of reclaimed water is required to submit to the division under C.C.R. Sections 84.9 and 84.10 of this regulation. 
    Water utility infrastructure charge shall mean the fee for fixed infrastructure and recurring costs not related to volumetric water production costs. 
(2767 3134 3683; Ord. No. 3950 , § 10, 10-10-2018) 
8-12-2. - Appropriate Uses. 
(A)  Reclaimed/non-potable water will be made available for allowable purposes on commercial/industrial sites, parks, golf courses and common areas within residential developments, as allowed by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, C.C.R. Section 84. Reclaimed water will not be available for individual, single-family residential use. 
(B)  All new developments will be required to submit an application for review for connection to the reclaimed/non-potable water system. This application will be submitted to the department of public works and utilities as part of the preliminary/official development plan (PDP/ODP) process. It shall be at the sole discretion of the city manager or his designee to decide if a new development will utilize reclaimed/non-potable or potable water for landscape irrigation practices based on City of Westminster criteria. The criteria may include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The availability of non-potable or reclaimed water distribution /transmission lines in the area of the development and/or project. 
(2)  Availability of sufficient irrigated area for use of non-potable or reclaimed water. 
(3)  Conformance with state and federal regulations. 
(C)  No use of non-potable water will commence, or connection to the reclaimed/non-potable system be made, without the prior approval of the city. 
(D)  Users with Existing Irrigation Systems: When reclaimed/non-potable water becomes available to a property, the City Manager or his designee shall provide written notice to the potential customer(s) located on that property of such availability. Users with existing irrigation systems using potable water who desire to convert to non-potable water must apply for reclaimed/non-potable water in accordance with the application procedures specified in this chapter. Approved users must disconnect irrigation systems from the potable water system and connect to the non-potable water system within 180 days of such written notice of approval. 
(E)  Users with New or Redeveloped Irrigation Taps: All new irrigation systems constructed after the effective date of this chapter and approved application process must connect to the reclaimed/non-potable water system at construction, if non-potable water is available to the property and if deemed reasonable by the City Manager or his designee. Such connection must be made prior to, or contemporaneously with, connection of other improvements on the property to the potable water system. If reclaimed/non-potable water is not available to a property at the time of construction of an irrigation system but is planned to be available in the future, construction to reclaimed water system standards may be required. In such instances, connection to the non-potable water system may be required within 180 days of notice of availability from the City. The City Manager or his designee may approve temporary connections to the potable system. Once reclaimed/non-potable water becomes available, the user may be required to connect to the reclaimed non-potable system within 180 days. 
(2767 3134) 
8-12-3. - Applicability. 
(A)  These regulations apply to the use of reclaimed/non-potable water for landscape irrigation, industrial uses, and commercial uses. No unapproved use of reclaimed water is permitted, except that these regulations do not apply to reuse of treated wastewater for: on-site landscape irrigation by wastewater treatment plants, agricultural use, or industrial use or to wastewater that has been treated and released to state waters. These regulations apply to the use of reclaimed water for individual treaters and users, as defined herein, upon the issuance of a notice of authorization by the water quality control division. 
(B)  These regulations only apply to users of the City's non-potable and reclaimed water systems. 
(3134) 
8-12-4. - Utility Permit Required. 
(A)  A reclaimed/non-potable water tap shall not be made on any reclaimed/non-potable water main, either public or private, or any other portion of the waterworks of the City without first securing an approved utility permit. The application for a reclaimed/non-potable utility permit shall be made in writing upon a form furnished by the City and shall clearly state the tap size, irrigated area by hydrozone, address, and person applying for tap and any other information as the City may reasonably require. 
(B)  Reclaimed/non-potable service lines and meter vaults may be installed as part of water main construction, if prior written approval has been received from the City. The installations of these service lines and meter vaults are subject to inspection and approval by the City and shall be in accordance with adopted city standards and specifications. 
(C)  Payment of the tap fee when the construction requires a building permit shall be made no earlier than the date of approval of building permit and no later than the date upon which the water meter is installed. Payment of the reclaimed/non-potable water tap fee for an irrigation system, or for any other installation or construction not requiring issuance of a building permit, shall be at the time of the utility permit application. The amount of such fee shall be calculated according to the City's service commitment calculation formulas and the fee schedule in effect at the time payment is made. 
(D)  For existing facilities that do not require a certificate of occupancy and that have an existing irrigation tap or use an existing tap for irrigation purposes, a utility permit will be required, but will have no additional tap fee charged if the taps are the same size when the existing potable connection is exchanged for a reclaimed/non-potable water connection. Prior to a reclaimed/non-potable water meter being installed, the existing potable water tap must be abandoned in accordance with applicable city standards and specifications. 
(E)  Where any unit currently having a reclaimed/non-potable water tap is demolished, and a building permit for reconstruction purposes is issued, and no change in water use is anticipated within one year of the date of demolition, no new tap fee shall be required, and the new unit shall be regarded as being served by the tap in service prior to demolition of the unit. Failure to satisfy the above criteria shall constitute an abandonment of the reclaimed/non-potable water tap and the service commitments. Any subsequent construction shall be done in conformance with the Westminster Municipal Code. Any modification of the irrigated area over 500 square feet from the most recent official development plan (ODP) landscaped area totals, or from the existing landscape if no ODP exists, that would result in the calculated increased requirement of irrigation water may result in the imposition of additional irrigation tap fees. 
(F)  Where any reclaimed/non-potable water tap registers no use and for which payment of the monthly meter charge has not been made for more than 36 consecutive months, it shall constitute an abandonment of the water tap and service commitments and the meter shall be removed by the City. Any subsequent occupation of that unit shall be done in conformance with this Code and shall require a new utility permit application and payment of the applicable tap fee. 
(2767 3134) 
8-12-5. - Tap Fee Calculation. 
(A)  The reclaimed/non-potable water tap applicant will submit plans: 
(1)  Identifying the proposed irrigated area; 
(2)  The total square footage/acreage per water use category; 
(3)  Proposed landscape plan; and 
(4)  An irrigation plan signed by a professional irrigation system designer. 
(5)  For specific landscape and irrigation system requirements, refer to the City of Westminster landscape regulations. 
(6)  For a listing of landscape materials suitable/approved for use in non-potable irrigated areas, contact the City of Westminster Water Resources staff. 
This information will be used to calculate a projected water demand for the purpose of determining the equivalent reclaimed/non-potable tap size. The applicant shall then pay 80 percent of the potable water tap fees set forth in Section 8-7-3, W.M.C., the total of which shall be known as the reclaimed/non-potable water tap fee, which shall be paid upon issuance of the utility permit or as otherwise required by Section 8-12-2, W.M.C. 
(B)  Provision of Materials and Work: For all reclaimed/non-potable water taps, the applicant shall furnish all labor and work and all materials as specified. See City of Westminster "Standards and Specifications for the Design and Construction of Public Improvements" for details. The City shall provide the applicant with a list of required materials and approved suppliers at the time of application. 
(2767 3134 3683) 
8-12-6. - Specifications. 
(A)  The City will specify all materials that the applicant is to furnish pursuant to adopted City standards and specifications. Reclaimed/non-potable water use will be metered through a single vault for each customer site. Meter vaults shall be located only within public rights-of-way, public easements, or City easements. Location and grade shall be subject to approval of the City. Once installed and approved, all reclaimed/non-potable metering equipment becomes the property of the City. 
(B)  Authorization to install any tap or meter may be withheld by the City if the applicant is in arrears for any current water account for that property, is in violation of any law of the City or state and federal regulations, or in default in any agreement with the City. It shall be unlawful to use, or permit to be used, any non-potable water tap installation until the meter has been approved or set by the City, unless specific written authorization has been granted by the City. 
(C)  Each reclaimed/non-potable water tap shall be assigned a service address and billing account in the name of the property owner or manager. 
(D)  Any modification of the irrigated area over 500 square feet from the most recent official development plan (ODP) landscaped area totals, or from the existing landscape if no ODP exists, that would result in the calculated increased requirement of irrigation water may result in the imposition of additional irrigation tap fees. 
(E)  All reclaimed/non-potable water piping and appurtenances shall be clearly identified as non-potable water facilities. 
(1)  Reclaimed/non-potable water service pipe and tubing shall be purple (pantone purple 522c) or identified with a purple stripe with the words non-potable or reclaimed water at eight-inch intervals. All irrigation boxes, control valves, appurtenances, and sprinkler heads shall be constructed of purple materials and labeled as non-potable water. 
(2)  Covers for all valve boxes, meter and service boxes, and other below-ground devices shall be painted purple and/or shall be permanently embossed "non-potable water" or "reclaimed water." 
(3)  The public shall be notified of the use of reclaimed water by posting advisory signs designating the nature of the water use either non-potable or reclaimed. 
(a)  Signage shall be placed, as appropriate, at entrances to residential neighborhoods where reclaimed/non-potable water is used, and at prominent locations at all commercial sites, including multi-family developments, office parks, schools, churches, recreational developments, and golf courses. 
(b)  Notification for golf courses shall include notification at entrance and the first and tenth tees, as well as notes on scorecards. 
(c)  Advisory signs shall be posted adjacent to lakes or ponds used to store reclaimed/non-potable water. 
(F)  Cross Connection Control: All customers receiving reclaimed/non-potable water will be required to install a reduced pressure principal type backflow prevention device downstream of the non-potable water meter. No cross connection between the non-potable system and the potable water system shall be allowed. 
(G)  All construction shall be in compliance with American Water Works Association (AWWA) manual of water supply practices for dual water systems M-24, and all applicable city specifications. 
(2767 3134) 
8-12-7. - Water Rate Schedule. 
(A)  All non-potable water delivered from the City's reclaimed/non-potable water system shall be metered, and the charge therefor shall be set at 80 percent of the existing commercial potable water rates as set forth in Section 8-7-9, W.M.C. 
(B)  Continuance of Customer Charges: Monthly customer charges shall be assessed in all cases during the irrigation season, including where no water is consumed, until such time as City personnel are specifically requested to discontinue reclaimed/non-potable water service at the meter. Monthly customer charges will not be assessed in the months when reclaimed /non-potable water is not available for delivery from the system. 
(C)  Residential, irrigation, townhome/condominium (consisting of four units or more) and public/quasi-public users shall, in 2019, be charged a monthly water utility infrastructure charge based on the meter size as listed in Schedule A plus: $5.68 per 1,000 gallons, and shall, in 2020, be charged a monthly water utility infrastructure charge based on the meter size as listed in Schedule A plus: $6.04 per 1,000 gallons. 
(D)  Commercial users shall, in 2019, be charged a monthly water utility infrastructure charge based on meter size as listed in Schedule A plus: $5.68 per 1,000 gallons for the number of gallons used per monthly billing, and shall, in 2020, be charged a monthly water utility infrastructure charge based on meter size as listed in Schedule A plus: $6.04 per 1,000 gallons. 
Schedule A Meter Size 
Code Meter Size 2019 Monthly Water Utility Infrastructure Charge 2020 Monthly Water Utility Infrastructure Charge 1 ?" × 3/4" $10.96 $13.05 2 3/4" × 3/4" $16.75 $19.33 3 1" $23.64 $27.78 5 11/2" $38.88 $47.18 6 2" $55.72 $69.19 7 2" × ?" $55.72 $69.19 8 3" $115.35 $144.39 9 3" × 3/4" $115.35 $144.39 10 4" $154.14 $208.59 11 4" × 1" $154.14 $208.59 12 6" $270.06 $388.70 13 6" × 11/2" $270.06 $388.70 14 6" × 3" $270.06 $270.06 15 8" $415.63 $582.72 18 10" $616.48 $891.62 20 10" × 12" × 6" $616.48 $891.62  
(2767 3134 3742; Ord. No. 3858, § 3, 10-24-2016 ; Ord. No. 3950 , § 11, 10-10-2018) 
8-12-8. - Computation of Rate. 
(A)  The schedule of water rates set forth in Section 8-7-7, W.M.C., shall be applied to reclaimed water used or consumed as determined by the water meter readings obtained by the City at 80 percent of the applicable potable water rate rounded down to the nearest cent. 
(B)  Reclaimed/non-potable water meters are to be read to the last full 1,000 gallons counted. Any meter reading containing a portion of one 1,000 gallons shall be rounded down to the nearest 1,000 gallons. 
(C)  Tests of reclaimed/non-potable water meters, by customer request, will be performed at actual cost. This fee will be waived if the meter is over-registering. If the meter is over-registering, the customer will receive a credit for excess charges on the prior 12 months consumption. If City records indicate a meter change or accuracy test during the 12 months, the credit will apply from the date of the meter change or test. 
(2767 3134 3683; Ord. No. 3950 , § 12, 10-10-2018) 
8-12-9. - Delinquent Payments and Service Charges. 
(A)  The City shall have all remedies available as described in Section 8-7-9, W.M.C. 
(2767 3134) 
8-12-10. - Tampering or a Bypass Prohibited. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any meter or to install or use any bypass or other device whereby water may be drawn from a service pipe without being registered by the meter. 
(B)  All meters shall be kept in good repair by the City, and shall be and remain the property of the City and under its control. No meter shall be set so that there will be more than two feet of exposed unmetered service pipe. 
(2767 3134) 
8-12-11. - Duty of User. 
(A)  All reclaimed/non-potable water meter vaults shall be placed and maintained so that the vaults are readily accessible to utility personnel, away from trees and bushes and outside of fences. 
(B)  No person owning or possessing or controlling the property on which a reclaimed/non-potable water meter vault is located shall obstruct the vault in any manner so that access to the meter is prevented. If such obstruction is not removed within the period of time prescribed in the notice required in subsection (F) below, the owner or possessor shall be deemed to have consented to the City's entry onto the property for the purpose of removing the obstruction and gaining access to the meter. All costs incurred in the removal of the obstruction shall be charged to the water consumer, owner or possessor, as prescribed in subsection (G). 
(C)  No person owning or possessing or controlling the property on which a reclaimed/non-potable water meter pit is located shall fail to maintain landscaping around the meter pit to provide at least three feet of unobstructed access to the meter from the public right-of-way and at least five feet of vertical clearance above the meter pit. 
(D)  No person owning or possessing or controlling the property on which a reclaimed/non-potable water meter pit is located shall place a fence in such location that the fence will obstruct access to the meter pit from the public right-of-way. 
(E)  No person owning or possessing or controlling the property on which a reclaimed/non-potable water meter pit is located shall fail to assure that landscape materials taller than four inches are no closer than six inches to the meter pit, nor shall any such person allow any landscaping material to cover any part of the meter pit lid. 
(F)  If the City Manager or his designee finds that any person has failed to comply with any of the requirements of subsections (B), (C), (D), or (E) of this section, the City shall notify the reclaimed/non-potable water consumer, owner or possessor or controller of the property by hand delivery or certified mail that he shall be required to comply within 15 days of the date of delivering or mailing the notice. 
(G)  If the person so notified fails to comply with the requirements of the notice, the City may cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof, together with an amount of $50.00 for administrative costs, to the person so notified. Such costs shall be added to the charges for water service, and failure to pay such cost shall warrant and authorize the City in shutting off the water. 
(H)  All users of reclaimed water will be required to submit a certification statement signed by the user or legal representative of the user that it has been provided with a copy of the state regulations and has agreed to comply with the applicable requirements of the regulations, in particular the conditions for application of reclaimed water meeting unrestricted use standards, and to allow access to the site to perform monitoring and analysis, as required by the Colorado Department of Public Heath and Environment. 
(I)  All reclaimed/non-potable water users will have clearly visible signage posted on the site that calls attention to the fact that the water is not safe for human consumption. Wording used will be, or similar to, "Non-Potable Water-Do Not Drink." The signage shall be posted in the dominant language(s) expected to be spoken at the site. 
(J)  Irrigation Control: User shall control the use of reclaimed/non-potable water to those areas indicated in the permit application. The owner, applicant, or user is responsible for controlling over spray run off on new systems for systems requesting conversion. 
(1)  Irrigation shall be controlled to minimize ponding and runoff of reclaimed/non-potable water. 
(2)  Direct and windblown spray shall be confined to the area designated and approved for reclaimed/non-potable water irrigation, to the extent possible. 
(3)  Precautions shall be taken so that reclaimed/non-potable water is not sprayed on any facility or area not designated for reclaimed/non-potable water irrigation, such as passing vehicles, fences, buildings, potable water fountains and other dispensers, or food handling areas. 
(4)  Reclaimed/non-potable irrigation systems shall be configured and secured in a manner that only permits operation by authorized personnel. 
(5)  There shall be no hose bib connections accessible to the public at any existing or new piping connected to the reclaimed/non-potable water system. 
(6)  There shall be no spraying of reclaimed/non-potable water over outdoor drinking water fountains in public areas. 
(7)  There shall be no connection between the potable water supply and any piping containing reclaimed/non-potable water. Supplementing reclaimed/non-potable water with potable water shall not be allowed, except through an air-gap separation. Reclaimed/non-potable water supplementation with potable water is only available for "pond storage" customers with an air-gap separation. For reclaimed/non-potable customers, there shall be no connection whatsoever between a temporary or supplemental system and the reclaimed/non-potable system, either upstream or downstream of the point of delivery, at any time. 
(8)  Tank trucks and other equipment that are used to distribute reclaimed/non-potable water shall be clearly identified with warning signs. 
(9)  Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent the breeding of insects and other vectors of health significance. 
(10)  For all non-potable systems, the user shall maintain as-built plans and provide a copy to the City of the use area showing all buildings, potable and reclaimed/non-potable water facilities, the sanitary wastewater collection system, etc. 
(11)  Inspection, supervision, and employee training should be provided by the user to assure proper operation of the reclaimed/non-potable water system in accordance with Colorado Department of Health and Environment Regulations. 
(2767 3134) 
8-12-12. - Using Water From Another Connection Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any consumer to permit reclaimed/non-potable water to be taken through his service pipe for the use of any person whose premises are not connected for the use of reclaimed/non-potable water from the City's mains. 
(2767 3134) 
8-12-13. - Credit for Overcharge. 
    The City Finance Director or finance staff may give credit to any utility customer that has been overcharged. The credit must not exceed the intent of this chapter. 
(2767 3134) 
8-12-14. - Water Shortage or Drought. 
    In the event of a water shortage or drought emergency that requires the reduction of the use of water from the reclaimed/non-potable water utility, the City Manager shall have the authority to immediately require and implement mandatory reductions as he deems necessary for the protection of the public, as described in Section 8-7-24, W.M.C. Such reductions or water restrictions shall be in effect until such time as the City Council or the City Manager removes them. In the event of a prolonged drought or other water shortage emergency that may require water restrictions or limitations for more than 15 days, the City Council may adopt, by resolution, a long-term water conservation plan, as described in Section 8-7-24, W.M.C. 
(2767 3134) 
8-12-15. - Water Tap Fee Credits. 
(A)  If a parcel of land has an existing water tap in service and the owner proposes to change the irrigation portion of the water use to reclaimed/non-potable water, then no additional tap fee will be charged for connection to the reclaimed/non-potable water system. 
(B)  If any tap is installed and completed without receiving proper inspection and approval by the City, no tap fee credit shall be given. 
(C)  Abandonment: If a demolition or vacation of a unit results in an abandonment of a reclaimed/non-potable water tap, no cash refund shall be granted for any taps released from service, and no tap fee credit shall be granted at the time a new utility permit is issued. 
(2767 3134) 
8-12-16. - Waste of Water. 
(A)  Waste of Water is Prohibited. Waste of water is defined as the intentional or non-intentional use of water for a non-beneficial purpose, and includes continuous application of water to any lawn, turf, sodded, or landscaped area, resulting in the pooling or flowing of water into drainage or storm drainage facilities, failure to repair any irrigation system that is leaking, and the use of hoses for washing of vehicles and other outdoor uses other than irrigation not equipped with a shutoff valve that is normally closed and necessitates hand pressure on the valve to permit the flow of water. 
    Notwithstanding the enforcement provisions set forth in this section, the City Manager, or his designee, may order a shut off of the reclaimed/non-potable water service to a property if the city manager, or his designee, reasonably finds that an extreme waste of water is occurring on the premises. 
(B)  The Director of Public Works and Utilities is hereby authorized to enforce this section. The person billed for water service to a property, whether owner or occupant, shall be responsible for compliance with subsections (A) and (B) within ten days of the violation notice, unless otherwise specified by the Director of Public Works and Utilities, and shall be subject to the following actions and penalties: 
(1)  Upon a first violation, the person billed will be advised in writing of the violation and issued a warning for the violation. The warning shall be in effect for a period of one year from the date of issue. A second violation within a one year period shall result in the person billed being advised in writing of the violation and a charge of $50.00 will be added to the water bill for the property. Advisement shall include the procedure to schedule a hearing if requested. 
(2)  A third or additional violation within a one year period shall result in the person billed being advised in writing of the violation and a charge of $100.00 will be added to the water bill for the property. Advisement shall include the procedure to schedule a hearing if requested. In addition, the City Manager, or his designee, may order a suspension of service to the property until all outstanding fines are paid. Restoration of service shall occur as detailed in Section 8-7-9, W.M.C. 
(3)  Upon any notice(s) of violation of this section, a copy of such notice shall also be mailed to the owner(s) of the real property served, if the owner's address differs from the subject property address. 
(C)  If a hearing is requested, it shall be scheduled as soon as practical before the City Manager or his designee. 
(3134) 
CHAPTER 13. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 

8-13-1. - Purpose. 
(A)  The City of Westminster hereby adopts this chapter in order to construct, operate, and maintain stormwater facilities for its own use and for the use of public and private users within and without the territorial boundaries of the City, and to provide for a method whereby the City may prescribe, revise, and collect in advance or otherwise, from any owner of any real property receiving service therefrom, rates, fees, and charges or any combination thereof for the services furnished by stormwater facilities, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, minimum charges, charges for the availability of service, and reasonable penalties for any delinquencies, including, but not limited to, interest on delinquencies from any date due, reasonable attorneys' fees, and other costs of collection, and providing that the City Council of the City may modify, supervise, or regulate any such rates, fees, or charges. 
(B)  Furthermore, this chapter will promote the general public health, safety and welfare by reducing the potential for the movement of emergency vehicles to be impeded or inhibited during storm or flooding periods; by minimizing storm and flood losses, inconvenience, and damage resulting from runoff; and by promoting activities that improve the water quality of runoff in the City of Westminster. 
(C)  Notwithstanding the above, floods from runoff may occur that exceed the capacity of stormwater facilities constructed and maintained by funds made available pursuant to this chapter. This chapter does not imply that property subject to the fees and charges established herein will be free from stormwater flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall not create any liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage. 
(2875) 
8-13-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Base rate shall mean the monthly rate of assessment associated with each runoff area unit (RAU) calculated for a property. 
    Development shall mean any man-made change to real property including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, streets, parking lots, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, or excavating. 
    Director shall mean the director of the department of community development of the City of Westminster, Colorado, or his/her designee. 
    Impervious surface shall mean surfaces on or in real property where the rate of infiltration of stormwater into the earth has been reduced by the works of man. For purposes of this chapter, buildings, man-made structures, driveways, patio areas, roofs, concrete or asphalt sidewalks, parking lots or storage areas, and other bricked, oiled, macadam or hard-surfaced areas that impede passage of stormwaters into the earth's surface are deemed to be impervious. 
    Project costs shall mean those costs of administration, management, planning, engineering, construction, reconstruction, right-of-way acquisition, replacement, contingencies, fiscal, legal, and all operation and maintenance costs of stormwater facilities, including those costs to comply with federal, state or city laws regulating stormwater facilities or runoff. 
    Runoff shall mean that part of snowfall, rainfall or other stormwater that is not absorbed, transpired, evaporated, or left in surface depressions, and that then flows controlled or uncontrolled into a street, storm sewer, watercourse or body of water. 
    Runoff area unit (RAU) shall mean the average area of impervious surface on a single-family detached residential property as determined by random sampling of such properties in the City. 
    Stormwater facilities shall mean any one or more of the various devices used in the collection, treatment, or disposition of storm, flood or surface drainage waters, including all manmade structures or natural watercourses for the conveyance of runoff, such as: detention areas, berms, swales, improved watercourses, channels, bridges, gulches, wetland areas, streams, gullies, flumes, culverts, gutters, pumping stations, pipes, ditches, siphons, catch basins and street facilities; all inlets; collection, drainage, or disposal lines; intercepting sewers; disposal plants; settling basins; outfall sewers; all pumping, power, and other equipment and appurtenances; all extension, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; and any and all rights or interests in such stormwater facilities. 
    Utility fee or fee shall mean the stormwater utility fee created by this chapter. 
    Watercourse shall mean a stream having a body or banks and usually discharging into some other stream or body of water. 
(2875 3315) 
8-13-3. - Establishing Stormwater Management Program. 
    There is hereby established a stormwater management program in the City of Westminster. Through said program, the city shall construct, operate, and maintain stormwater facilities and pay other project costs and perform other functions or duties authorized by law. Such program shall be owned by the City and operated in accordance with all applicable laws. 
(2875) 
8-13-4. - Establishing Stormwater Utility Fee. 
(A)  Fee Established: There is hereby imposed on the owner of each and every lot or parcel of land within the City containing an impervious surface a stormwater utility fee. This fee is deemed reasonable and is necessary to pay for the project costs of existing and future city stormwater facilities. All of the proceeds of the service fee are for payment for use of the City's stormwater facilities by the owners of real property upon which the fee is imposed. 
(B)  Basis for Fee: The basis for the amount of the fee is the extent to which each parcel of land within the City makes use of the stormwater facilities, such use to be defined by the amount of impervious surface on the property. The fee is also based on the cost of including the parcel in the property and billing records, plans, and monitoring activities of the stormwater management program. 
(C)  Exemptions: All public highways, roadways, streets, alleys, railroad rights-of-way, irrigation canals, and undeveloped property shall be exempt from all charges imposed by this chapter. 
(D)  How Fee Collected: The fee shall be payable monthly and shall be billed and collected with the City water and sewer bill. 
(E)  Calculation of Fee: For purposes of imposing the stormwater utility fee, all lots and parcels within the City are classified into two classes; namely, single-family detached residential (SFDR) and all others (non-SFDR). 
    The Director or his designee is directed to prepare a list of lots and parcels within the City and assign the appropriate classification to each lot or parcel, as follows: 
(1)  Each single-family detached residential property shall be billed a flat fee as established herein for the average impervious area on the property. The single-family detached residential average area shall be referred to as the runoff area unit (RAU). The RAU will be determined by digitally measuring and summing the impervious area on a random sample of approximately 450 single-family detached residences in the City and averaging the total. The monthly fee to be charged for each single-family detached residential property shall be referred to as the current base rate per month. Both the RAU and the base rate will be established by ordinance or resolution of City Council. Prior to consideration of an ordinance or resolution to subsequently modify the RAU or the base rate, the City shall publicize the proposed fee modification and provide an opportunity for public input regarding the proposed fee change. 
(2)  For all other properties not covered by paragraph (E)(1) of this section, the fee shall be determined by dividing the calculated total square footage of impervious area on the property by the runoff area unit (RAU), multiplying the result by the base rate, and apportioning the result to the utility accounts that serve the property. The billing rate for non-SFDR properties may be updated by the director based on any additions/subtractions to the impervious area. 
(F)  Additional Fees: The stormwater utility fee shall be subject to additional fees for delinquent payment, uncollectible checks, liens and any other penalties that are the same as those imposed with City water or sewer utility charges. 
(2875 3315) 
8-13-5. - Administrative and Judicial Review. 
(A)  Right to Petition: A property owner may petition the Director for a revision or modification of the stormwater utility fee no later than 30 days after having been billed for such charge. Any such petition may only be filed once in connection with the issue or issues presented in the petition, except upon a showing of changed circumstances sufficient to justify the filing of an additional petition. The basis for the petition is limited to the following issues: 
(1)  For Single-Family Detached Residential. An owner of single-family detached residential property may petition on the basis that his/her property has been incorrectly classified as such. 
(2)  For All Other Properties (Non-SFDR). An owner of property other than single-family detached residential may petition on the following basis: 
(a)  The impervious area on the property has been improperly measured or calculated. 
(b)  The property is exempt from the fee pursuant to subsection 8-13-4(C), W.M.C. 
(c)  The property is improperly classified as non-SFDR. 
(d)  A computational error was made in calculating the amount charged. 
(B)  In Writing: Such petition shall be in writing. Any relevant information in support of the petition shall be submitted with the petition. 
(C)  Informal Meeting: The Director or his designee may attempt to resolve the issues raised in the petition via a telephone conference or the Director may recommend an informal meeting with the property owner. The Director shall make a final decision on the petition within 30 days of receipt of the petition and may confirm or modify such fee or determination in accordance with the facts submitted. Such decision by the Director shall be in writing and notice thereof shall be mailed to or served upon the petitioner within ten days from the date of the director's action. Service by certified mail, return receipt requested, shall be conclusive evidence of notice for the purpose of this chapter. Such action by the Director shall be considered final and the remaining total liability, if any, shall be paid on or before 30 days after the date of the decision. 
(2875 3315) 
8-13-6. - Enforcement. 
    In the event any owner or owners of any lot, parcel of land, or any real property within the legal boundaries of the City shall neglect, fail, or refuse to pay the fees fixed by this chapter, the City may pursue any remedy available at law or equity to enforce and collect the fee. The city may also recover, in addition to fees due, all court cost, attorney fees, and interest on the amount owing. 
(A)  Lien Declared: The City Council hereby finds and determines that it is the policy of the City that all stormwater facilities supplied and furnished by the City and supported by the stormwater utility fee shall be deemed to be supplied and furnished to the real property so served without regard to the actual person, business, organization or entity billed for stormwater facilities. Accordingly, in addition to other civil collection procedures, all fees and charges, together with all interest and penalties for default in payment, and all costs in collecting the same, until paid, shall constitute a perpetual lien on the property, on a parity with the tax lien of general, state, county, city, town, or school taxes, and no sale of such property to enforce any general, state, county, city, town or school tax or other liens shall extinguish the perpetual lien for such fees, charges, interest, penalties, and costs. 
(B)  Termination of Water Service: In addition to the other remedies specified herein or otherwise permitted by law, the City may, in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 8-7-9, W.M.C., terminate water service to any building, improvement, facility, land, real property, lot or parcel for which the stormwater utility fee is not paid. Reinstatement of service shall occur upon payment of all delinquent charges and a reinstatement fee as set by resolution of City Council. 
(C)  Delinquent charges and fees may be collected as any other utility bill owed to the City at the option of the City. 
(D)  Enforcement of this section shall be in the municipal court of the city or the district court of Jefferson County or Adams County. No remedy provided herein shall be exclusive, but the same shall be cumulative; and the taking of any action hereunder shall not preclude or prevent the taking of other action hereunder to enjoin any violation of this chapter. 
(2875 3315) 
8-13-7. - Unusual Circumstances. 
    It is anticipated there will be situations that are not addressed by the procedures and criteria in this chapter. In these cases, the Director is delegated the authority to analyze and decide those cases. 
(2875) 
Title IX. - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY 
CHAPTER 1. - SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS 

9-1-1. - Construction. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or reconstruct any sidewalk, curb, or gutter within a public right-of-way within the city without having first procured a permit therefor from the City Manager or his authorized representative. The application for the permit shall be in accordance with regulations prescribed by the City Manager and shall include sufficient information to show that the construction will be in conformance with City specifications and approvals. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform such work other than in compliance with applicable specifications and approvals established by the City and any conditions or limitations contained in the permit. 
(1959 Code 2100) 
9-1-2. - Compliance Required. 
    Any sidewalk, curb or gutter that shall hereafter be constructed not in strict conformity with this Chapter, shall, within ten days after notice to the owner of the property adjacent to or upon which the sidewalk curb or gutter has been constructed, be made to conform to this Chapter at the expense of the owner or the same shall be removed by the City. 
(12 2100) 
9-1-3. - Notification for Repairs. 
    When any sidewalk, curb or gutter on or adjacent to any property within the City is in need of repair or construction, the City shall cause notice in writing to be served upon the owner, occupant or person in charge of the property to repair or construct the same within 30 days. Notice shall be mailed to the record owner at the owner's last known address. 
(101 2100) 
9-1-4. - Failure to Comply. 
    If the person upon whom the notice is served fails, after notification, to construct or repair the sidewalk, curb or gutter no later than 30 days after service of the notice, the City may construct the sidewalk, curb or gutter or make the repairs. The costs of the work shall be assessed against the property owner and the cost shall become a first and prior lien upon the property, as provided by Title I, Chapter 31, of this Code. 
(1680 2100) 
9-1-5. - Obstruction of Sidewalks, Curbs or Gutters; Public Nuisance. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow obstructions to remain on any sidewalk, curb or gutter open to the public and abutting or adjoining the property controlled, owned or occupied by such person. Obstructions, for purposes of this Section, include, but are not limited to, piles of materials, overhanging vegetation, weeds, adjoining structures overhanging the sidewalk, or any other physical object located within the width of the sidewalk, curb or gutter (excepting lawfully parked motor vehicles) and less than seven feet above the sidewalk. 
(B)  (1)  In the event that the provisions of Subsection 9-1-5(A), W.M.C., are violated, the City Manager or his authorized representative may cause to be served upon the owner, occupant or the person in control of the property, either personally or by mail, or by means of posting the property, a notice stating: "You are notified that, as owner or tenant of property abutting or adjoining a public sidewalk, curb or gutter, you are required to remove all obstructions from such sidewalks, curb or cutter within 24 hours of this notice. Failure to remove obstructions from the public sidewalk, curb or gutter within 24 hours of this notice may result in the issuance of a summons and complaint, or the City may remove such obstructions and assess the cost against the premises abutting the sidewalk, curb or gutter or both such summons and removal." Such notice shall be sent to the record owner of the property at his last known address. In any case, the posting of such property by the City shall be deemed adequate notice for the City's removal of the obstruction and placement of a lien upon the property. 
(2)  If the person upon whom said notice is served fails, neglects or refuses to correct the violation by not later than 24 hours after service or posting of the notice, or in the event that no person can be found in the City who either is or claims to be the owner of such lot or land or who represents or claims to represent such owner, the City may cause the obstruction to be removed and the actual cost of such removal, plus ten percent for inspection and other administrative costs in connection therewith, shall be assessed and collected as specified in Title I, Chapter 31, of this Code. The City may also cause a summons and complaint to be served upon the owner, occupant or person in control of the property. 
(C)  Public Nuisance: Any obstruction that constitutes an emergency presenting imminent danger of serious injury to persons or property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be summarily abated pursuant to Sections 8-4-4 and 8-4-5, W.M.C. 
(1805 2100 3688) 
9-1-6. - Violation. 
    Any person found to be in violation of this Chapter shall be punished as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(2100) 
CHAPTER 2. - RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS 

9-2-1. - Permit Required. 
(A)  Without first having secured a right-of-way permit from the City, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Dig up, open, excavate, construct in or on or cause to be dug up, opened, excavated or constructed in or on, any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way; . 
(2)  Conduct any work within, upon, under or above any portion of any travel lane of a street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way or otherwise obstruct vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian travel on a street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way; or 
(3)  Disturb a ditch line or the pavement or shoulder of any roadway. 
    For the purpose of this Section, the term work includes the installation of micro wireless facilities involving any of the activities described in (1), (2), or (3) above. 
(B)  The City Engineer shall establish regulations and specifications for work in public rights-of-way for the protection of the rights-of-way and installed infrastructure and the protection of persons, and their property, lawfully using the rights-of-way, and may place conditions on any permit as he or she shall deem necessary. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct work in public rights-of-way in violation of such regulations and specifications or the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(C)  Applications for a permit shall indicate the exact location, height, depth, extent, nature, and purpose of the work, including a sketch or site plan as necessary, and the time required for the work. Applicants shall also pay a fee to the City before the issuance of a right-of-way permit. The amount of the fee shall be established on an annual basis by the City Manager upon recommendation of the City Engineer, and shall include: 
(1)  The fee shall be reasonably related to the costs directly incurred by the City in providing services relating to the granting and administration of the permit, including inspection costs; and 
(2)  The fee may be graduated, depending upon the scale and location of the project; and 
(3)  If the proposed work requires construction drawing review, the fees related to such review, as provided in Section 11-1-6, W.M.C..; and 
(4)  If the proposed work involves cutting the pavement of any street or sidewalk, the fees required by Section 9-2-8, W.M.C.. 
(D)  A separate permit shall be required for each use of the public right-of-way. A permit shall be required at least two working days prior to commencement of the work. The permit shall be kept at the site of the work and shall be exhibited upon request to any law enforcement officer or the City Engineer or his authorized representative. 
(E)  The City engineer shall establish a time limit for work to be accomplished under a right-of-way permit. 
(F)  A right-of-way permit must be obtained by a class D public way contractor with a contract for work affecting public property or grounds, utility systems, or work within any street right-of-way, utility easement, or other public property. 
(2100 2598 3599; Ord. No. 3891, § 1, 6-26-2017 ) 
9-2-2. - Safety Appliances and Barricades Required. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or cause to be dug any hole, drain, ditch or any other excavation in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the City without providing, during the nighttime, sufficient red lights to be placed with a suitable barricade or temporary fence around such hole, drain, ditch or other excavation in order to prevent injury to persons or property. 
(B)  During the daytime, the barricade shall be maintained, but warning lights are not required. 
(C)  Every excavation shall be protected at all times by traffic safety appliances as prescribed by the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices," latest edition, and in such a manner as to minimize the disruption of the flow of traffic in the vicinity of the excavation. 
(A2100) 
9-2-3. - Unlawful to Remove Safety Appliances or Barricades. 
    It shall be unlawful to damage, displace, remove or interfere with any barricade, warning light or any other safety appliance that is lawfully placed around or about any street, alley, sidewalk or other excavations or construction work in the City. 
(A2100) 
9-2-4. - Backfills. 
(A)  Backfills shall be made in accordance with the plans and specifications furnished or approved by the City Engineer. 
(B)  Such plans and specifications shall be in conformance with City specifications and shall be specifically adapted to the particular conditions of travel, load requirements, terrain, subsoil and moisture where the backfill is to be effected. 
(C)  In the event of settlement or subsidence of a particular excavation or part thereof, the permittee who had performed the excavation work shall be responsible for all repaving and repair costs occasioned thereby. 
(A2100) 
9-2-5. - Hindering or Obstructing Work Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to hinder or obstruct any paving operations or excavations conducted in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(A2100) 
9-2-6. - Liability for Damage. 
    Any person who shall undertake work pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be answerable for any damage occasioned to persons, animals or property by reason of carelessness and negligence connected with such work. 
(1307 2100) 
9-2-7. - Enforcement. 
(A)  Public Nuisance: Any work occurring upon, within, under or above any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way in the City (with or without a permit as required by this chapter) that constitutes an emergency presenting imminent danger of serious injury to persons or property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be summarily abated pursuant to Sections 8-4-4 and 8-4-5, W.M.C. 
(B)  Violation: Any person found to be in violation of this Chapter shall be punished as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(C)  Additional Remedies: In addition to the penalties established above, violations of this Chapter shall be cause for the City to proceed against any surety, to commence an action in a court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate legal and equitable relief, and any other action permitted by law. Such failure shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of permits, licenses and registrations held by the violator. 
(2100; Ord. No. 3891, § 2, 6-26-2017 ) 
9-2-8. - Street Cut Impact Fees. 
(A)  In addition to the right-of-way permit fee described in Section 9-2-1, W.M.C., above, no person or entity shall cut the pavement of any City street prior to the payment to the City of a street impact fee to cover the effects of long-term damage to the street pavement created over time by intermittent street cuts. Such fees shall be paid before the issuance of a right-of-way permit. 
(B)  The street cut impact fee will be established annually by the City Manager, upon recommendation of the City Engineer, and shall be based upon the following factors: 
(1)  Whether the cut is a longitudinal trench or a transverse trench. 
(2)  Whether the street was resurfaced within the current year and the last four years or seal coated within the current year and the last two years. 
(3)  Whether the street is earmarked for total reconstruction within the current year and the next two years in the City's five-year pavement management master plan for street improvements. 
(4)  Normally, fees will be doubled for streets that have been resurfaced within the current year and the past four calendar years, or seal coated within the current year and the past two calendar years. 
(5)  Normally, fees will be waived for streets scheduled for total pavement reconstruction within the current year and the following two years. 
Printed copies of the fee schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be on file in the office of the City's Community Development Department. 
(3072 3599) 
CHAPTER 4. - SOLICITATION ON OR NEAR STREET OR HIGHWAY 

9-4-1. - Solicitation On or Near Street or Highway. 
(A)  The purpose of this Chapter is to prevent dangers to persons and property, to prevent delays, and to avoid interference with the traffic flow. Roadways that have center medians often are designed to deal with specific traffic flow problems. Any delay or distraction may interfere with traffic planning. Sometimes persons stand near intersections and near traffic lights to contact drivers or passengers in cars that are passing or that are stopped temporarily due to traffic lights. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit employment, business, contributions, or sales of any kind, or collect monies for the same, from the occupant of any vehicle traveling upon any street or highway when such solicitation or collection either: 
(1)  Causes the person performing the activity to enter onto the traveled portion of a street or highway. 
(2)  Involves the person performing the activity to be located upon any median area that separates traffic lanes for vehicular travel in opposite directions. 
(3)  The person performing the activity is located such that vehicles cannot move into a legal parking area to safely conduct the transaction. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit employment, business, contributions or sales of any kind, or collect monies for the same, from the occupant of any vehicle on any highway included in the interstate system, including any entrance to or exit from such highway. 
(D)  For purposes of this Chapter, the traveled portion of the street or highway shall mean that portion of the road normally used by moving motor vehicle traffic. 
(E)  A violation of this Chapter is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(2362 2387) 
9-4-2. - Sound Trucks. 
(A)  The use of sound trucks with sound amplifying equipment in operation shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The only sounds permitted to be amplified are music or human speech. 
(2)  Operations are permitted for nine hours each day. The permitted nine hours of operation shall be between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(3)  Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of less than 12 miles per hour. When stopped to make sales, said sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated. 
(4)  Sound shall not be issued within 100 yards of hospitals, or within 100 yards of churches during the hours services are being held, or within 500 feet of a school during the school year. 
(5)  The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, lewd, indecent or slanderous. 
(6)  The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of 100 yards from the sound truck and so that said volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any sound truck to amplify sound along any particular route more than one time during a 24 hour period. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any sound truck to stop within 25 feet of an intersection when making a sale, or attempting to make a sale. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for any sound truck to double park, or park in a manner contrary to any ordinance relating to parking, when attempting a sale or making a sale. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful for any sound truck to make a U-turn in any block. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of a sound truck to drive his vehicle backward to make or attempt to make a sale. 
(12)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of a sound truck to sell to any person who is standing in the street. 
(13)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of a sound truck to permit any person to hang on the vehicle, or permit any person to ride in or on the vehicle, except a bona fide assistant or assistants. 
(14)  All sound trucks must be equipped with four-way flashing lights, both parking and taillights. Trucks must have lights flashing while seeking or making a sale. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or cause to be used, a sound truck with its sound amplifying equipment in operation in the City without having paid an annual registration fee of $5.00 per vehicle and filed a registration statement with the City Clerk in writing and having it approved by the City Manager and City Clerk. This statement shall be filed in duplicate and include the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the registrant, 
(2)  Name and address of person having direct charge of the sound truck, 
(3)  Name and address of all persons who will use or operate the sound truck, 
(4)  The purpose for which the sound truck will be used, 
(5)  A general statement as to the areas of the City in which the sound truck will be used, 
(6)  The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck, and 
(7)  The number of days of proposed operation of the sound truck. 
(C)  Definitions: 
    Sound truck shall mean any vehicle, or horse-drawn vehicle, having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment. 
    Sound amplifying equipment shall mean any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. "Sound amplifying equipment" shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which installed, or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles, or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. 
(1224 2001 3017 3563) 
9-4-3. - Violations. 
    A violation of this Chapter is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(3563) 
CHAPTER 5. - BUS PASSENGER SHELTERS 

9-5-1. - Award of Exclusive Right. 
    From time to time, the City may solicit proposals from vendors for the erection and maintenance of bus passenger shelters within the City limits for the benefit of transit patrons. In order to defray the costs of shelters, the City may allow advertising signage to be incorporated into the design of the structures as specified within this Code. Proposals will be evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth within the City's request for proposals, and the City Council shall have the sole authority to determine if a contract should be awarded. If the City Council elects to award such a contract, the selected vendor shall have the exclusive right to place shelters within the City limits for the duration of the term designated within the executed contract. 
(2858) 
9-5-2. - Shelter Design. 
    Shelters must be constructed of substantial material in accordance with the approved design that is referenced in the executed contract between the City and the bus passenger shelter vendor. Each shelter shall be located on top of a concrete pad that serves as a means of preventing mud and weeds from accumulating near the shelter. Shelters shall not be constructed or maintained in a manner that will constitute a violation of any section of this Code. 
(2858) 
9-5-3. - Placement of Shelters. 
    Shelters may be located only at officially designated regional transportation district (RTD) bus stops and must be no closer than three feet to the roadway edge. Shelters may be located only at those locations specified within the executed contract between the City and the bus passenger shelter vendor. Shelters must not obstruct public walkways, sidewalks, sight distance triangles or pedestrian access to traffic control devices. 
(2858) 
9-5-4. - Advertising Signage on Shelters. 
    Advertising signage on a shelter shall be limited to no more than two panels. Each panel shall be no greater than 24 square feet in size. No fluorescent, day-glo or other reflective or brilliant colors are permitted anywhere on the sign. 
(2858) 
9-5-5. - Permits. 
    A building permit is required to be issued prior to the placement of a bus passenger shelter. 
(A)  One permit will be issued for each shelter, provided the shelter complies with the commitment in the contract and with this Chapter. The vendor shall be required to have applicable City licenses. If a shelter is not installed within 180 days from the date the permit is issued, the permit will become null and void. 
(B)  Bond Required: Before any license, as provided in this Chapter, will be issued to a vendor, such vendor shall file with the City a bond running to the City in the sum of $10,000.00 executed by the vendor as principal and at least one surety upon which service of process may be made in the State of Colorado. Such bond shall be conditioned that said vendor shall comply fully with all provisions of the laws of the City and statutes of the State of Colorado regulating and concerning the vendor's business and will pay all judgments rendered for violations of ordinances or statutes. Such bond must be approved by the City, both as to form and as to the responsibility of the surety thereon. 
(2858) 
9-5-6. - Insurance. 
    Before any permit, as provided in this Section, will be issued to a vendor, such vendor shall furnish a certificate of insurance with limits of not less than $300,000.00 combined single limit bodily injury and property damage, with a 30-day notice of cancellation, to be maintained during the life of the permit. The policy shall name the City as an additional insured. Should the vendor cause the policy to lapse, be canceled, be withdrawn or be subject to a reduction in the required amount of insurance, the City will cause the operations permitted under this Chapter to cease. 
(2858) 
9-5-7. - Moving of Shelters. 
    A shelter shall be permitted for one location only. Shelters may not be moved from stop to stop without permits. Relocation or cancellation of an official bus stop by RTD will require that the vendor move or remove the shelter and pad within 30 days. 
(2858) 
9-5-8. - Maintenance and Repair of Shelters. 
    The vendor shall maintain all shelters in a safe and clean condition at all times. 
(2858) 
9-5-9. - Violations. 
    If provisions of this Chapter are violated, the City may serve, either personally or by mail, written notice upon the vendor to correct the violations. If the vendor fails, neglects or refuses to correct the violation within ten days of mailing or service of said notice, the City may have the shelter removed, and the cost of such work, plus 15 percent for inspection, shall be assessed against the vendor. 
(2858) 
CHAPTER 6. - DISPOSAL OF COMBUSTIBLES 

9-6-1. - Trash. 
    No person or persons shall allow to remain longer than 36 hours, or overnight, in any alley, or in any sidewalk or premises, within 30 feet of any building, empty boxes, barrels, rubbish, trash, waste paper, excelsior or other like combustible materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to burn trash, waste paper, rubbish or other like combustible material without permission from the Fire Department. 
    No person shall have any bonfires or open burning, except by permission from the Fire Department. 
(3688) 
9-6-2. - Ashes. 
    No person or persons shall be allowed to place ashes within any building in any box, barrel or other wooden vessel or upon any wooden vessel or floor. 
    No ashes shall be kept or deposited in any part of the City unless the same shall be kept in a secure noncombustible container, and every owner of property where ashes are kept or deposited shall keep a noncombustible receptacle or ash can for that purpose, so located as not to endanger walls, fences and other combustible material. 
(3688) 
9-6-3. - Oily Waste or Rags. 
    No person shall keep or permit to be kept on the premises any oily waste or oily rags, unless at all times when not actually in use such oily waste and oily rags be kept in a noncombustible metal can with a cover. 
(299 3688) 
9-6-4. - Violations. 
    A violation of this Chapter is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(3646) 
CHAPTER 7. - LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS 

9-7-1. - City to Contract. 
    The City shall have the power to contract for, construct, acquire or install special or local public improvements; to assess the cost thereof wholly or in part against the property specially benefited; to jointly make and jointly contract for a local public improvement and a general public improvement and to pay from any lawful fund that portion of the cost that is general public benefit; and to accept contributions or grants-in-aid to supply the whole or any part of the cost apportioned to the City, or to accept and apply such contribution or grants-in-aid wholly or in part to the credit of the appropriate public improvement district. 
(276 1667) 
9-7-2. - Contract. 
    In all cases where the cost of local public improvements is to be assessed wholly or in part upon the property benefited, the improvements shall be constructed by independent contract or contracts. All such contracts shall be let by the City Manager with the approval of the City Council. All such contracts shall be let to the lowest reliable and responsible bidder after publication of notice to bidders once a week for two consecutive weeks by two insertions in a newspaper of general circulation within the City, and such other newspaper or newspapers as may be designated by the City Council. The right to reject any and all bids is reserved. No such contract shall be made without bond for its faithful performance with sufficient surety or sureties thereon. 
    The aggregate payments under any contract shall not exceed either the aggregate estimate of the City Engineer or the amounts appropriated. Upon notice and for substantial cause, the work under such contracts may be suspended or terminated forthwith by the City Council or the City Manager. 
    Every contract shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter and the provisions of any ordinance authorizing the improvements or contracts. 
    In the letting of contracts, the City Manager may impose such conditions upon bidders with regard to bonds and securities and such guarantees of good faith and responsibility on the part of the bidders for the faithful completion of the work and providing for any other material matter or thing in connection therewith as may be considered advantageous to the city. 
    Upon default in the performance of any contract, the City Manager may advertise and let a contract for the incompleted work in a like manner and without further ordinance, and charge the cost thereof to the original contractor upon his contract; and when a deficiency shall in such case occur, the City Manager, with the approval of the City Council, may advance the amount thereof out of any available funds in the City and recover the same by suit on the original contract and bond. 
(276) 
9-7-3. - Assessment of Property. 
    In all cases when the cost of a local public improvement is to be assessed wholly or in part upon the property benefited, the cost shall be assessed in proportion to benefits received. Such assessments may be in proportion as the frontage of each lot or tract of land is to the frontage of all the lots and lands so improved, or may be in proportion as the area of each piece of real estate in the district is to the area of all the real estate in the district, or may be by any other method that will result in assessment being most equitably in proportion to benefits received. If, at the time of the passage of the ordinance authorizing any improvement, any piece of real estate has the whole or any part of the proposed improvement conforming to the general plan and acceptable to the City Engineer, the existing improvement may be adopted in whole or in part, or necessary changes thereof may be made to make the same conform to the general plan, and the owner of such real estate shall, when the assessment is made, be credited with the amount that is saved by reason of adopting or adapting such existing improvement. 
(276) 
9-7-4. - Exceptions of Assessment. 
    In all cases where the cost of a local public improvement is to be assessed wholly or in part upon property benefited, the improvement shall be initiated by the City Manager without receiving a petition therefor, except that when the owners of the real estate that would bear 35 percent or more of the estimated cost of the proposed improvements have filed a regularly executed petition therefor, the City Manager shall advertise such improvement for remonstrances unless, in his judgment, the proposed improvement is not good and sufficient for the particular locality; provided, however, that no improvement proposed by petition shall be advertised for remonstrances if the preliminary informal estimate of the City Engineer exceeds by more than ten percent the maximum unit cost stated in the petition. The estimate of the City Engineer shall be conclusive for this determination. 
(276) 
9-7-5. - Rules of Petition. 
    Every petition for a proposed improvement shall describe the real property owned by each signer as being benefited by the proposed improvement, shall state the nature and location of the proposed improvement and the proposed maximum unit cost thereof, which unit cost shall be exclusive of the cost of collection of the assessments, other incidentals and all interest on any bonds issued in payment of construction and other costs from the time of issuance of said bonds to the time that interest commences on assessments; shall authorize advertising of the proposed improvement for remonstrances, if a preliminary, informal estimate of the City Engineer indicates that the cost of the proposed improvement will not exceed by more than ten percent the maximum unit cost set forth in the petition; and shall authorize an increase of the proposed maximum unit cost by not more than ten percent thereof, and the assessment of such increase, if the estimate of the City Engineer determines that such increase is necessary. 
    All signatures or petitions shall be subscribed and acknowledged in the manner provided by law for the acknowledgment of deeds of conveyance of real estate; provided, however, that the signature of any owner or owners of real property may be attached to a petition by their agents duly authorized by power of attorney accompanying the petition. No petitioner, his heirs or assigns shall be permitted to withdraw from a petition after such petition has been filed with the City Manager, unless the proposed improvement is not advertised for remonstrances within nine months from the filing of the petition with the City Manager, and any petitioner who fails to withdraw prior to advertising shall be deemed to have waived his right to withdraw. 
(276) 
9-7-6. - Public Notice of Proposed Improvements. 
    In all cases where the cost of local public improvements is assessed wholly or in part upon property benefited, public notice of the proposed improvements, either individually or in groups, shall be given. When it is proposed to assess real estate that is not abutting, adjoining, contiguous or adjacent to any proposed improvement, the notice shall state the exterior boundaries of the real estate proposed to be so assessed, or of the proposed district. The City Manager shall, by advertisement once a week for three consecutive weeks, by three insertions in a newspaper of general circulation within the City, give notice to the owners of the real estate benefited and to all persons interested generally and, without naming such owners or persons, a description of each proposed improvement and of the real property that would be benefited thereby, a proposed method of assessment and the manner of payment therefor, and the date, place and time for hearing written remonstrances to the proposed improvement, which date shall be not less than 20 days after the first publication of the notice of the hearing. In addition, the City Manager shall mail by first-class mail, not less than ten days prior to the hearing, a printed copy of such notice to the owners of record of all real estate in the proposed district, as such owners of record are determined by reference to the current records in the office of the County Assessor, as such records are kept by that official for the purpose of performing his function of county assessor. 
(276) 
9-7-7. - Hearing of Advertised Proposed Improvements. 
    On the day and at the time and place specified in the notice hereinabove set forth, the City Manager shall conduct a hearing for the purpose of considering the desirability of and the need for such advertised proposed improvements. If for any reason the hearing is postponed and not held until a later hour or date, and the City Manager is hereby authorized to postpone any hearing to a fixed later hour and date, written remonstrances to a proposed improvement shall be accepted up to the opening of the postponed session of the hearing; otherwise, such written remonstrances must be filed prior to the date and hour of the original hearing. 
    All written remonstrances to a proposed improvement shall be subscribed and acknowledged in the same manner required for petitions for proposed improvements. No person who has signed his name for an improvement shall be permitted to sign a remonstrance to the same improvement, unless such person has regularly withdrawn from such petition as herein provided. 
    If a duly executed written remonstrance is timely filed by persons constituting a majority of the owners of the property to be assessed, except in cases where the City shall pay one-half or more of the total cost of the improvements made, the proposed improvements shall not be ordered. 
    After the hearing and subject to the foregoing limitations, the City Manager shall enter an order approving those proposed improvements that he considers proper and disapproving those proposed improvements that he considers improper. All proceedings by the City Manager may be modified or rescinded wholly or in part at any time prior to the passage of the ordinance authorizing the improvements; provided that no substantial change in the district, details, preliminary plans or specifications or estimates shall be made after the first publication of notice to property owners, except the deletion of improvements and property from the proposed program and district; and provided, further, that the City Manager shall have the right to make minor changes in the time, plans and materials entering into the work at any time before its completion. Any objection to the regularity, validity and correctness of the proceedings and instruments taken, adopted or made prior to the date of said hearing shall be deemed waived unless presented by remonstrance at the time and in the manner herein specified. 
(276) 
9-7-8. - Formation. 
    After the hearing hereinabove set forth, the City Engineer shall combine into suitable construction units those proposed local public improvements that have been approved by the City Manager. Each such construction unit, whether composed of noncontiguous parts or sections or not, shall constitute a local public improvement district and shall be so referred to hereinafter. More than one kind of improvement may be combined in one Local Public Improvement District. The City Council may provide for a Local Public Improvement District to consist of more than one assessment unit, if the council determines that, due to differences in cost, character, nature or location of the improvements, the costs can be more equitably assessed by means of separate assessment units within the Local Public Improvement District. In the formation of such local public improvement district or districts, the City Engineer shall make such condition as, in his judgment, will make for efficiency in construction and will result in the lowest possible construction cost. For each such Local Public Improvement District, the City Engineer shall submit to the city manager a detailed estimate of the total cost of the improvements, and a detailed estimate for each improvement included within the district, exclusive of the cost of collection and other incidentals, and of all interest on bonds issued in payment of construction and other costs from the time of issuance of said bonds to the time that interest commences on assessments; full details and specifications for the proposed construction, which said details and specifications shall permit and encourage competition among bidders; a map showing the real property to be assessed for the cost of construction; and that portion, if any, of the cost of such construction that is not to be assessed for local public improvement. 
(276 1633) 
9-7-9. - Approval. 
    Whenever the City Manager approves a Local Public Improvement District as submitted by the City Engineer, he shall cause to be prepared and submitted to the City Council an ordinance authorizing creation of the district and the construction of the improvements proposed, which ordinance shall be in the form recommended by the City Manager by his endorsement thereon. 
    The finding of the City Council by ordinance that any local public improvements were duly ordered after notice duly given, or that a petition or remonstrance was or was not filed, or was or was not duly subscribed and acknowledged as herein required, shall be conclusive in every court or other tribunal. 
(276) 
9-7-10. - Owners of Abutting Real Estate. 
    Before beginning any authorized construction, the City Manager may order the owners of the abutting real estate to connect their several premises with the gas, water and sewer mains or with any other conduits in the street or alley adjacent to their several premises. In case of a failure or refusal by the owners of the abutting real estate to make the ordered connections, such connections shall be made incidental to the authorized construction and the cost thereof assessed upon the appropriate abutting real estate. 
(276) 
9-7-11. - Notice of Cost. 
    Upon completion of any local improvement, and upon acceptance thereof by the City Manager, or whenever the whole cost of an improvement, or a complete unit thereof, can be definitely ascertained, the City Manager shall publish notice once a week for three consecutive weeks, by three insertions in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, a notice to the owners of the real estate to be assessed and all persons interested generally and, without naming such owners or persons, that said improvements have been or are about to be completed and accepted, specifying the whole cost of the improvements, the portion, if any, to be paid by the City, and the proposed apportionment on the real property benefited, and a statement that any written complaints, objections and remonstrances to the proposed apportionment that are filed with the City Manager at any time within 20 days after the first publication of the notice will be heard and determined by the council, sitting as a board of equalization, at its first regular meeting thereafter, giving the time and place of such meeting, or at an adjournment thereof, before the passage of any ordinance assessing the cost of such improvement. Any objection to the regularity, validity or correctness of the proceedings, or of said proposed apportionment, or of any assessment based thereon, and of the amount thereof levied on each tract and parcel of land, shall be deemed waived, unless presented in writing at the time and in the manner herein specified. In determining the whole cost of the local public improvement, there shall be included therein, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the cost of constructing or otherwise acquiring such improvement or improvements, engineering and clerical services and supplies, cost of inspection, cost of collecting assessments, advertising, printing, interest on bonds until interest on assessments commences to defray such, fiscal services, legal services for preparing proceedings and advising in regard thereto and other incidental costs. 
(276) 
9-7-12. - Complaints. 
    After the period specified in such notice, the City Council, sitting as a board of equalization, at its next regular meeting, or an adjournment thereof, shall hear and determine all written complaints, objections and remonstrances filed with the City Manager and may confirm the apportionment proposed or make any modifications that may seem equitable and just. 
    After the consideration of all objections to the apportionment, if any change in the apportionment shall be made by council, it shall certify such change to the City Manager, who shall prepare a new apportionment and an assessing ordinance in accordance therewith and transmit the same to council. The assessing ordinance shall assess the cost of the improvement against the real estate to be assessed in the district in the proportion finally determined. The passage of the assessing ordinance shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that the property assessed is benefited in the amount of the assessment and that such assessments have been lawfully made. 
(276) 
9-7-13. - Assessment Roll. 
    The City Clerk shall, from said assessing ordinance, prepare a local assessment roll in book form, showing in suitable columns each piece of real estate assessed, the amount of the assessment, the amounts of each installment of principal and interests if, in pursuance of this Chapter, the same is payable in installments and the date when such installments will become due, with suitable columns for use in case of payment of the whole amount, or of any installment or penalty, and deliver the same duly certified, under the corporate seal, to the City Treasurer for collection. 
(276) 
9-7-14. - Lien Against Property. 
    From the date of the final publication of the assessing ordinance, all assessments made pursuant thereto shall be a lien in the several amounts assessed against each lot or tract of land, and such assessments shall have priority over all other liens except general taxes. As to any subdivisions of any real estate assessed pursuant thereto, the assessments in each case shall be a lien upon all the subdivisions in proportion to their respective areas. No delays, mistakes, errors, defects or irregularities in any act or proceeding authorized herein shall prejudice or invalidate any final assessment, but the same shall be remedied by subsequent or amended acts or proceedings as the case may require and, when so remedied, the same shall take effect as of the date of the original act or proceeding. 
    If, in any court of competent jurisdiction, any final assessment is set aside for irregularity in the proceedings or for any other reason, then the council, upon notice as required in the making of an original assessment, may make a new assessment in accordance with the provisions herein. 
(276) 
9-7-15. - Assessments; Due and Payable. 
    Without demand, all assessments shall be due and payable within 30 days after the publication of the assessing ordinance after its passage; provided, that the City Council may provide that the owners of the property to be assessed may elect to pay such assessments in annual installments, not exceeding 20, which installments shall include interest on the unpaid assessment annually at such rate as may be set forth in the assessing ordinance. The number of installments, periods of payment and rate of interest shall be determined and fixed by the City Council in the assessing ordinance. Payments may be made to the City Treasurer at any time within 30 days after the publication of the assessing ordinance after its passage, and an allowance of the per centum added for costs of collection shall be made on all payments during said period of 30 days. 
    Failure to pay the whole assessment within said period of 30 days shall be conclusively considered and held as an election on the part of all persons interested, whether under disability or otherwise, to pay in such installments. All persons so electing to pay in installments shall be conclusively considered to have consented to said improvements. Such election shall be conclusively considered and held a waiver of any and all right to question the power or jurisdiction of the City to construct or acquire the improvements, the quality of the work, the regularity or sufficiency of the proceedings, the validity or correctness of the assessment, or the validity of the lien thereof. 
    The owner of any piece of real estate not in default as to any installment or payment may at any time pay the whole unpaid principal of his assessment with the interest to the time the next installment of interest or principal becomes due and payable. 
    The owner of any divided or undivided interest may pay his share of any assessment. 
(276 1633) 
9-7-16. - Default of Payment. 
    At the expiration of said 30-day period provided in the preceding section, the City Treasurer shall return the local assessment roll to the clerk, thereon showing all payments made thereon with the date of each payment. Said roll shall be certified by the City Clerk under the corporate seal of the City, and by him delivered to the county treasurer of Adams County or Jefferson County, as the case may be, with his warrant for collection of the same, and the City Clerk shall obtain a receipt from the County Treasurer for the same. The County Treasurer shall receive payment of all assessments appearing upon the assessment roll, with interest. In case of default in the payment of any installment of principal or interest when due, the county treasurer shall advertise and sell any and all property for which such default is suffered for the payment of the whole of the unpaid assessments, with interest and penalties thereon. Said advertisements and sales shall be made at the same time and in the same manner, under all the same conditions and penalties and with the same effect, as are provided by general law for sales of real estate in default of payment of general taxes. 
(276 1633) 
9-7-17. - Failure to Pay. 
    Failure to pay any installment, whether of principal or interest, when due or a determination by the council that a pending tax sale affecting any property subject to an assessment threatens to extinguish or materially impair the lien of such an assessment, shall cause the whole of the unpaid principal and accrued interest to become due and payable immediately, and the whole amount of the unpaid principal and accrued interest shall thereafter draw penalty interest at a rate per month equal to the monthly rate applicable to installments, plus an additional one and one-quarter percent per month or fraction of a month until the day of sale; but, at any time prior to the date of sale, the owner may pay the amount of all delinquent installments, with all penalty interest accrued, and thereupon shall be restored to the right thereafter to pay in installments in the same manner as if default had not been suffered. No statute of limitations shall apply until the last installment of assessments becomes due and payable. 
(276 1633 1681) 
9-7-18. - Sale of Unpaid Assessments. 
    At any sale by the County Treasurer of any real estate in the City for the purpose of paying any special assessments for local improvements, the City Treasurer, having the written authority from the City Council, may purchase such real estate without paying for the same in cash, and receive a certificate of purchase from the county treasurer in the name of the City. Such certificates shall be received and credited at their face value, with all interest and penalties accrued, on account of the assessments in pursuance of which the sale was made. The certificates may thereafter be sold by the City Treasurer for the best price obtainable at public sale, at auction or by sealed bids, in the same manner and under the same conditions as is hereinafter provided in respect to the sale of property owned by the City, and the proceeds, in the event that all bonded indebtedness incurred in payment for said local improvements has not been discharged in full, credited to the fund created by the ordinance for the payment of such assessments; or, in the event that all bonded indebtedness incurred in payment for said local improvements has been discharged in full, the proceeds shall be credited to the special surplus and deficiency fund provided for by Section 9-7-21, W.M.C. 
    Such assignments shall be without recourse, and the sale and assignment shall operate as a lien in favor of the purchaser and assignee as provided by law in the case of sale of real estate in default of payment of the general taxes. 
    Cumulatively, with all other remedies, the City, being the owner of the property by virtue of a tax deed or being the owner of property otherwise acquired in satisfaction or discharge of the liens represented by such certificates of sale, may sell such property for the best price obtainable at public sale, at auction, or by sealed bids. Such sale shall be after public notice by the City Treasurer to all persons having or claiming any interest in the property to be sold or the proceeds of such sale, such public notice to be by publication, once a week for three consecutive weeks by three insertions in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. Such notice shall describe the property, state the time, place and manner of receiving bids and the time fixed for sale, which shall be not less than 20 days after the first publication. The City may reject any and all bids. Any interested party, at any time within ten days after receipt of bids for the sale of property may file with the City Manager a written protest as to the sufficiency or the amount of any bid made or the validity of the proceedings for the sale. If such protest shall be denied, such person, within ten days thereafter, shall commence an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin or restrain the City from completing the sale. If no such action shall be commenced, all protests or objections to the sale shall be deemed to have been waived, and the City shall then convey the property to the successful bidder by quit claim deed. 
    In addition to all other remedies, the City, when it is the holder of a certificate of purchase, may bring a civil action for the foreclosure thereof, joining as defendants all persons having or claiming any interest in the property or the proceeds of foreclosure sale, and all governmental units having taxes or other claims against said property, and all unknown persons having or claiming interest in said property. Any number of certificates may be foreclosed in the same proceeding. In such proceedings, the City, as plaintiff, shall be entitled to all relief provided by law in actions for adjudication of rights with respect to real property. 
    The proceeds of any such sale of property shall be credited to the appropriate special assessment fund or the surplus and deficiency fund, as hereinabove provided. The City shall deduct therefrom the necessary expenses in securing deeds and taking procedures for the sale or foreclosure. 
(276) 
9-7-19. - Bonds. 
    For the purpose of paying all or such portion of the cost of any improvement constructed under the provisions of this Chapter, special assessment bonds of the City may be issued of such date and in such denominations as may be prescribed by the City Council, in fully registered form (i.e., registered as to payment of both principal and interest), bearing the name of the district improved and payable in a sufficient period of years after date to cover the period of payment provided, but subject to call as provided in Section 9-7-20, W.M.C. All such bonds shall be issued on estimates approved by the City Council or sold as hereinafter provided, and the City Treasurer shall preserve a record of the same in a suitable book kept for that purpose. All such bonds shall be subscribed by the mayor, countersigned by the City Treasurer, with the corporate seal of the city thereto affixed, attested by the City Clerk. 
    Such bonds shall be payable out of the monies collected on account of the assessments made for such improvements, out of the surplus and deficiency fund referred to in Section 9-7-21, W.M.C., or out of any monies provided by credit enhancements obtained for the bonds. All monies collected from such assessments for any improvement shall be applied for the payment of the bonds issued until payment in full is made of all the bonds, both principal and interest. 
    The bonds may be used in payment of the cost of the improvement as specified or the City Council may sell sufficient of said bonds to pay the cost in cash. Said bonds may be sold by public sale or private sale, to the best advantage of the City. All bids may be rejected at the discretion of the City Council. All such bonds shall be negotiable in form, shall bear interest as may be fixed by the City Council, payable either semiannually or annually as may be provided by the City Council in the ordinance authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
(276 948 1663 1667) 
9-7-20. - Payment of Bonds. 
    Whenever the City Treasurer has funds derived from assessment payment in the treasury to the credit of the improvement district exceeding the interest on the unpaid principal of the bonds issued therefor and outstanding for such period as may be specified in the ordinance authorizing the bonds, the City Treasurer shall call in or direct the bond registrar to call in a suitable number of such bonds for payment. Notice of redemption of bonds shall be given in the manner provided in the ordinance authorizing the issuance thereof. On the redemption date specified in such notice, interest on the bonds so called shall cease. The notice shall specify by number the bonds so called, and all such bonds shall be paid in their regular numerical order. 
(276 1667) 
9-7-21. - Surplus and Deficiency. 
    Where all outstanding bonds have been paid in a public improvement district, and any money remains to the credit of said district, it shall be transferred to a special surplus and deficiency fund and, whenever there is a deficiency in any improvement district to meet payment of outstanding bonds, it shall be paid out of said fund. Whenever a public improvement district has paid and cancelled three-fourths of its bonds outstanding, and for any reason the remaining assessments are not paid in time to pay the remaining bonds of the district and there is not sufficient money in said special surplus and deficiency fund, then the City shall pay said bonds when due and reimburse itself by collecting the unpaid assessments due said district. 
    In consideration of general benefits conferred on the City at large from the construction or installation of improvements in special or local improvement districts, the City Council may levy annual taxes on all taxable property within the City at a rate not exceeding two mills in any one year, to be disbursed as determined by the City Council for the purpose of advancing money to maintain current payments of interest and equal annual payments of the principal amount of bonds issued for any special or local improvement district thereinafter created. 
    The proceeds of such taxes shall be placed in a special fund and shall be disbursed only for the purposes specified herein, provided, however, that in lieu of such tax levies, the City Council may annually transfer to such special fund any available money of the City, but in no event shall the amount transferred in any one year exceed the amount that would result from a tax levied in such year as herein limited. 
    In addition to the above, the City Council may finance the City's share of the cost of any special improvement project, whether or not such cost is assessed against City-owned property, by the issuance of special improvement district bonds and shall appropriate annually an amount sufficient for the payment of that portion of the share of the costs then due. The City's share of the cost of any special improvement project shall be determined by the City Council. Such bonds shall not be subject to any election requirements or debt limitation that might otherwise exist pursuant to the City Charter or other applicable law. 
(276 1667) 
9-7-22. - Definitions. 
    In all proceedings authorized or required by this Chapter, figures may be used instead of words, and it shall not be necessary in improvement districts to designate each piece of real estate in the district separately, but general description and quantities may be used except in the assessment rolls, and the cost may be stated as being a probable amount per front foot, or per square foot, or per lot of a given size, and proportionate amounts for other lots or, when a different rule of assessment is provided, then as being subject to such rule. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Alley improvements shall mean and include surfacing and necessary improvements incidental thereto. 
    City Engineer shall mean and include any engineer, or firm of engineers, or corporation engaged in the practice of engineering, which may be under contract with the City with respect to local public improvements contracted for or installed pursuant to this Chapter. 
    City Manager shall mean and include his authorized representative, when such authority has been given by a written order of the City Manager; or in the absence of a City Manager, the City Work Supervisor. 
    City Treasurer shall mean and include the City Finance Director. 
    Construct, constructed, construction, or words of similar import shall mean and include "acquire," "acquired," "acquisition" or similar import in districts created to acquire improvements already constructed. 
    Lots, plots, block, and other subdivisions may be designated in accordance with any recorded plat thereof, and unplatted lands by any definite description. 
    Real estate shall mean and include all lands, whether platted or unplatted, regardless of lot or land lines. 
    Street shall mean and include avenues, boulevards other highways and bridges. 
    Street improvements shall mean and include any one or more of the following: 
(A)  Surfacing, extending, widening, lengthening, altering, reconstruction or other improving of roadways. 
(B)  Construction of curbs, gutters and sidewalks. 
(C)  Construction of bridges, overpasses and underpasses. 
(D)  The necessary grading therefor. 
(E)  Landscaping of adjoining parkways by the planting of trees and shrubs. 
(F)  Storm drainage incidental thereto. 
(276 1633 1667) 
9-7-23. - Improvements. 
    The improvements authorized by this Chapter may consist of street improvements, such as grading, paving, curbing, guttering, providing parking for, widening, lengthening, altering or otherwise improving the whole or any part of any street or alley, or streets or alleys, including bridges, overpasses and underpasses in the City, or any one or more of said improvements, including the reconstruction, replacement, renewal, or extension of the same. In case of grading only, or grading and curbing only, the improvements may include the necessary crosswalks. 
    Such improvement may also consist of the construction of district sewers, or storm sewers in districts to be known as storm sewer districts, the same to be provided by ordinance in accordance with the provisions herein contained. Said sewers may consist of the necessary manholes, inlets and appurtenances, and shall be so constructed as to connect with some existing public sewer or natural drainage. Said districts may be divided into subdistricts to be specially named or numbered in said ordinance. Such storm drains may be made, contracted for, or constructed larger than required by a local public improvement district, and the City may pay from any lawful fund that portion of the cost that may be in excess of the cost required by the district, and upon the extension at a later time of the mains or submains to an area not included within the district for which mains or submains were made and contracted for, the City may assess the amount paid by the City as a lien upon real property benefited by the oversized construction and extension of the mains and submains. 
(276 1633 1667) 
9-7-24. - Legal Proceedings. 
    No action or proceeding, at law or in equity, to review any acts or proceedings, or to question the validity or enjoin the performance of any act, or the issuance or collection of any bonds, or the levy or collection of any assessments authorized herein, or for any other relief against any acts or proceedings done or had pursuant hereto or under the provisions of the charter of the City of Westminster, with reference hereto, whether based upon illegalities, irregularities or jurisdictional defects, shall be maintained, unless commenced within 30 days after the performance of the act or the passage of the resolution or ordinance complained of or else be thereafter perpetually barred. 
    Local Public Improvement Districts created but not completed and assessed on the effective date of this Chapter shall not be affected hereby but shall be governed by the laws relating to such improvement districts on the date of their creation. 
(276 1633) 
9-7-25. - Waiver of Procedures. 
    Any of the provisions of this Chapter may be waived in writing by the owner of all property in the district that is to be assessed and by the Mayor, if the City is to bear any of the costs of the improvements. Such a waiver must state the requirements of this Chapter that are being waived. No person shall be permitted to withdraw a written waiver once it has been submitted to the City Council for consideration. The authorization for such a waiver shall be contained within the ordinance establishing the district. 
(276 1633 1667) 
9-7-26. - Acquisition of Improvements. 
    Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, a local improvement district may be created for the acquisition of improvements already constructed, or for both acquisition and construction of improvements. With respect to improvements to be acquired, the provisions of this Chapter concerning public bidding of construction contracts shall not apply. 
(276 1667) 
CHAPTER 8. - INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM FOR STREETLIGHT COSTS AND CONCRETE REPLACEMENT 

9-8-1. - Legislative Intent. 
    The City Council finds, determines and declares as follows: 
(A)  The City of Westminster has a program to replace deteriorated concrete curb, gutter and sidewalk adjacent to citizens' properties and throughout the City, as part of the reconstruction and resurfacing of streets; and 
(B)  The City of Westminster provides and maintains streetlighting, on new and existing streets, and pays for its illumination; and 
(C)  Both the concrete replacement program and the provision and maintenance of streetlighting provide a direct service to both owners and occupants of properties within the City and to residents using the public streets and sidewalks; and 
(D)  As both City residents and non-resident owners of property receive the health, safety, and aesthetic benefits of street illumination and sound and secure sidewalks, it is equitable and reasonable to fund a portion of the costs of said concrete replacement and streetlighting by imposing an infrastructure fee on each consumer's utility bill to help defray part of the City's costs of providing these services to its users. 
(3315) 
9-8-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Billing date shall mean the date that appears as the "billing date" on the utility bill for the month for which the charge is being assessed. 
    Charge due shall mean the amount owing, including any collection fee. 
    Code shall mean the Westminster Municipal Code. 
    Collection fee shall mean the fee added to any past due infrastructure fee. 
    Concrete replacement cost shall mean the cost of maintaining and replacing curbs, gutters, and sidewalks within the City. 
    Consumer shall mean any person receiving water or sewer service from the City. 
    Finance Director shall mean the finance director of the City of Westminster, or his/her appointee. 
    In-city shall mean located within the boundaries of the City. 
    Infrastructure fee shall mean that portion of the utility bill intended to cover the costs of providing City streetlighting and concrete replacement. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, public or private corporation, estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee, agent or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by court or otherwise, or any other legal entity. 
    Streetlight cost shall mean the cost of new streetlight installations, maintenance and repair of damaged light poles, and the cost of electricity required for illumination of streetlights. 
    Utility bill shall mean the monthly billing statement for utility accounts sent to consumers of city utility services, which may include water, sewer, stormwater management, concrete replacement and streetlighting. 
(3315) 
9-8-3. - Infrastructure Fee Established. 
    There is hereby established an infrastructure fee in the amount of $3.00 per month on each utility bill sent to an in-city consumer of City utility services. Effective January 1, 2011, the infrastructure fee shall increase to $4.00 per month on each utility bill sent to an in-city consumer of City utility services. Effective January 1, 2014, the infrastructure fee shall increase to $5.00 per month on each utility bill sent to an in-city consumer of City utility services, and effective January 1, 2015, the infrastructure fee shall increase to $6.00 per month on each utility bill sent to an in-city consumer of City utility services. All proceeds of the infrastructure fee will be used to offset the City's costs in providing concrete replacement and streetlighting services. 
(3315 3549 3691) 
9-8-4. - Administration. 
(A)  Billing Method: Beginning with utility bills having a billing date of January 1, 2007, or later, the fee shall be billed periodically in the same manner and to the same person as other utility accounts. 
(B)  Due Date: The charge shall be due and collected in the same manner as city water, sewer, and stormwater utility fees, except that no City utility service shall be disrupted for non-payment of the infrastructure fee due. 
(C)  Application of Payment. Any payment made towards the amount of the bill shall be first applied to payment of the Infrastructure Fee. 
(D)  Collection Fee: If any charge due is not paid within 90 days of the billing date, a fee of $10.00 shall be levied. 
(E)  Abatement: 
(1)  Charge. Infrastructure fees properly imposed shall not be abated. 
(2)  Collection Fee. Any collection fee levied by this Section may be abated by the Finance Director, if the Finance Director finds good cause therefor. 
(F)  Security: The City shall have as security for the collection of the charge due a lien upon the real property listed as the service address of the utility bill. Such liens shall be governed by Title I, Chapter 31 of this Code. 
(3315) 
9-8-5. - Concrete Replacement Criteria. 
(A)  Criteria for Replacement: Concrete replacement must be warranted in at least one of the following ways: 
(1)  The condition of the concrete is a safety, pedestrian, or traffic hazard, due to heaving or having settled conditions; 
(2)  The deterioration of the surface by spalling/scaling has caused the aggregate to become loose; 
(3)  The curb, gutter or sidewalk has cracked, causing infiltration of water into the subgrade, which will result in heaving condition and/or settlement; or 
(4)  Where severe settlement of gutters has caused water to pond in the gutter, street, or on the sidewalk, resulting in icy, hazardous conditions during the winter months, and stagnant, standing water in the summer months. 
(B)  No replacement may be authorized by staff without meeting the criteria described above. 
(3315) 
Title X. - TRAFFIC 
CHAPTER 1. - TRAFFIC CODE 

10-1-1. - Adoption. 
(A)  Pursuant to Parts 1 and 2 of Article 16 of Title 31 and Part 4 of Article 15 of Title 30, C.R.S., as amended, there is hereby adopted by reference Articles I and II, inclusive, of the 2010 edition of the "Model Traffic Code for Colorado," promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety, and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue EP700, Denver, CO 80222. The subject matter of the Model Traffic Code relates primarily to comprehensive traffic control regulations for the City of Westminster. The purpose of this ordinance and the Code adopted herein is to provide a system of traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the state and the nation. At least one copy of the Model Traffic Code adopted herein is now filed in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours. 
(B)  Pursuant to Parts 1 and 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., as amended, there is hereby adopted by reference the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways" (the "Uniform Manual"), as adopted by the Colorado General Assembly at Section 42-4-104, C.R.S., and as amended from time to time. At least one copy of the Uniform Manual adopted herein is now filed in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours. 
(C)  Pursuant to Parts 1 and 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., as amended, there is hereby adopted by reference the "Colorado Supplement to Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways" (the "Supplement"), as adopted by the Colorado Department of Transportation, and as amended from time to time. At least one copy of the supplement adopted herein is now filed in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours. 
(2432 3052 3594) 
10-1-1.5. - Definitions. 
(A)  The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Title, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
(1)  "Unlicensed vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle required by state law to be registered pursuant to Article 3 of Title 42, C.R.S., that is not properly registered, and also includes toy vehicles, go-karts, all terrain vehicles, off-highway vehicles, snowmobiles, electric personal assistive mobility devices ("EPAMDs"), golf carts, low-power scooters, and any other vehicle or device powered by an electric motor or internal combustion engine that is not generally and commonly used to transport persons and property over streets and highways, but the term does not include wheelchairs or electric assisted bicycles. 
(2)  When used in this Code, terms defined in Section 42-1-102, C.R.S., shall have the meaning provided therein, as may be amended from time to time. 
(3594) 
10-1-2. - Deletions. 
    The 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code is adopted as if set out at length, save and except the following sections that are expressly deleted: 
Section 117. Personal mobility devices. 
Section 615. School zones-increase in penalties for moving traffic violations. 
Section 1202. Parking or abandonment of vehicles. 
Section 1408. Operation of motor vehicles on property under control of or owned by parks and recreation districts. 
Section 1701. Traffic offenses and infractions classified-penalties-penalty and surcharge schedule-repeal. 
Section 1702. Counties-traffic offenses classified-schedule of fines. 
(2432 3052 3594) 
10-1-3. - Additions or Modifications. 
    The 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code is subject to the additions or modifications as set forth in this Chapter 1 of Title X of the Westminster Municipal Code, including the following: 
(A)  In Section 110, "Provisions uniform throughout jurisdiction," subsection (4) is amended to read: "The Westminster Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over violations of traffic regulations enacted or adopted by the City Council." 
(B)  Section 221, "Bicycle and personal mobility device equipment," is amended so that the title reads, "Bicycle equipment" and each reference to "EPAMD" in the body of the Section is deleted. 
(C)  In Section 223, "Brakes," all references to "Section 235(1)(a)" in subsection (1), are modified to read "Section 42-4-235(1)(a), C.R.S." 
(D)  Section 225, "Mufflers-prevention of noise," in subsection (1.5), the reference to "Section 235(1)(a)" is modified to read "Section 42-4-235(1)(a), C.R.S." 
(E)  Section 225, "Mufflers-prevention of noise," in subsection (3), the reference to "Section 205(5.5)(a)" is modified to read "Section 43-4-205(5.5)(a), C.R.S." 
(F)  Section 228, "Restrictions on tire equipment," in subsection (5)(c)(III), the reference to "Section 235(1)(a)" is modified to read "Section 42-4-235(1)(a), C.R.S." 
(G)  Section 229, "Safety glazing material on motor vehicles," in subsection (4), the reference to "Section 219" is modified to read "Section 42-3-219, C.R.S." 
(H)  Section 236, "Child restraint system required-definitions-exemptions," in subsection (1)(a), the reference to "Code 6" is modified to read "Article 6." 
(I)  Section 237, "Safety belt systems-mandatory use-exemptions-penalty," in subsection (3)(g), the reference to "Section 235(1)(a)" is modified to read "Section 42-4-235(1)(a), C.R.S." 
(J)  In Section 239, "Misuse of a wireless telephone-definitions-penalty-preemption," subsections (5)(a) and (b) are omitted. 
(K)  Section 509, "Vehicles weighed-excess removed," in subsection (2)(b), the reference to "Section 102(32)" is modified to read "Section 42-1-102(32), C.R.S." 
(L)  In Section 613, "Failure to pay toll established by regional transportation district," the reference to "Code 4" is modified to read "Article 4." 
(M)  In Section 710, "Emerging from or entering ally, driveway, or building," subsection (3) is modified to read as follows: 
(3)  No person shall drive any vehicle other than a bicycle, electric assisted bicycle, or any other human-powered vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway and except as permitted in Sections 10-1-13 and 10-1-14, W.M.C. 
(N)  Section 805, "Pedestrians walking or traveling in a wheelchair on highways," in subsection (5), the reference to "Section 110" is modified to read "Section 42-4-110, C.R.S." and the reference to "Section 111" is modified to read "Section 42-4-111, C.R.S." 
(O)  In Section 1010, "Driving on a divided or controlled access highway," subsection (3) is modified to read as follows: 
(3)  Local authorities may by ordinance consistent with the provisions of Section 43-2-135(1)(g), C.R.S, with respect to any controlled-access highway under their respective jurisdictions, prohibit the use of any such highway by any class or kind of traffic that is found to be incompatible with the normal and safe movement of traffic. After adopting such prohibitory regulations, local authorities, or their designees, shall install official traffic control devices in conformity with the standards established by Sections 601 and 602 at entrance points or along the highway on which such regulations are applicable. When such devices are so in place, giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey the restrictions made known by such devices. 
(P)  Section 1012, "High occupancy vehicle (HOV) and high occupancy toll (HOT) lanes," in subsection (2.5)(c), the reference to September 1, 2003, is deleted. 
(Q)  Section 1012, "High occupancy vehicle (HOV) and high occupancy toll (HOT) lanes," in subsection (3)(b), the reference to "Section 1701(4)(a)(I)(K)" is modified to read "Section 42-4-1701(4)(a)(I)(K), C.R.S." 
(R)  Section 1105, "Speed contests-speed exhibitions-aiding and facilitating-immobilization of motor vehicle-definitions," subsection (7)(c) is modified to read as follows: 
(c)  The failure of the owner of the immobilized motor vehicle to request removal of the immobilization device and pay the fee within fourteen (14) days after the end of the immobilization period ordered by the court or within the additional time granted by the court pursuant to paragraph (D) of this Subsection (7), whichever is applicable, shall result in the motor vehicle being deemed an 'abandoned vehicle,' as defined in Section 1802(1)(d) and Section 42-4-2102(1)(d), C.R.S., and subject to the provisions of Part 18 of this Code and Part 21 of Article 4 of Title 42, C.R.S., whichever is applicable. The law enforcement agency entitled to payment of the fee under this Subsection (7) shall be eligible to recover the fee if the abandoned motor vehicle is sold, pursuant to Section 1809(2)(b.5) or Section 42-4-2108(2)(a.5), C.R.S. 
(S)  Section 1105, "Speed contests-speed exhibitions-aiding and facilitating-immobilization of motor vehicle-definitions," subsection (8)(b) is modified to read as follows: 
(b)  No person may remove the immobilization device after the end of the immobilization period except the law enforcement agency that placed the immobilization device and that has been requested by the owner to remove the device and to which the owner has properly paid the fee required by subsection (7) of this Section. Nothing in this Subsection (8) shall be construed to prevent the removal of an immobilization device in order to comply with the provisions of Part 18 of this Code or Part 21 of Article 4 of Title 42, C.R.S. 
(T)  In Section 1204, "Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places," subsection (2)(a) is amended to read as follows: 
(a)  Within five feet (5') of a public or private driveway; except this Subsection shall not apply to Franklin Square Subdivision nor the bulb portion of a cul-de-sac anywhere in the City. 
(U)  In Section 1204, "Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places," new subsections (4)(d) and (e) are added and read as follows: 
(d)  Subsection (1) shall not apply to official law enforcement or emergency vehicles in the course of performing law enforcement duties or providing emergency services. 
(e)  Paragraph (a) of subsection (1) shall not apply to authorized service vehicles parked by public employees or their agents in the course of providing public service functions. 
(V)  In Section 1208, "Parking privileges for persons with disabilities - applicability," all references to "Section 204(2)" are modified to read "Section 42-3-204(2), C.R.S.;" all references to "Section 204(1)" are modified to read "Section 42-3-204(1), C.R.S.;" all references to "Section 204(1)(b)" are modified to read "Section 42-3-204(1)(b), C.R.S.;" all references to "Section 204" are modified to read "Section 42-3-204, C.R.S.;" and all references to "Section 102(17)" are modified to read "Section 42-1-102(17), C.R.S." 
(W)  In Section 1208, "Parking privileges for persons with disabilities-applicability," subsection (6) is modified to read as follows: 
(6)  Any person who is not a person with a disability and who exercises the privilege defined in subsection (2) of this Section or who violates the provisions of subsection (5) or subsection (10) of this Section commits a class B traffic infraction and shall receive the maximum fine thereunder. Any person who violates this Subsection (6) by parking a vehicle owned by a commercial carrier, as defined in Section 42-1-102(17), C.R.S., shall be subject to an enhanced fine. 
(X)  In Section 1208, "Parking privileges for persons with disabilities-applicability," subsection (7) is modified to read as follows: 
(7)  Any person who is not a person with a disability and who uses a license plate or placard issued pursuant to Section 42-3-204, C.R.S., to receive the benefits or privileges available to a person with a disability under this Section commits a class B traffic infraction and shall be subject to an enhanced fine. 
(Y)  In Section 1208, "Parking privileges for persons with disabilities-applicability," subsection (11) is modified to read as follows: 
(11)  Any person who knowingly and fraudulently obtains, possesses, uses, or transfers a placard issued to a person with a disability pursuant to Section 42-3-204, C.R.S., is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who knowingly and willfully receives remuneration for committing a misdemeanor pursuant to this Subsection (11) shall be subject to twice the civil and criminal fine that would otherwise be imposed. 
(Z)  Section 1401, "Reckless driving-penalty," in subsection (1), the reference to "Section 127" is modified to read "Section 42-2-127, C.R.S.," and subsection (2) is deleted in its entirety. 
(AA)  Section 1402, "Careless driving-penalty," in subsection (1), the reference to "Section 127" is modified to read "Section 42-2-127, C.R.S.," and subsection (2) is deleted in its entirety. 
(BB)  In Section 1406, "Foreign matter on highway prohibited," subsection (5)(b)(II), specifying a $500.00 penalty, is deleted. 
(CC)  In Section 1409, "Compulsory insurance-penalty-legislative intent," subsection (4)(a) is replaced and shall read in its entirety as follows: "Any person who violates the provisions of subsection (1), (2), or (3) of this Section commits a criminal traffic offense." Subsections 4(b) and (c) are deleted. 
(DD)  In Section 1409, "Compulsory insurance-penalty-legislative intent," subsection (9) is deleted in its entirety. 
(EE)  In Section 1412, "Operation of bicycles and other human powered vehicles," all references to "Section 111" are modified to read "Section 42-4-111, C.R.S.;" the reference to "Code 10" is modified to read "Article 10;" and all references to "Section 127" are modified to read "Section 42-2-127, C.R.S." 
(FF)  In Section 1805, "Appraisal of abandoned motor vehicles-sale," the reference to "Part 1 of Code 6 of this Title" is modified to read "Part 1 of Article 6 of Title 42, C.R.S.;" and the reference to "Code 6 of Title 12, C.R.S." is modified to read "Article 6 of Title 12, C.R.S." 
(2432 3052 3594) 
10-1-4. - Penalties. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of this Chapter or any provision of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities, as adopted or amended by this Code. Such violations are traffic infractions and are hereby deemed civil matters, except those violations stated in subsection (C) of this Section. 
(B)  Any violation of this Code that is a noncriminal traffic infraction shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. As authorized by Section 1-2-24, W.M.C., the municipal court may, by order, establish a schedule of fines for violations eligible for payment through the violations bureau. 
(C)  Any violation of any of the following provisions of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities, as adopted and amended by the City, and any violation of Section 10-1-11, W.M.C., shall be a criminal traffic offense punishable by a fine or by imprisonment or by both as specified in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1)  Section 1101, Speed limits, but only when the speed alleged is greater than 24 miles per hour over the reasonable and prudent speed; 
(2)  Section 1105, Speed contests; 
(3)  Section 1401, Reckless driving; 
(4)  Section 1402, Careless driving; 
(5)  Section 1409, Compulsory insurance; 
(6)  Section 1413, Eluding or attempting to elude a police officer; and 
(7)  Section 1903, School buses-Stops-Signs-Passing. 
(D)  In the event that a defendant is charged with more than one traffic offense arising out of the same incident and at least one of the charged offenses is listed in subsection (C) above, the defendant shall have the right to demand a trial by jury as to all such offenses, which shall be consolidated for purposes of trial. 
(2432 3594) 
10-1-5. - Application. 
    This ordinance shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park, and to every other public way or public place or public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of the City, the use of which the City has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. The provisions of Sections 1401, 1402, 1413, and Part 16 of the adopted Model Traffic Code, respectively, concerning reckless driving, careless driving, eluding a police officer, and accidents and accident reports shall apply not only to public places and ways but also throughout the City. 
(2432) 
10-1-6. - Validity. 
    If any part or parts of this ordinance are for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance and each part or parts thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one part or parts may be declared invalid. 
(2432) 
10-1-7. - Repeal. 
    Existing or parts of ordinances covering the same matters as embraced in this ordinance are hereby repealed and all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this ordinance. 
(2432) 
10-1-8. - Interpretation. 
    This ordinance shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to conform with the state's uniform system for the regulation of vehicles and traffic. Article and section headings of the ordinance and adopted model traffic code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. 
(2432) 
10-1-9. - Certification. 
    The City Clerk shall certify to the passage of this ordinance and make not less than three copies of the adopted code available for inspection by the public during regular business hours. 
(2432) 
10-1-10. - Reprinting. 
    Because the Model Traffic Code for Colorado is published by an agency of the State of Colorado in a separate bound volume, the said code shall not be reprinted at length and inserted in the existing loose leaf binder of the Municipal Code of the City of Westminster. Reference to the model traffic code as printed and bound by the State of Colorado shall have the same force and effect as if said model traffic code were set forth at length and inserted within the Official Code of the City of Westminster, subject to the amendments set forth herein. 
(2432) 
10-1-11. - Regulation of Commercial Vehicles. 
(A)  No person or motor carrier shall operate a commercial vehicle on any street within the City unless such vehicle is in compliance with Section 42-4-235, C.R.S., as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(B)  This Section may be enforced by any City Police Officer or firefighter who meets the inspector qualifications set forth in Section 42-4-235, C.R.S., as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in violation of subsection (A) of this Section. 
(2432 3594) 
10-1-12. - Parking Restrictions. 
(A)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Bus shall mean a motor vehicle designed to seat more than ten passengers and used for the transportation of persons, either for compensation or not, including, but not limited to, motor vehicles operated for profit by governmental agencies and motor vehicles used for the transportation of children to and from school. 
    Camper shall mean a non-wheeled, detachable piece of vehicular equipment that weighs over 500 pounds, used for temporary or permanent habitation, that has no independent motor power and that is capable of being placed on a vehicle but is not capable of being towed. 
    Camping trailer shall mean a trailer constructed so as to provide temporary occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons. 
    Construction equipment shall mean a vehicle, whether self-propelled or not, designed for the use in the construction, maintenance, or repair of roadways, structures, and ditches, or modified for use in the construction, maintenance, or repair of roadways, structures, and ditches, the use of which on public roadways is incidental to its primary use. 
    Front yard or side yard on street shall mean that part of a lot that exists between any lot line that runs parallel to a street and the extension of the nearest exterior wall of the building located upon that lot. 
    Loading and unloading shall mean the uninterrupted activity of continuously moving material, equipment, goods or other items of personal property from or to a vehicle during an 24 hour maximum period. 
    Mobile home shall mean any vehicle used, or constructed so as to permit its use, as a conveyance upon streets and highways, constructed in such a manner as to permit occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons. 
    Motor home shall mean a motorized vehicle designed or used as a conveyance upon streets and highways and constructed so as to provide temporary occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons, but excluding pick-up trucks with attached campers. 
    Recreation vehicle or RV shall mean a motor home, mobile home, or camping trailer. 
    Residential district shall mean any area zoned RE, R1, RA, R2, R3, R4 or R5 under Title XI of this Code, or designated as a residential area in the official development plan for any planned unit development, along with all land within 300 feet of such area. 
    Semi-tractor shall mean a motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross combination weight rating (GCWR) in excess of 26,001 pounds, which is designed and commonly used to draw a semi-trailer and its cargo load over the public roadways. 
    Trailer shall mean any wheeled vehicle without motor power that may be drawn over the roadway by a motor vehicle, including camping trailers and boat trailers. 
    Truck shall mean a motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) over 11,000 pounds, equipped with a body designed to carry cargo or special permanently mounted equipment. 
    Truck trailer shall mean a wheeled vehicle, the empty weight of which is more than 2,000 pounds or the length of which is greater than 25 feet, which has no motor power and is designed to be used in conjunction with a semi-tractor so that some part of its own weight and that of its cargo load rests upon or is carried by such semi-tractor. 
    Vehicle associated with a business shall mean any vehicle that has a sign affixed to it referring to a business, or any vehicle displaying special tags or insignia identified with a particular occupation. 
(B)  The following restrictions shall apply to the parking of vehicles on public streets within the City: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to park any trailer, boat, mobile home or motor home that is less than 35 feet long on any public street or highway within any residential district of the City unless: 
(a)  The vehicle is a recreational vehicle (RV) that is being loaded or unloaded; loading and unloading of an RV includes trip preparation or post-trip clean up or minor maintenance. 
(b)  The vehicle is a boat or trailer (other than a camping trailer) that is being loaded or unloaded. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, including, but not limited to, those listed in (1) above, that is 35 feet or more long on any public street or highway within any residential district of the City, except for the purpose of loading and unloading. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to park truck trailers, semi-tractors, trucks, buses and construction equipment on any public street or highway within any residential district of the City; provided, however, that parking next to a construction site for which a valid permit exists shall be allowed for the purpose of loading and unloading materials. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any public street, highway, public right-of-way, or public property in the City for the principal purpose of: (a) displaying such vehicle for sale or lease; (b) washing, greasing, painting, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency; or (c) displaying advertising. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any camper not mounted upon a vehicle to be left upon any street or highway within the City. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle that is required to be licensed by Colorado statute upon any street or highway within the City unless a valid license is properly displayed on the vehicle. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon a street or highway in such a manner or under such conditions as to interfere with the free movement of vehicular traffic or proper street or highway maintenance. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a manner as to leave available less than two feet clearance between vehicles when parked. 
(9)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon a street or highway in a manner as to block the driveway entrance to any property abutting the street or highway. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on public right-of-way located between the curb and sidewalk. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful to move and repark any vehicle in the same location or within 300 feet of the same location for the principal purpose of evading the application of sub-section (1) and (2) of this Subsection (B). 
(C)  The following restrictions shall apply to the parking of vehicles on private property within the City: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle that is 35 feet or more in length on any private street within any residential district of the City, or upon any residential lot within the City, except for the purpose of loading and unloading. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to park trailers, boats, automobiles, mounted or unmounted campers, or any motor vehicle in any front yard or side yard on street, unless such vehicles are parked on a driveway paved with concrete, asphalt, rock or gravel, or in a side yard behind a lawfully constructed six-foot privacy fence. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or combination of vehicles on private property so that the public sidewalk is obstructed. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to park truck trailers, semi-tractors, trucks, buses and construction equipment on any private street in a residential district, on any driveway in a residential district, on a vacant lot in a residential district or in a front yard or side yard on street; provided, however, that parking on a construction site for which a valid building permit exists is allowed for the purpose of loading and unloading materials. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on any private street or private property within the City displaying that vehicle for sale or lease, except that a property owner may display one vehicle per residential dwelling unit with a "For Sale" sign or a "For Lease" sign listing the owner's address in the driveway of his residence, provided that the vehicle does not violate the requirements contained in this Section. This Subsection shall not apply to car sales lots approved for such use pursuant to this Code. 
(6)  Churches located in a residential district may park one multi-passenger bus on the church parking lot. Said bus is to be locked when not in use. Additional buses owned by such church shall not be parked or stored on the church parking lot, but shall be parked or stored at a location having appropriate zoning to permit such use. 
(D)  It shall be unlawful to park more than one vehicle associated with a business in any residential district of the City where such vehicle is visible from public or private property. 
(E)  Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as specified in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(F)  The parking of any vehicle in violation of this Section is declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4 of Title IX of this Code. 
(G)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle within a designated fire lane as approved by the Westminster Fire Department. 
(2432 3647 3757) 
10-1-13. - Operation of Registered Motor Vehicles. 
(A)  Motor vehicles properly registered pursuant to Article 3 of Title 42, C.R.S., may be operated within the City only on streets and highways; public ways and alleys; parking lots open to the public; and on private property, but only with the private property owner's consent. 
(B)  Subsection (A) shall not apply to motor vehicles operated by public employees in the course of performing official law enforcement duties or providing emergency services. In addition, subsection (A) shall not prohibit operation of authorized service vehicles on public property by a public employee or agent for the purpose of maintaining, repairing, surveying, or patrolling the property. 
(2432 2786 3594) 
10-1-14. - Operation of Unlicensed Vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an unlicensed vehicle in the City as follows: 
(A)  On highways, except that a person operating a toy vehicle or golf cart may go upon a highway when crossing the highway in a designated crosswalk and, when so crossing, shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(B)  Unless the property is posted by the owner to allow such use, use of unlicensed vehicles is prohibited in the following locations: 
(1)  On City-owned property, including, but not limited to, City-owned parking lots, City-owned park property, and City bike or pedestrian paths and trails; 
(2)  On publicly held or controlled park or recreational property; 
(3)  On school district-owned property or any public school grounds or campus; 
(4)  On private property, including privately owned parking lots open to public use. 
(5)  It shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of this Subsection (B) if written permission has been granted by the property owner to the specific person operating the unlicensed vehicle. 
(C)  On sidewalks, except that toy vehicles may be operated on a sidewalk adjacent to private property or on a sidewalk adjacent to any public street that is not a state highway. 
(2432 2901 3594) 
10-1-15. - Driving Through Private Property or Driveways. 
(A)  It is unlawful for any person to drive from a public street or public way of this City over, across or through any private property or driveway to avoid traffic-control signals, stop signs, or other traffic-control devices or as a route or shortcut from one public street or public way to another. 
(B)  As used in subsection (A) of this Section, "private property" includes, but is not limited to, any property not dedicated as a public street or public way, alley, right-of-way or easement. 
(C)  The following shall be affirmative defenses to a charge of violation of subsection (A) of this Section: 
(1)  That the person charged is the owner of the property or driveway through or across which the motor vehicle is driven or of leasehold or easement rights therein, or of the right to the possession or use thereof. 
(2)  That at the time of the violation, the action was in response to an emergency that the driver reasonably perceived was necessary to avoid a risk of substantial harm to himself or others. 
(3)  The vehicle came to a complete stop and the ignition was turned off prior to the reentry of the vehicle onto public right-of-way. 
(4)  The action was in response to a mechanical failure or malfunction of the vehicle. 
(2432) 
10-1-16. - Parking Permits. 
(A)  Parking Permits Authorized: The City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue parking permits in accordance with the provisions of this Section to allow the on-street parking of motor vehicles by residents of blocks designated by the traffic engineer as restricted parking areas. 
(B)  Description of Restriction: 
(1)  In a block that has been designated as a restricted parking area and in which have been erected signs that conform to the requirements of law, on-street parking of motor vehicles shall be prohibited, unless there is properly displayed in the vehicle the permit provided for in subsection (E). For purposes of this Section, such a permit is properly displayed only when it is located on the dashboard of the vehicle in front of the driver's seat and the date of expiration of the permit is clearly visible through the windshield of the vehicle. 
(2)  The owner, driver, or both, of any vehicle that is parked in violation of this Section shall be subject to the penalty provided for in subsection (H). 
(3)  Motorcycles, mopeds, and other two-wheeled vehicles shall be exempt from this Section. 
(4)  The Traffic Engineer shall determine the dates and times of day that the restrictions are in effect, based upon the dates and hours of operation of the senior high school in the neighborhood. 
(C)  Restricted Parking Area Defined: In order to qualify as a "restricted parking area," the block shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The block or some part thereof shall fall within one-half mile of the closest property line of a senior high school; and 
(2)  A written petition signed by the owners or residents of approximately two-thirds of the lots with frontage on the block shall be submitted to the City Clerk requesting that the block be designated as a restricted parking area; and 
(3)  The block cannot be part of the state highway system, as that term is defined in Section 43-2-101, C.R.S., as amended. 
    If all of the above criteria are met, the Traffic Engineer may designate the block as a restricted parking area. 
(D)  Signs: Signs indicating the parking restrictions shall be erected in a block designated by the traffic engineer as a restricted parking area. The signs shall give notice that parking is prohibited unless there is properly displayed in the motor vehicle a permit that is issued pursuant to subsection (E) and shall indicate the dates and times of day that the restrictions apply. 
(E)  Permit Application and Fees: 
(1)  Upon application to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City, the City Clerk shall issue no more than five permits per residence when the address of the applicant is within a restricted parking area. The applicant shall on request provide a currently valid Colorado drivers license to establish that his or her residence is within the restricted parking area. 
(2)  The first two permits are free and a fee of $5.00 shall be charged for each permit thereafter up to five permits. 
(F)  Removal of Designation as Restricted Parking Area: The Traffic Engineer shall have the discretion to remove the designation of a block as a restricted parking area if any one of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)  By virtue of closure of the school or change in use of the property, the block or some part thereof is no longer located within one-half mile of the closest property line of a senior high school; or 
(2)  A written petition signed by the owners or residents of approximately two-thirds of the lots with frontage on the block is submitted to the City Clerk requesting that designation of the block as a restricted parking area be removed; or 
(3)  The block becomes part of the state highway system, as that term is defined in Section 43-2-101, C.R.S., as amended. 
(G)  Violation: Vehicles parked in violation of this Section shall be towed and impounded pursuant to Section 10-1-17, W.M.C. In any prosecution of the provisions of this Section, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint was parking or stopped in violation of this Section, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such stopping or parking, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the person who parked or stopped, or knowingly permitted to be parked or stopped, such unattended vehicle at the place where and for the time in which such violation occurred. 
(H)  Penalty: A violation of this Section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the limits established in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(I)  Permit Cancellation: The City Clerk shall cancel permits held by residents who repeatedly allow a permit to be used by nonresidents. Occasional use of a permit by a resident's invited guests shall be allowed. 
(2432) 
10-1-17. - Impoundment of Vehicles; Authority; Procedure. 
(A)  No person shall abandon any vehicle upon private property other than his own without the written consent of the owner or lessee thereof. The City may request that the property owner furnish a copy of the written consent. The following sign shall be posted prominently on commercial locations: "Vehicles abandoned for 24 hours on this property, without the consent of the owner or lessee, will be towed away at the discretion of this property owner or lessee." 
(B)  Subject to the procedures specified in this Section, a police officer shall require a vehicle to be removed or cause it to be removed and placed in storage in a garage or other place of safety designated or maintained by the City when: 
(1)  The vehicle is found, attended or unattended, standing or parked upon any portion of a street, highway, or public thoroughfare within the City in such manner as to constitute a violation of this Code; or 
(2)  The vehicle has been left unattended on any portion of a street, highway or public thoroughfare and is presumed to be abandoned; or 
(3)  The vehicle has been left unattended on private property or City property, the vehicle is presumed to be abandoned, and the owner or lessee of such property has notified the Police Department about the vehicle. 
(4)  For purposes of this Subsection (B), a vehicle left unattended on any portion of a street, highway or public thoroughfare for a period of 24 hours or more shall be presumed abandoned, unless the owner or operator thereof has conspicuously affixed thereto information indicating his intention to return to the vehicle or has otherwise notified the police department of his intention to remove the vehicle. Notwithstanding such notification of intent to return and to remove the vehicle, if the vehicle has been left unattended for longer than 48 hours, it shall be presumed to be abandoned. A vehicle left unattended on property other than a street or public thoroughfare for a period longer than 24 hours shall be presumed to be abandoned, unless prior arrangements with the owner or lessee of the property have been made regarding the vehicle. A bona fide effort shall be made by the police officer to contact the owner or operator of the vehicle prior to towing or impoundment. 
(C)  Notice: Whenever a police officer orders the impoundment of a vehicle, and the police officer knows or is able to ascertain the name and address of the owner thereof, the police officer shall give or cause to be given notice in writing to the owner of the fact of the removal, the reasons therefor, and of the place to which the vehicle has been removed. In the event the vehicle is stored in a designated garage, a copy of the notice shall be given to the proprietor of the garage. The written notice shall also contain the following statement: 
"A police officer has ordered the towing of your vehicle. If you believe that the impoundment was improper, you have seven (7) days from the date of this notice to file a written request with the Westminster Municipal Court located at 3030 Turnpike Drive, Westminster, Colorado 80030, for a hearing regarding the propriety of this impoundment. Such hearing shall be scheduled within three (3) days (excluding Saturday, Sunday and City holidays) of the date your written request is received by the Westminster Municipal Court. The Court may waive the towing and storage fees if it is found that the impoundment was improper. 
If you retrieve your vehicle from impoundment, you still have the right to a subsequent hearing and reimbursement if you make a timely request. You are encouraged to also contact the Watch Commander of the Westminster Police Department for purposes of resolving the dispute concerning the impoundment of your vehicle without the necessity of having a formal hearing." 
    The written notice shall either be deposited in the United States Mail within 24 hours from the time of the impoundment of the vehicle, excluding Saturday, Sunday and holidays, or personally handed to the owner. 
(D)  Hearing: A hearing shall be conducted before the Westminster Municipal Court within three days of receipt of a written demand therefor from the person seeking the hearing, unless such person waives the right to a speedy hearing in writing. Saturdays, Sundays and City holidays are to be excluded from the calculation of the three-day period. The sole issue before the court shall be whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. "Probable cause to impound" shall mean such a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary care and prudence to believe that there was sufficient breach of law to grant legal authority for the removal of the vehicle. The court shall conduct the hearing in an informal manner and shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence. The person demanding the hearing shall carry the burden of establishing that such person has the right to possession of the vehicle. The City of Westminster shall carry the burden of establishing that there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. The burden of proof shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. The decision shall be a final decision of the Westminster Municipal Court. Failure of the registered or legal owner, or their agent, to request or attend a scheduled post-seizure hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. 
(E)  Reimbursement for Improper Impoundment: Upon a determination by the court that the subject vehicle was improperly impounded, the City shall either fully reimburse the owner of the impounded vehicle for all towing and storage fees paid by the owner, or directly pay the towing and storage company for accrued fees. 
(F)  The hearing and reimbursement provisions contained in this Section shall only be applicable to vehicles that have been impounded by order of a police officer. 
(G)  No impounded vehicle shall be released to its owner until all towing charges, storage charges and administrative fees have been paid to the City, or in the case of towing and storage charges, to such private person or firm as may have performed such services at the request of the City. The owner of the vehicle may also be issued a citation for a parking violation or abandoned vehicle violation. 
(H)  The requirements contained within this Section relating to compliance with time periods are directory in nature. Failure of the City to strictly comply with said time periods shall not cause an automatic forfeiture of the City's rights under the code. 
(1585 2432) 
10-1-18. - Cruising. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, or as owner of a motor vehicle to permit its operation, past a traffic control point three times in the same direction within any three-hour period between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. 
(B)  A violation of subsection (A) shall constitute a noncriminal traffic infraction, punishable by a fine as specified in Section 10-1-4, W.M.C., subject to any mandatory minimum fines, which the Municipal Court judge shall not have discretion to suspend or reduce. Each successive trip past a traffic-control point after a violation has occurred shall constitute a separate violation. 
(C)  Signs indicating that cruising is prohibited shall be posted immediately preceding the traffic control point. 
(D)  The provisions of this Section shall not be applicable to the operator of a police, fire, or rescue vehicle in the conduct of official duties, the operator of a common carrier, or the operator of any motor vehicle when such motor vehicle is being operated for legitimate business purposes. 
(E)  Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Owner shall mean any person who is the owner of a motor vehicle, or has custody thereof, and who is riding therein at the time of its operation. 
    Traffic-control point shall mean the location of any sign indicating that cruising is prohibited, or any point designated by the City that is located between any such signs. 
(F)  Minimum Fines: Minimum fines upon conviction shall be imposed as listed below, and the Municipal Court Judge shall not have discretion to suspend or reduce these fines: 
(1)  First offense-Fine of not less than $125.00. 
(2)  Second offense-Fine of not less than $250.00. 
(3)  Third and subsequent offenses-Fine of not less than $350.00. 
(2940) 
CHAPTER 2. - TRANSPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND HAZARDOUS WASTE BY MOTOR VEHICLE 

10-2-1. - Legislative Intent. 
    It is the intent of this Chapter to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by regulating the transportation of hazardous materials and hazardous waste on the streets and roadways in the City of Westminster so that the citizens of Westminster may be reasonably protected from the dangers of accidents involving hazardous materials and hazardous waste. It is intended that the designation of routes for the transportation of hazardous materials and hazardous waste enhances the public safety by informing City officials of where such transporters are likely to be and by keeping access to residential areas to a minimum. 
(1644 2067) 
10-2-2. - State Regulations Adopted by Reference. 
(A)  Hazardous materials and hazardous wastes, as defined by the rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado State Patrol at 8 C.C.R. 1507-25, shall be transported within the City in accordance with 8 C.C.R. 1507-25, as the same may from time to time be amended, which is hereby adopted by reference pursuant to Section 1-1-4, W.M.C., subject to any deletions, amendments and additions contained in this Chapter. 
(B)  This Section may be enforced by any City Police Officer or Firefighter who meets the inspector qualifications set forth in the federal regulations referenced by the Colorado State Patrol Regulations adopted in subsection (A) of this Section. 
(C)  Copies of the state patrol regulations adopted by reference in this Section are available for inspection at the office of the City Clerk. 
(2067 3688) 
10-2-4. - Restrictions on Transportation of Hazardous Materials and Hazardous Waste by Motor Vehicles; Exceptions. 
(A)  Hazardous material required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. 172 and hazardous waste shall not be transported by motor vehicle within the City by any person except on the following routes or for the purpose of making pickups and/or deliveries within the City pursuant to Subsection (B) of this Section. 
(1)  Denver-Boulder Turnpike (US 36) 
(2)  Interstate 25 
(B)  Motor vehicles carrying such hazardous material or hazardous waste that are making local pickups and/or deliveries shall be operated over the safest and most direct route to and from the origination or destination point. The safest and most direct route shall also be taken when it is necessary to make successive pickups or deliveries. Such routes shall not pass through residential areas unless there is no practicable alternative. Operating convenience shall not be a determining factor in determining whether the route taken was the safest and most direct, or whether there was no practical alternative to passing through residential areas. In all instances, such vehicles shall comply with local truck routing and weight limitation restrictions and prohibitions. 
(C)  Unless there is no practicable alternative, hazardous material and hazardous waste shall not be transported by motor vehicle within the City by any person for purposes of making pickups or deliveries over routes near or through areas of heavy population or places where crowds are assembled, through tunnels, or on narrow streets or alleys. Operating convenience is not a basis for determining whether it is practicable to operate a motor vehicle in accordance with this Paragraph. 
(D)  The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to farm machinery, which is exempted from registration requirements pursuant to Section 42-3-102, C.R.S., or agricultural distribution equipment attached to or conveyed by such farm machinery, except for those provisions relating to the placarding of loads, spills, and operation of motor vehicles as set out in Section 10-2-6, W.M.C., and except when such vehicles are used in furtherance of any commercial business other than agriculture. 
(1644 2067) 
10-2-5. - Suspension of Motor Vehicle Operations. 
    The City Manager or his designee may temporarily suspend the operation within the City of some or all motor vehicles carrying hazardous material or hazardous waste whenever road, weather, traffic or other hazardous circumstances warrant that action to protect the health and welfare of the public. In such event, the City shall immediately endeavor to notify the public of the suspension of operation by internet, newspaper, television or radio. Written confirmation of such action will be provided by the city upon request. 
(1644 2067 3688) 
10-2-6. - Operation of Motor Vehicles Carrying Hazardous Waste or Material. 
(A)  The following restrictions shall apply to motor vehicles carrying hazardous waste or material within the City: 
(1)  Except for the purposes of loading or unloading, no person shall park such motor vehicle within the City for more than one hour at any given time unless an exigent circumstance exists. If an exigent circumstance does exist, then the vehicle operator shall immediately notify an enforcement official. This paragraph shall also apply to vehicle operators stopped for meals. 
(2)  No person shall operate such vehicle so as to block any public right-of-way while loading or unloading cargo. 
(3)  Except for purposes of loading or unloading, no person shall park such vehicle in any garage or covered building without first obtaining permission to do so from an enforcement official. 
(4)  When necessary for safe operation, no person shall back such vehicle without the aid of a flagman. No vehicle operator shall stop such vehicle for meals unless the vehicle is parked in a well-lighted area, not less than 300 feet from the nearest building, and on or directly adjacent to a designated route. The vehicle operator shall at all times comply with applicable regulations regarding attendance of such vehicles. 
(1644 2067) 
10-2-7. - Reporting Requirements. 
(A)  If any hazardous materials or hazardous wastes are discharged from a motor vehicle, either on private property, the public right-of-way or public property, the operator shall immediately notify the police and fire departments. The following information is necessary for proper identification under this Section: 
(1)  The location of the incident; 
(2)  The proper shipping name of the hazardous materials or hazardous wastes involved and amount and types of cargo; and 
(3)  Information required to effect the cleanup of the cargo or to protect the health and safety of the public, if necessary, including flammability, toxicity or reactivity. 
(B)  Upon request of an enforcement official, the operator of a vehicle specified in subsection (A) of this Section shall provide a copy of the shipping papers for inspection. 
(1644 2067) 
10-2-8. - Discharging Hazardous Materials or Waste or Radioactive Materials. 
(A)  No person shall discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit hazardous materials, hazardous waste or radioactive materials into or upon any city street, highway, sanitary sewer, drainage canal or ditch, storm drain or flood control channel, or upon the ground, including private property, unless such discharge is expressly permitted by the property owner and complies with all applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(B)  A violation of this Section is a criminal offense, punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both, as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(1644 2000 2067) 
10-2-9. - Authority to Inspect and Direct Disposition of Certain Motor Vehicles. 
    Any enforcement official is hereby authorized to inspect any motor vehicle and the shipping papers carried therein when such vehicle is transporting hazardous waste or materials on the streets or highways within the City. Further, enforcement officials are hereby authorized to immobilize, impound or otherwise direct the disposition of such motor vehicles when the officer determines that the motor vehicle, the operation thereof, or the commodity being transported is unsafe, and when such immobilization, impoundment or disposition is appropriate under or required by the provisions of this Chapter or by rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes. 
(1644 2067) 
10-2-10. - Violations and Penalty. 
    It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter. Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine as set forth in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(1644 1918 2067) 
Title XI. - LAND DEVELOPMENT AND GROWTH PROCEDURES 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

11-1-1. - Purpose. 
    This title is enacted to preserve and promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the City and of the public generally and to encourage and facilitate the orderly growth and expansion of the City. This title combines the provisions more commonly found in separate zoning, subdivision, growth management, building, floodplain, and numerous other ordinances into a single Land Use and Development Code that will cover all phases of development from annexation through certificate of occupancy. The intent of the unified approach is to: 
(A)  Address the changes in the way land development occurs. Current land development practices blur the traditional distinctions between zoning, plan approval, and subdivision and, typically, contain a variety of residential and non-residential uses in a single development plan. 
(B)  Include all types and stages of development under one title and provide for the convenience of those using the development process. 
(C)  Avoid overlapping, conflicting, or inconsistent code provisions. 
(2534 3497) 
11-1-2. - General Authority. 
    This title is enacted pursuant to the home rule provisions of Article XX of the Colorado Constitution and the authority and powers contained in the City Charter of the City of Westminster, including, but not limited to, Chapters 2, 4 and 11.5 thereof. 
(2534) 
11-1-3. - Violations. 
(A)  Unless otherwise permitted by this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Use, occupy, or sell any land or building, or authorize or permit the use, occupancy, or sale of any land or building under the person's control except in conformance with all applicable provisions of this title. 
(2)  Use, occupy, or sell any land or building or authorize or permit the use, occupancy, or sale of any land or building except in conformance with all applicable requirements and/or restrictions, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  Any zoning district requirements and restrictions, including PUD (planned unit development) zones, 
(b)  The contents of any preliminary development plan (PDP), official development plan (ODP), or final plat, 
(c)  The contents of any approved engineering construction drawings, engineering drawings, building construction drawings, and any public or private improvement drawings, 
(d)  The terms, conditions and covenants of any annexation agreement, public and/or private improvements agreement, development agreement, or any agreement entered into pursuant to the provisions of this title, 
(e)  The contents of any approved drainage, traffic, or utility study, and 
(f)  The terms and conditions of any approved variance or exception. 
(3)  Construct, reconstruct or alter any building or structure or authorize the construction, reconstruction or alteration of any building or structure under the person's control except in conformance with all applicable provisions of this title and with all applicable requirements and/or restrictions, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  Any zoning district requirements and restrictions, including PUD (planned unit development) zones, 
(b)  The contents of any preliminary development plan (PDP), official development plan (ODP), or final plat, 
(c)  The contents of any approved engineering construction drawings, building construction drawings, and any public or private improvement drawings, 
(d)  The terms, conditions and covenants of any annexation agreement; public and/or private improvements agreement, development agreement entered into pursuant to the provisions of this title, 
(e)  The contents of any approved drainage, traffic, or utility study, and 
(f)  The terms and conditions of any approved variance or exception. 
(4)  Utilize any yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with provisions of this title to provide a yard or other open space for any other building. No yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot. 
(5)  Construct, reconstruct, alter, or change the use of any building or other structure, including signage, within the City without obtaining a building permit from the building official or his authorized representative. No permit shall be issued unless the plans of and for the proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration, demolition, or use fully conform to the zoning regulations then in effect. No business license shall be issued by the City Clerk without being furnished a written notice from the Planning Manager and building official, or their designees, that the use of the premises proposed is in conformance with the requirements of the provisions of this title. 
(6)  Use, occupy or authorize the use or occupancy of any land or building for any use that is unlawful under any state or federal law; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to uses within any Residential Zoning District deemed to be permitted under Article XVIII, Sections 14 or 16, of the Colorado Constitution. 
(B)  For purposes of this section, the "use" or "occupancy" of a building or land relates to anything and everything that is done to, on, or in that building or land. 
(2534 2797 3491 3497 3634 3664 3666) 
11-1-4. - Interpretation. 
    The provisions of this title shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of this title are at variance with any other provision of this Code, any other duly adopted City ordinance, or any duly promulgated rule or regulation of the City, the more restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern. Any action or approval authorized in this title to be taken for granted by the City Manager may be taken for granted by the City Manager's designated representative. 
(2534 3497) 
11-1-5. - Penalties and Remedies. 
(A)  Any person, either as owner, lessee, occupant, or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of this title, or any amendment thereof, or who interferes in any manner with any person in the performance of a right or duty granted or imposed upon him by the provisions of this title, shall be deemed guilty of a criminal misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(B)  Any building or structure that is, or is proposed to be, constructed, reconstructed, altered, maintained, or used and any land that is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this title or any amendment thereof is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the City, or any owner of real estate within the City, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove such unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance, or use. 
(2534) 
11-1-6. - Land Use and Development Review Fee Schedule. 
(A)  An applicant for any of the following land use or development reviews shall pay in advance the corresponding fee or fees: 
(1)  Review Fees: 
PDP or amendment-Concept review ..... $350.00 (x) sq. rt. of acres ($350.00 min.) 
PDP or amendment-Technical review ..... $350.00 (x) sq. rt. of acres ($350.00 min.) 
ODP or amendment-Concept review ..... $400.00 (x) sq. rt. of acres ($400.00 min.) 
ODP or amendment-Technical review ..... $400.00 (x) sq. rt. of acres ($400.00 min.) 
Combined PDP/ODP (including amendments) 
Concept review ..... $550.00 (x) sq. rt. of acres ($550.00 min.) 
Technical review ..... $550.00 (x) sq. rt. of acres ($550.00 min.) 
Zoning or rezoning ..... $500.00 
Annexation ..... $300.00 
Comprehensive land use plan amendments ..... $500.00 
Administrative amendment (PDP/ODP) ..... $250.00 
Minor administrative amendment (PDP/ODP) ..... $75.00 
ODP waiver ..... $250.00 
Special or conditional use permit ..... $450.00 
Temporary use/special event permit ..... $100.00 
Construction drawing reviews ..... $750.00 + $75.00 (x) sq. rt. of acres ($1,125.00 max.) 
(Construction drawing reviews may include, but are not limited to, final plats, address plats, construction drawings, R.O.W. permits and public improvements agreements) 
Minor replat (lot line adjustment) ..... $300.00 
Vacations (R.O.W. and easements) ..... $300.00 
Land disturbance permits ..... $250.00 
Development sign posting fee ..... $50.00 
Variance ..... $250.00 
(2)  Other Service Fees: 
Zoning verification letter ..... $50.00 
Affidavit of correction ..... $100.00 
Recording fees for plats and plans ..... $50.00 + $20.00/page 
Recording fees for letter and legal size e-filing ..... $10.00/page 
Floodplain information (non-residential only) ..... $20.00 
Scheduling and conducting public hearing ..... $350.00/hearing 
(3)  Document Fees: 
Plan submittal guidelines ..... $20.00 
Comprehensive land use plan ..... $25.00 
Northeast comprehensive development plan ..... $5.00 
Copies of plans on file ..... $5.00/page 
Copies of documents (up to 20 pages) on CD ..... $5.00/CD 
(B)  Applications requiring additional or modified submittals will be considered abandoned if the required submittal or resubmittal is not made within 180 days of the last submittal date and a new application and new fee will be required. 
(2598 3031 3152 3497 3599 3664) 
CHAPTER 2. - DEFINITIONS 

11-2-1. - Definitions. 
(A)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this title, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Accessory building shall mean any detached building, structure, or portion thereof that is not habitable, is located on the same principal lot as a habitable structure, and is clearly incidental to the principal structure, such as, but not limited to, a garage, storage shed, gazebo, pergola, dog run, or similar structure. An accessory building shall not include a fence, play equipment, outdoor fireplace, fire-pit, cooking grill, trellis, arbor, or similar structure not intended for use as a shade or storage structure. An accessory building also shall not include a miniature structure that is less than five feet in height, such as a fountain, play house, doll house, or dog house. 
    Affordable housing shall mean a new proposed residential development consisting of any combination of single-family attached, single-family detached, and multi-family dwelling units, regardless of the age of occupants, provided that 50 percent or more of the units serve households earning from zero to 80 percent of the regional Area Median Income (AMI) as defined by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
    Ambulance service shall mean a privately-owned facility for the dispatch, storage, and maintenance of emergency medical care vehicles. 
    Animal day care, indoor shall mean a facility where non-livestock animals may be groomed, trained, exercised, and socialized, but not kept or boarded outside overnight, bred, or sold. Outdoor runs or other outdoor areas are not permitted. 
    Animal day care, outdoor shall mean a facility where non-livestock animals may be groomed, trained, exercised, and socialized, but not kept or boarded overnight, bred, or sold. Outdoor runs and exercise areas are permitted. 
    Antique shall mean an article of glass, china, furniture, musical instrument, or similar furnishing or decoration that has been used by one or more persons and that has greater value than when it was originally created and sold and has significance as a result of age, design, quality, historical association, or affiliation with a well-known person. 
    Antique shop shall mean a shop or store that devotes more than 75 percent of its retail floor area to the sale of antiques. 
    Appeal shall mean a request for a review of the interpretation of any provisions of this ordinance, or a request for review of the identification of any floodplain or floodway as indicated in any official flood study. 
    Applicant shall mean a person, partnership, company, corporation, public agency, or the assigns of such entities that request permission to engage in land development activity. 
    Architectural projection shall mean any projection that is not intended for occupancy and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building, including roof overhangs, mansards, unenclosed exterior balconies, marquees, bay windows, immovable awnings, canopies, pilasters, fascias, and the like, but not including signs. 
    Assisted living residence shall mean a state-licensed residential facility that provides impaired adults with room and board, personal services, protective oversight and supervision, and social care due to impaired capacity, but not to the extent that regular 24-hour medical or nursing care is required and subject to the limitations in Section 25-27-102, C.R.S., as amended. 
    Attached senior housing unit shall mean an attached residential dwelling unit within a housing project restricted to persons 60 years of age or over, or as may otherwise be determined by council. 
    Awning shall mean a roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building as an architectural detail or for the purpose of shielding an area, doorway, or window from the elements. 
    Brewery shall mean a facility that is primarily for the on-site manufacturing of malt liquors, which may include a tap room that is less than or equal to 30 percent of the facility's total floor area, including any outdoor seating or accessory sales areas. For the purposes of this definition, "tap room" shall mean a use associated with and on the same premises as a brewery, at which guests may consume and purchase, for on or off premise consumption, the manufacturer's products and other nonalcoholic beverages. 
    Brewpub shall mean a facility that is primarily a restaurant where malt liquor is manufactured on the premises as an accessory use. A brewpub may include some off-site distribution of its malt liquor consistent with state law. 
    Billboard shall mean a sign and its structure, advertising an establishment, merchandise, service, or entertainment that is not sold, produced, manufactured or furnished on the property where the said sign is located. 
    Body piercing/tattoo parlor shall mean an establishment that engages in the non-medical act of penetrating the skin, other than the ears, to make, generally permanent in nature, a hole, mark, or scar. The term "body piercing/tattoo" shall apply to body illustrations but exclude permanent cosmetics, such as lip liner, eyeliner, or eyebrow enhancement. 
    Building Code shall mean the latest edition of the Building Code as amended and adopted by the City Council of the City of Westminster. 
    Building official shall mean the officer or other person charged with the administration and enforcement of the building code and sign code or the building official's duly authorized representative. 
    Building service equipment shall mean the plumbing, mechanical, and electrical equipment, including piping, wiring, fixtures, and other accessories that provide sanitation, lighting, heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration, fire protection, and facilities essential for the habitable occupancy of a mobile home, building, or structure. 
    Canopy shall mean a structure of rigid or non-rigid material on a framework sheltering an area or forming a sheltered walk to the entrance of building. 
    City engineer shall mean and include any engineer, or firm of engineers, or corporation engaged in the practice of engineering, that may be under contract with the city with respect to local public improvements contracted for or installed pursuant to this chapter. 
    Cemetery shall mean land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematoriums, mausoleums, and funeral establishments, when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery. 
    Church shall mean a building or structure or group of buildings or structures that are primarily intended for the conducting of organized religious services and accessory uses normally associated therewith. 
    Comprehensive Plan shall mean the current municipal planning document(s) adopted pursuant to City Charter Section 4.16 and Title 31, Chapter 23, C.R.S. 
    Conditional use shall mean a use that may be an appropriate use in a Specific Zoning District because it is subject to certain conditions prescribed in this title. 
    Consignment shall mean the placing of used merchandise, by the owner of such goods, in the bailment of another, while retaining ownership until the goods are sold. Consignment of goods differs from donation of goods in that, with consignment, the owner of the goods retains ownership until he or she receives payment for them, and the goods have generally not lost a significant amount of value due to their original quality and limited wear. 
    Consignment store shall mean a shop or store that devotes more than 75 percent of its retail sales floor area to the sale of consignment items. 
    Construct shall mean "constructed," "construction," or words of similar import and shall be deemed to include "acquire," "acquired," "acquisition," or similar import in districts created to acquire improvements already constructed. 
    Construction trailer shall mean a mobile home, manufactured home, or similar structure located on a construction site and temporarily used as office space and/or to store material and equipment for the convenience of the construction project. 
    Correction home shall mean a state-licensed facility housing residents for purposes of rehabilitation, special care, supervision, or treatment for social, behavioral, or disciplinary problems. A "correction home" includes adult or juvenile "halfway houses," community corrections facilities and law offender division facilities. 
    Cut shall mean an act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, or relocated. 
    Day care facility shall mean a state-licensed facility maintained for the care of five or more persons not related to the owner, operator or manager thereof, providing care, supervision, or education for less than 24 hours. The term includes facilities commonly known as "child care center," "day care center," "adult day care facility," "day nursery," "preschool," "kindergarten," and "summer camp," except that "kindergarten" does not include a kindergarten maintained in connection with a public or private elementary school. 
    Detention pond shall mean a pond constructed for the temporary storage of runoff waters where the opening for release is of a relatively fixed capacity and not manually operated. 
    Developed flow shall mean the amount of rainfall runoff generated by a parcel of land that has been developed to its ultimate use with no retention or detention facilities by which the runoff volume or flow rate is altered. 
    Developer shall mean any person, persons, company, partnership, or corporation who subdivides, constructs, or provides any type of improvements or in any way engages in the development of land. 
    Development" shall mean any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Discount store shall mean a retail establishment that sells new merchandise at discounted prices. 
    Distillery shall mean a facility for the manufacturing of spirituous liquors, as that term is defined in state law. 
    Distribution center shall mean a facility where goods are received and/or stored for delivery to the ultimate customer at off-site locations and such goods are not manufactured, produced, or reprocessed on-site. Said facility is characterized by a larger storage capacity and volume of traffic than a typical retail packaging and postal substation. 
    Diversion channel shall mean a channel with a supporting ridge on the lower side constructed across the slope. 
    Domestic violence shelter home shall mean a residential facility providing special care for victims of domestic violence. 
    Donation facility shall mean a non-retail facility or collection point with bins, containers, sheds, or other facilities designed and intended for the depositing of clothing, textiles, or other household goods for pick-up. 
    Duplex shall mean a building designed as a single freestanding structure, containing two separate living units, each of which is designed to be occupied as a separate residence for one family or household. Each living unit has direct access to the outside. 
    Dwelling unit shall mean a single residential unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
    Dwelling unit, multi-family shall mean a dwelling unit contained in a structure also containing other dwelling units in which each unit is attached to another at one or more party walls and at either the floor or the ceiling. For purposes of Chapter 3 of this title, no dwelling units shall be classified as multi-family if they contain more than two bedrooms. A dwelling unit otherwise meeting this definition but containing more than two bedrooms shall be considered a single-family attached dwelling unit for purposes of said chapter only. A structure could contain both multi-family dwelling units and single-family attached dwelling units as defined herein. 
    Dwelling unit, residential shall mean a building or part of a building, including cooking, bath, toilet and general living facilities and spaces, and designed and intended for occupancy as a primary residence by one family or by a group living essentially as a family. The term "dwelling unit" is synonymous with "residential" and also includes such uses as dormitories and nursing homes, but not hospitals, hotels, and motels. 
    Dwelling unit, single-family attached shall mean a dwelling unit contained in its own structure from ground to roof, which structure shares one or more party walls with one or more similar units. Includes duplex dwellings. 
    Dwelling unit, single-family detached shall mean a single dwelling unit contained in a freestanding structure that has no party walls with other structures. 
    Erosion shall mean the wearing away of land surface by detachment and transportation of soil or rock material through the action of moving water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
    Erosion control plan shall mean the plan required as an application for a land disturbance permit. Such document illustrates grading plans and includes necessary land treatment measures, including construction schedules of treatment installations that will minimize soil erosion and sedimentation. 
    Existing residential subdivisions shall mean a platted and duly recorded residential subdivision or a residential subdivision for which an application for final plat was submitted by July 1, 1994, in accordance with Ordinance No. 2223. Any other subdivision shall be deemed to be a new residential subdivision within the meaning of this chapter. 
    Family shall mean a head of household plus, if applicable, any individuals related to the head of household by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship, including foster children placed by a state institution or a licensed child placement agency. 
    Family care home shall mean a state-licensed facility in the residence of the provider that provides less than 24-hour care, training, education, or supervision for two to six children who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the care provider. 
    Fast food restaurant shall mean any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the restaurant building or for carry-out with consumption off the premises, and whose design or principal method of operation includes one or both of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Foods, frozen desserts, or beverages are usually served in paper, plastic, edible, or other disposable containers. 
(2)  Facilities for on-premises consumption of the food are insufficient for the volume of food sold in the establishment. 
    Final plat shall mean the map or plan of record of a subdivision and any accompanying material, as described in this Code or in rules and regulations promulgated hereto. 
    Flood or flooding shall mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of inland waters from channels and reservoir spillways or (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source or (3) mudslides or mudflows that is combined with mud or other debris that is sufficiently fluid so as to flow over the surface of normally dry land areas, such as Earth carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
    Floodplain shall mean the area that will be inundated during the occurrence of a storm of a given magnitude or frequency. 
    Floodplain management shall mean the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
    Flood profile shall mean a graph or longitudinal profile showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to the ground surface along a stream or river. 
    Flood storage area shall mean those portions of the floodplain that may serve as a temporary storage area for floodwaters from the 100-year flood that are outside the floodway area. 
    Food service shall mean both full service and fast food restaurants with or without liquor service, as well as specialty stores, such as doughnut shops and ice cream parlors. 
    Frontage, building shall mean the horizontal, linear dimension of that side of a building that abuts a street, a parking area, a mall, or other circulation area that is open to the general public; and having either a main window display of the enterprise or a public entrance to the building. In industrial districts a building side with an entrance open to employees shall also qualify as a building frontage. Where more than one use occupies a building, each use having a public entrance or main window display for its exclusive use shall be considered to have its own building frontage, which shall be the front width of the portion of the building occupied by that use. 
    Frontage, lot shall mean that side of a lot abutting on a street or way ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot. 
    Frontage, street shall mean the linear frontage(s) of a lot or parcel abutting on a private or public street that provides principal access to, or visibility of, the premises. 
    Grading shall mean the practice of changing the ground level or slope. 
    Gross floor area shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings, excluding the following areas: attic areas with head room of less than seven feet; unenclosed building exterior walks, stairs, or fire escapes; elevator structures on the roof; areas devoted exclusively to air conditioning, ventilating, and other building machinery and equipment; and parking structures and enclosed pedestrian walks of over 30 feet in width and 100 feet in length. 
    Group care facility shall mean a state-licensed residential facility providing accommodations, personal services or special care for individuals of any age, not related to the owner or operator thereof, and who seek or require a protective living environment, but who do not require 24-hour medical or nursing services. Group care facilities shall include, but are not limited to, group homes of more than eight persons, residential child care facilities, specialized group facilities, and youth shelter facilities. 
    Group home shall mean a group home for persons with intellectual and developmental disabilities, a group home for persons with behavioral or mental health disorders, a group home for the aged, or any other type of home allowed under the provisions of the federal Fair Housing Act, as amended, for any type of protected class, or pursuant to any other applicable law. "Group home" does not include a facility which provides 24-hour medical or nursing care to its occupants. 
    Group home for persons with behavioral or mental health disorders shall mean a state-licensed group living situation where services and support are provided for the exclusive use of no more than eight persons with behavioral or mental health disorders, which shall not include persons who have committed a violent offense. 
    Group home for persons with intellectual and developmental disabilities shall mean a state-licensed group living situation where services and support are provided for the exclusive use of no more than eight persons with intellectual and developmental disabilities. 
    Group home for the aged shall mean a group living situation for the exclusive use of not more than eight persons 60 years of age or older. Group homes for the aged do not include nursing facilities or institutions providing life care. 
    Health/fitness facility shall mean an indoor fitness center, gymnasium, health and athletic club which may include exercise equipment, indoor and outdoor courts, spa, sauna, pool and associated amenities. 
    Home occupation shall mean any activity carried out for gain by a resident and conducted as a customary, incidental, and accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit. 
    Hotel, full service shall mean any establishment that provides temporary lodging for compensation, generally providing between 100 to 600 guest rooms and may include suites providing larger living space separate from the bedroom. Hotels in this category shall have large internal lobbies sufficient to handle check-in and checkout functions associated with conference traffic. This type of facility shall provide conference, meeting or banquet rooms. Access to rooms shall be through internal corridors. The facility may provide retail space for newsstands, gift shops, and business service centers. Food and beverage outlets, including formal restaurants offering various styles of food across a range of prices, will be available. The establishment shall provide daily housekeeping, room, maid, linen, telephone and other similar services. Hotels of this type shall provide a swimming pool and a fully equipped fitness center and may provide whirlpools, sauna and steam rooms. A hotel of any type shall at all times operate only as a hotel, and in no event shall it be converted to a multiple unit dwelling or any other form of permanent residence. A guest shall at all times be prohibited from using a hotel room or suite as a primary permanent residence. 
    Hotel, extended stay shall mean any establishment that provides temporary lodging for compensation, providing larger rooms (greater than 400 square feet) with a living space separate from the bedroom. Extended stay hotels shall provide 75 percent of all suites with Pullman kitchens (sink, built-in cook top or stove, microwave oven and refrigerator). Ninety percent of all rooms within this category shall be available to guests staying 90 days or less. Hotels in this category shall have a main office providing check-in, checkout and customer service functions at all hours. Housekeeping/maid service shall be provided. Ingress and egress to units shall be either internal or through a secured internal courtyard. This type of facility shall provide hospitality lounge and/or meeting rooms and may provide limited retail space for newsstands, gift shops, and business service center. Extended stay hotels are encouraged to provide a formal restaurant or cafe and a fully equipped fitness center for use by guests, on-site or through co-op. A hotel of any type shall at all times operate only as a hotel, and in no event shall it be converted to a multiple unit dwelling or any other form of permanent residence. A guest shall at all times be prohibited from using a hotel room or suite as a primary permanent residence. 
    Hotel, mid-tier shall mean any establishment that provides temporary lodging for compensation, generally providing between 80 to 500 guest rooms and may include suites. Ingress and egress shall be through an internal lobby with an office providing check-in, checkout and related services at all hours. Access to rooms shall be through an internal corridor. This type of facility may provide limited retail space for gift shops or other similar uses. A formal restaurant or cafe is encouraged. Separate meeting rooms should be provided for conferences or banquets. Mid-tier hotels shall provide, on-site, a swimming pool and are encouraged to provide whirlpool, sauna, steam room and a fully equipped fitness center. A hotel of any type shall at all times operate only as a hotel, and in no event shall it be converted to a multiple unit dwelling or any other form of permanent residence. A guest shall at all times be prohibited from using a hotel room or suite as a primary permanent residence. 
    Hotel, limited service shall mean any establishment that provides temporary lodging, for compensation, generally providing between 50 to 125 rooms at rates below the prevailing rates of full-service facilities in the same area. Hotels in this category shall have a main office providing check-in, checkout and customer service functions at all hours. Ingress and egress to rooms can be either internal or external (internal will be encouraged). Hotels in this category are encouraged to provide on-site or through co-op, a fully equipped fitness center for use by guests. The establishment shall provide daily housekeeping, room, maid, linen, telephone and other similar services. A hotel of any type shall at all times operate only as a hotel and in no event shall it be converted to a multiple unit dwelling or any other form of permanent residence. A guest shall at all times be prohibited from using a hotel room or suite as a primary permanent residence. 
    Hospital shall mean an institution, licensed by the state department of health, providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other abnormal physical or mental conditions and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, training facilities, or ambulance service. 
    Illumination, direct shall mean lighting by means of an unshielded light source, including neon tubing, that is effectively visible as a part of the sign where light travels directly from the source to the viewer's eye. 
    Illumination, indirect shall mean lighting by means of a light source that is directed at a reflecting surface in such a way as to illuminate the sign from the front, or a light source that is primarily designed to illuminate the entire building facade upon which a sign is displayed. Indirect illumination does not include lighting that is primarily used for purposes other than sign illumination, such as parking lot lights or lights inside a building that may silhouette a window sign but that are primarily installed to serve as inside illumination. 
    Illumination, internal shall mean lighting by means of a light source that is within a sign having a translucent background, silhouetting opaque letters or designs, or that is within letters or designs that are themselves made of a translucent material. 
    Indoor entertainment shall mean an establishment where entertainment, either passive or active, is provided on a temporary or permanent basis for the pleasure of the patrons and is contained entirely within a closed building. Entertainment establishments include, but are not limited to, movie theatres, comedy clubs, laser tag, bowling, billiards, live performances, karaoke, dance, and similar activities. 
    Institutional care facility shall mean a state-licensed facility housing residents for purposes of rehabilitation, special care, supervision, treatment for behavioral or disciplinary problems or alcohol or substance abuse. Institutional care facilities include secure residential treatment centers, correction homes, home detention facilities, and halfway houses. 
    Interest rate shall mean that interest rate on recoverable costs that is officially established by the City Council from time to time. 
    Kennel shall mean premises where more than five nonlivestock animals, excluding offspring not exceeding four months of age belonging to one of the adult animals, are kept for any purpose, including boarding or training. The term "kennel" does not include pet shop. 
    Land disturbance shall mean an activity involving the clearing, grading, transporting, filling, or other activity that causes land to be exposed to erosion. 
    Land Use Plan shall mean a component of the Comprehensive Plan consisting of descriptions of land use categories; statements of land use policies; and a geographical depiction of the placement of land uses within the City and sphere of influence areas. 
    Light source shall mean neon, fluorescent or similar tube lighting, the incandescent bulb, including the light producing elements therein, and any reflecting surface that, by reason of its construction and/or placement, becomes, in effect, the light source. 
    Lot shall mean a tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land in single ownership and not divided by a public street. 
    Lot line, front shall mean the lot line on the frontage side of the lot. 
    Lot, reverse corner shall mean a corner lot having as its side lot line a continuation of the front lot line of the adjacent lots. 
    Maintenance, sign shall mean the replacing, repairing or repainting of a portion of a sign structure, periodic changing of bulletin board panels, or the renewing of copy that has become no longer usable through ordinary wear and tear, weather or accident. The replacing or repairing of a sign or sign structure that has been damaged to an extent exceeding 50 percent of the replacement cost, as determined by the building official, shall be considered as "maintenance" only when said sign conforms to all of the applicable provisions of this Code and when the damage has been caused by an act of God or violent accident. 
    Management shall mean the owner or person responsible for operating and managing the mobile home park, or an agent, employee, or representative authorized to act on said management's behalf, in connection with matters relating to tenancy and the overall operation and maintenance of the mobile home park. 
    Manufactured home shall mean a structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes mobile homes, park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. 
    Manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision shall mean a parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Marquee shall mean any hood, canopy, awning, or permanent roof-like construction that is supported wholly or in part by a building and projects from a wall of a building. 
    Mobile home shall mean any dwelling unit built on a permanent, wheeled chassis exceeding either eight feet in width or 32 feet in length and designed for long-term residential occupancy in a temporary or permanent location that is capable of being towed over public streets or highways as a unit or in sections and duly licensable as such. 
    Mobile home park shall mean a parcel of land under single ownership that has been planned and approved for the placement of a mobile home, occupied for dwelling purposes, and for transient and non-transient uses. 
    Mobile home space shall mean a plot of land within a mobile home park designed and intended to accommodate one mobile home. 
    Nursing home/facility shall mean a state-licensed facility that meets the state nursing home standards and is maintained primarily for the care and treatment of inpatients under the direction of a physician and have the availability of a licensed nurse on a 24-hour basis. For the purposes of the use categories in Section 11-4-4, W.M.C., nursing home shall include convalescent homes, rest homes, and assisted living residences, even though such uses do not provide 24-hour nursing or physician services. 
    Owner shall mean a natural person or persons, a company, a corporation, a partnership or other legal entity recorded as such on the real property records of the Adams or Jefferson County Clerk and Recorder, including a duly authorized agent or attorney, a purchaser, devisee, fiduciary or living person having a vested or contingent interest in the property in question. 
    Pawn shop shall mean any business that loans money on deposit of personal property or deals in the purchase or possession of personal property on condition of selling the same back again to the pledger or depositor, or loans or advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage security thereon, and takes or receives such personal property and issues a lien upon such personal property. 
    Participation costs shall mean that portion of the construction cost of public improvements for which the City is responsible. 
    Planning Manager shall mean the member of the Department of Community Development charged with administering the Comprehensive Plan and its implementation. 
    Pre-application meeting shall mean a meeting between City staff and an applicant regarding the land development process, contact information, applicable codes, applications and fees. 
    Professional engineer shall mean an engineer that is registered to practice engineering in the State of Colorado. 
    Public entrance shall mean an entrance to a building or premises that is customarily used or intended for use by the general public. Fire exits, special employee entrances and loading dock entrances not generally used by the public and the like are not considered public entrances. 
    Public improvement shall mean any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, drainage ditch, drainageway, utility line, pedestrian way, or other facility for public use or owned by the City. 
    Recoverable costs shall mean that portion of the construction cost for which the city determines the owners or developers of other properties served by the improvements are responsible. Recoverable costs may include that portion of the costs of construction financed by developers through special assessment obligations or any other form of financial support that exceeds the amount of benefits the financing developers will realize from the improvements so financed. 
    Recreational vehicle shall mean a vehicle that is (1) built on a single chassis; (2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Residential Design Standards shall mean the adopted minimum criteria for new single-family attached, single-family detached, senior housing and multi-family residential development. 
    Retail establishment shall mean a shop or store that, as its primary business, sells new merchandise to the public. 
    Roof shall mean the cover of any building, including the eaves and similar projections. 
    Roofline shall mean the highest point on any building where an exterior wall encloses usable floor space. The term "roofline" includes the top of any parapet wall, providing said parapet wall extends around the entire perimeter of the building at the same elevation. However, the top of a parapet wall extending along one or more building elevations or a portion of one or more building elevations may, as determined by the City Manager, be considered to be the roofline in those instances where the parapet wall improves the architectural appearance of a building or shields rooftop mechanical equipment. 
    Sales trailer shall mean a mobile home, manufactured home, or similar structure located on a development site and temporarily used as a sales or rental office for the units in the development. 
    Satellite earth station or satellite dish shall mean a dish-shaped antenna and associated electronics designed to receive television broadcasts relayed by microwave signals from earth orbiting communication satellites. 
    School, primary/secondary shall mean a public, private, or parochial educational facility offering instruction at the elementary, junior, and/or senior high school levels in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of Colorado. 
    Sediment shall mean rock, sand, gravel, silt, soil, or other material that is transported by, suspended in, or deposited by water or air or is accumulated in beds by other natural agencies. 
    Sediment basin shall mean a barrier or dam built at a suitable location to retain rock, sand, gravel, soil, or other material deposited by action of water, wind, ice, gravity, or other agents of erosion. 
    Sedimentation shall mean the process of subsidence and deposition of suspended matter carried by water or other liquids. 
    Senior housing development shall mean an attached, multiple-unit residential project for persons 60 years of age or older and may include the following types of facilities: 
Government-sponsored senior housing and non-profit senior housing: Government-sponsored senior housing projects provided by non-profit section 501(c)(3) organizations as defined by the federal government. Said projects must be approved by the City Council. Such projects shall be subject to the provisions contained in Section 11-3-6, W.M.C. Service requirements for said projects shall be reviewed individually, and service commitments shall be awarded on an individual basis by City Council action at the time of approval of an official development plan; or 
Non-government sponsored for-profit senior housing: 
(1)  Assisted living and long-term care facilities: Shelter and services for frail elderly who are functionally and/or socially impaired and in need of 24-hour supervision. Services must include, as a minimum, environmental security, transportation, housekeeping, social activities, laundry and meals. "Long-term" implies residency of longer than 100 days. 
(2)  Congregate care: Shelter for elderly who may need limited assistance but do not need 24-hour supervision. Services must include, at a minimum, environmental security, transportation, housekeeping, social activities, laundry and meals. 
(3)  Independent living: Multi-family housing targeted specifically to seniors who are functionally and socially independent. Services must include, at a minimum, environmental security, transportation, housekeeping and social activities. 
A senior housing development does not include single-family detached housing products that have age restrictions. 
    Serious hazard shall mean a man-made or natural phenomenon that is so adverse to past, current, or foreseeable development of land as to constitute a significant hazard to public health and safety or to property. The term may include, but is not limited to, natural hazards, such as ground subsidence, radioactivity, landslides, floodplains and unstable slopes, and man-made hazards, such as radioactivity and airport operations. 
    Service building shall mean any building or structure within a mobile home park that is used in common by the tenants of the mobile home park for such purposes as assembly, storage, recreation, laundry, car washing, office needs, or similar uses. 
    Service commitment shall mean that the measure of City service required is determined by the average service provided to one single-family detached dwelling unit. Calculation of a service commitment for a structure shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
Single-family detached dwelling unit or mobile home unit 1.0 service commitment Single-family attached dwelling unit 0.7 service commitment Multi-family dwelling unit 0.5 service commitment Attached senior housing unit 0.35 service commitment Nonresidential-To be determined on a case-by-case basis, based upon the specific plan presented  
    Shopping center; business center; and office, industrial, or technical parks/centers shall mean a group of two or more professional, office, commercial, industrial, or combination thereof establishments that are planned, developed, owned, or managed as a unit and related in location, size, and type, and provide on-site parking in definite relationship to the types and sizes of establishments. Freestanding or attached buildings that function as a part of a shopping center, though they may be under separate ownership, shall be deemed to be a part of the shopping center. 
    Silt trap shall mean a constructed permanent facility for the collection of water-carried soils. 
    South Westminster Residential Project shall mean a residential project located south of 80th Avenue in the City that meets all applicable design criteria for such projects. 
    Special use shall mean a type of use that, because of special characteristics or circumstances, may be appropriately placed in a particular zone district on a case-by-case basis subject to conditions necessary to make the use compatible with other uses permitted in the district or an adjoining district. 
    Start of construction shall include substantial improvements and shall mean the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Street shall mean roads, avenues, boulevards, expressways, highways, parkways, and bridges. 
    Street improvements shall mean any one or more of the following: surfacing, extending, widening, lengthening, altering, reconstruction, or other improvements to roadways; construction of curbs, gutters, or sidewalks; construction of bridges, overpasses, or underpasses; the necessary grading therefor; street lighting; landscaping of adjoining parkways by the planting of trees and shrubs; and storm drainage facilities incidental thereto. 
    Studio shall mean a small, single purpose facility containing no more than 4,000 square feet, for activities such as dance, martial arts, visual arts or calisthenics for improving strength and circulation or other similar uses as deemed appropriate by the City. 
    Subdivision shall mean the division, whether by deed, metes and bounds description, lease, map, plat, or other instrument, of any tract of land, lot, or parcel into two or more lots, parcels, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, transfer of ownership, or to offer for sale or development, including subdivision. Lots, plots, block and other subdivisions may be designated in accordance with any recorded plat thereof, and unplatted lands by any definite description. 
    Substance abuse rehabilitation home shall mean a residential facility for rehabilitation, special care, supervision, or treatment for alcohol, narcotic, or substance abuse. The home must be licensed by the state or the appropriate agency thereof. 
    Substantial damage shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement shall mean any repair, reconstruction, addition or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
(1)  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
(2)  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
    The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
    Tattoo/body piercing parlor shall mean the same as the term "body piercing/tattoo parlor" previously defined. 
    Thrift store shall mean a shop or store that devotes more than 75 percent of their retail sales floor area to the activity of selling used clothing or merchandise. This does not include antique shops or consignment stores, or used motor vehicle parts sales. 
    Unrestrained slope shall mean unstable earthen slope with high potential for movement or erosion. 
    Used merchandise shall mean goods and products that were once new but have been used by one or more persons. 
    Variance shall mean a departure from the provisions of the zoning ordinance, but not including the actual use or structure. 
    Veterinary office and clinic, indoor shall mean a facility for the care of sick or injured animals. Such facilities may include veterinarians' offices, administrative offices, space for examination, surgery, and recovery, and for overnight indoor boarding of animals while under treatment. 
    Veterinary office and clinic, outdoor shall mean a facility for the care of sick or injured animals. Such facilities may include veterinarians' offices, administrative offices, space for examination, surgery, and recovery, and for overnight indoor and outdoor boarding of animals while under treatment. 
    Warehouse shall mean a building used primarily for the storage of manufactured products, components, supplies, equipment, or materials, excluding bulk storage of materials that are flammable or explosive or that present hazards commonly recognized as offensive. 
    Wetlands shall mean those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands shall also include any lands that are defined as wetlands under any federal or state law. 
    Winery shall mean a facility for the manufacturing of vinous liquors, as that term is defined in state law. 
(B)  When used in this section, the phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
(3599 3644 3714 3770; Ord. No. 3919 , §§ 1, 2, 2-26-2018; Ord. No. 3926 , § 1, 3-26-2018; Ord. No. 3927 , § 1, 4-9-2018) 
CHAPTER 3. - COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING AND GROWTH MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3919 , § 3, adopted Feb. 26, 2018, repealed the former ch. 3, §§ 11-3-1-11-3-11, and enacted a new ch. 3 as set out herein. The former ch. 3 pertained to growth management program for the period January 1, 2011, through December 31, 2020, and derived from Ords. 2534, 2571, 2651, 2714, 2717, 2735, 2848, 2853, 2975, 3091, 3124, 3214, 3561, 3634, 3664, 3770; and Ord. No. 3873 , §§ 1-3, adopted Apr. 10, 2017. 

11-3-1. - Findings. 
(A)  Westminster City Charter Section 4.16 authorizes planning for the use, division and development of land for the general purpose of protecting the public health, safety and welfare, and further that the City is authorized by Part Two of Title 31, Chapter 23, C.R.S., to make, adopt, amend, extend, add to, or carry out a master plan for the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious development of the municipality. 
(B)  The adopted Westminster Comprehensive Plan serves as the official policy document of City Council and Planning Commission providing a consistent statement of the City's plan and policies for future development to bring about the City's vision for the future. 
(C)  A growth management program that balances growth and the ability of the City to effectively and safely absorb and serve such growth is essential for the preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Westminster. 
(D)  The provision of municipal services, which relate to the quality of the environment, fiscal soundness, carrying capacities of the utility and transportation systems and other related elements that affect residents of the City, will be negatively impacted by uncoordinated growth within the City if prudent growth management practices are not administered by the City that take into account the following elements: 
(1)  The City is nearing its physical build-out and little vacant land remains for development; 
(2)  Future development will rely on existing infrastructure and resources, planning for which needs to be closely tied to land uses and development intensity in order to provide adequate public services and maintain quality of life; 
(3)  The specificity of the Comprehensive Plan ensures that new development occurs in desired areas and in concert with the City's vision and infrastructure capacity; 
(4)  The overall mix and quality of land uses and development impact the City's economic and fiscal base; 
(5)  High quality design enhances the public realm and livability of the City's neighborhoods with elements that contribute to a safe environment and stable property values; and 
(6)  Maintaining and improving the City's physical and visual composition contributes to the quality of life and economic vitality of the community. 
( Ord. No. 3919 , § 3, 2-26-2018) 
11-3-2. - Adoption, Implementation and Compliance with City's Comprehensive Plan. 
(A)  Adoption of Comprehensive Plan: 
(1)  A Comprehensive Plan ("the plan") for the City and any City-initiated amendments thereto shall be referred to the Planning Commission for consideration, and a public hearing shall be scheduled. Notice of the hearing shall be given at least ten days prior to the hearing, such notice to state the date, place, and time of such hearing, and where copies of the proposed plan may be reviewed prior to the hearing. Notice shall be published once in the official newspaper of the City. 
(2)  The Planning Commission may consider separate sections of the plan at different hearings over a period of time, and such hearings may be continued from time to time to allow a thorough review by the Commission and the public. 
(3)  Within 30 days of taking action, the Planning Commission shall submit its written report and recommendation on the proposed plan, or its individual sections, to the City Council. 
(4)  Upon receipt of the report, the City Manager shall schedule a public hearing upon the plan or its sections before the City Council. Notice shall be given at least four days prior to the hearing, in the same manner as required in subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2), above. The Council may consider separate sections of the plan at different hearings over a period of time, and such hearings may be continued from time to time to allow a thorough review by the Council and the public. 
(5)  After public hearing and consideration of the recommendations of the Planning Commission, the City Council may, by ordinance, adopt the proposed plan or any of its sections, or the City Council may adopt sections of the plan and reject others, or may send the plan or any sections of it to the Planning Commission for further review and public comment. 
(B)  Approval Criteria: 
(1)  Plan Contents. The City Council shall evaluate the plan's contents to determine that the following criteria are met: 
(a)  The plan identifies goals that are consistent with adopted City policies, plans and regulations; 
(b)  The plan is appropriate for future consultation and reference by the City Council, departments, boards and commissions; 
(c)  Comments and recommendations from pertinent City departments and referral agencies have been considered; and 
(d)  Issues raised by stakeholders that are outside of the City's jurisdiction have been identified. 
(2)  Planning Process. The City Council shall evaluate the planning process to determine that the following criteria are met: 
(a)  The public was afforded opportunities to participate in the development of the plan; 
(b)  Appropriate municipal departments and referral agencies have reviewed the plan; and 
(c)  The Planning Commission has properly considered the plan. 
(C)  Compliance with the Plan: 
(1)  On and after the effective date of the ordinance adopting the Comprehensive Plan, or any section of it, it shall be unlawful for any person to use any parcel of land in any manner not in compliance with the adopted plan or any of its sections. 
(a)  This subsection shall not apply to a use established prior to the effective date of the ordinance adopting the plan or any of its sections. "Established prior to the effective date" shall mean that structures or improvements necessary or customary for the use were complete and occupied or ready for occupancy prior to the effective date, or that the structures or improvements were substantially in construction under a valid and unexpired building permit prior to the effective date. 
(b)  Any property owner who wishes to change the established use of a parcel shall comply with the plan at the time such use is changed or the property is substantially redeveloped. 
(2)  The Planning Manager is authorized to determine whether the use of any parcel is, or is not, in compliance with the plan. The owner of an affected parcel may appeal the decision of the Planning Manager to the City Manager. The City Manager or his designee shall conduct an informal meeting in which the Planning Manager and the owner may express their views. The City Manager or his designee shall consult with the City Attorney's office prior to the informal meeting. The City Manager shall decide the issue within a reasonable time and notify the owner in writing. Decisions made by the City Manager shall be maintained in the records by the Community Development Department. 
(D)  Land Use Plan Amendments: 
(1)  The City may, from time to time, initiate the amendment of the land use plan of the Comprehensive Plan for any parcel. Any proposed amendment shall be reviewed and adopted, after notice and public hearing, as required in Section 11-5-13, W.M.C. 
(2)  The owner of a parcel may request an amendment of the land use designation of the Comprehensive Plan only as to the parcel owned by him/her. Amendments shall be considered as described in Section 11-5-21, W.M.C. 
(E)  Enforcement: 
(1)  After the effective date of the plan or any of its sections, any use, or construction for such use, other than an established use as defined in Section 11-3-2(C), W.M.C., not in compliance with the adopted plan or any of its sections, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance that may be abated pursuant to the procedures for public nuisances established elsewhere in this Code. 
( Ord. No. 3919 , § 3, 2-26-2018) 
11-3-3. - Urban Design. 
    The City has created and adopted by reference Residential Design Standards to establish criteria for new residential buildings, dwellings, and site development. These standards are intended to establish quality appearance, compatibility of character, variety of design, and enhanced community values. In addition to minimum criteria, electives are also associated with points, of which a minimum number must be chosen to further enhance sound residential planning, architectural quality and landscape design. Retail Commercial and Traditional Mixed Use Neighborhood Development (TMUND) Design Guidelines have also been established with applicability provisions stated therein. 
(A)  The Residential Design Standards shall apply to all new residential buildings and dwellings and new residential development plans for construction within the corporate limits of the City. 
(B)  All new residential dwelling units and new residential development projects shall comply with all minimum requirements as specified in the Residential Design Standards. 
(C)  All new residential builders and development applicants and owners shall agree to provide certain elective items listed in the design standards. The total points associated with the chosen elective items shall meet or exceed the minimum number of elective points required for the project's residential category. 
(D)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Properties zoned RE, R1, RA, R2, R3, R4 or R5; 
(2)  South Westminster Residential Projects, as defined, shall comply with all minimum requirements as specified in the Residential Design Standards and shall not be required to agree to any optional elective requirements; 
(3)  SPD-Specific Plan Districts: New residential dwelling units and new residential projects in Specific Plan Districts shall comply with all applicable design standards established in the SPD Plan; and 
(4)  Affordable Housing: New residential dwelling units and new residential projects defined as affordable housing shall comply with all minimum requirements as specified in the Residential Design Standards and shall not be required to agree to any optional elective requirements. 
(E)  No official development plan, plat, or construction drawings for a new residential dwelling unit or new residential development project shall be approved by City staff without full compliance with this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 3919 , § 3, 2-26-2018) 
11-3-4. - Conditions for Building Permit Issuance. 
(A)  No building permits requiring new utility services shall be issued except in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  Any building permits issued in violation of this chapter shall be void, provided however nothing in this chapter shall alter or affect other requirements of Westminster Municipal Code relative to construction. 
(C)  Service commitments are considered issued at the time of building permit issuance. 
( Ord. No. 3919 , § 3, 2-26-2018) 
11-3-5. - Mandatory In-House Water Conservation. 
    In-house water conservation shall be mandatory for all structures constructed in the City, as follows: 
(A)  Residential Standards: All residential plumbing fixtures shall conform to the most recent version of the City's Plumbing Code. 
(B)  Nonresidential User Standards: The following conservation standards shall be mandatory for nonresidential uses: 
(1)  All plumbing fixtures shall conform to the most recent version of the City's Plumbing Code. 
(2)  Car Wash Recycle. Full water recycling systems shall be mandatory for all commercial car wash facilities hereafter constructed in the City, except for self-service car washes. 
( Ord. No. 3919 , § 3, 2-26-2018) 
11-3-6. - No Vested Rights. 
    Nothing herein shall create any vested rights to any service commitments allocated pursuant to this Code until such time as the service commitment is issued and the building permit inspection requirements of Subsection 11-3-4(C), W.M.C., has been satisfied. Prior allocations remain subject to subsequent rescission, reduction, or reallocation by council as they may deem necessary in the public interest. 
( Ord. No. 3919 , § 3, 2-26-2018) 
CHAPTER 4. - ZONING 

11-4-1. - Establishment of Districts. 
    The City hereby establishes the following defined zoning districts: 
RE ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. A residential district for large-lot single-family detached dwelling units. 
R1 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. A residential district for medium-lot single-family detached dwelling units. 
RA ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. A residential district for single-family detached dwelling units. 
R2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. A residential district allowing a mix of single-family detached dwelling units and duplexes. 
R3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. A residential district allowing a mix of single-family, duplex, and low-density multi-family dwelling units. 
R4 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. A residential district allowing a mix of single-family, duplex, and low- and medium-density multi-family dwelling units. 
R5 MOBILE HOME DISTRICT. A residential district specifically tailored for mobile home parks. 
T1 TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT. A mixed-use district allowing both office and residential uses. 
B1 BUSINESS DISTRICT. A restricted retail and office district where no outside storage of goods and merchandise is allowed. 
C1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. A retail and office district where outside storage of merchandise is permitted. 
C2 HEAVY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. A commercial district where more intensive activities and uses not compatible with residential and other business uses are allowed. 
M1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. A manufacturing and office district. 
O1 OPEN DISTRICT. An agricultural and open district for providing an area of the City devoted to the production of agricultural crops and livestock, as well as preserving and protecting agricultural and non-urbanized areas until urbanization is warranted and the appropriate change in district classification is made. 
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. A district where a maximum amount of flexibility is allowed in order to create a unified, innovative approach to mixed use design. 
SPD SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICT. A district intended to implement comprehensive land use and development policies, objectives and requests specifically designated as Focus Areas in the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
(2534 3497 3739) 
11-4-2. - Zoning Map. 
    A record of the boundaries and zoning classification of all districts established pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained by the Planning Manager, which record is by reference hereby made a part of this title. 
    In the event uncertainty shall be deemed to exist concerning the boundary of any district shown on the zoning district map, and the uncertainty cannot be resolved by reference to the applicable zoning ordinance, district boundaries shall be presumed to be located on section lines or lot lines, on the centerlines of highways, streets, alleys, railroad rights-of-way, and waterways, or on other logical boundaries as determined by the Planning Manager. 
(2534 3497) 
11-4-3. - Zoning Amendments. 
    Zoning amendments shall be as authorized in accordance with Chapter 5 of this title. All requests for rezoning must be in compliance with the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
(2534) 
11-4-4. - Allowed Uses. 
(A)  This section lists the uses allowed within each zoning district, except the Planned Unit Development District, PUD. 
(B)  The listing of a use as being allowed in any particular district shall be deemed to be an exclusion of such use from any other district, unless such use is specifically allowed in the other district. The Planning Manager shall determine if an unlisted use or set of uses falls into the definition of a listed use, and such determination is subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission, if an applicant so requests, subject to the hearing requirements of Section 11-5-13 (A), W.M.C. The decision of the Planning Commission on the matter is final. 
(C)  Uses are allowed only insofar as they possess a valid state license, if required, and they are not prohibited or in conflict with other provisions of this title or the City's Comprehensive Plan. In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between this section and the City's Comprehensive Plan, the Comprehensive Plan shall control. 
(D)  Uses allowed pursuant to this section do not apply to that area included in the South Westminster Urban Renewal Plan, Phase I (Sub-areas A-I), and the uses allowed in that area shall be governed by the Plan. 
(E)  The categories of allowed uses are as follows: 
PERMITTED USES, indicated as "P" in the following table, are allowed as of right. 
CONDITIONAL USES, indicated as "C" in the following table, are allowed upon a determination that they meet the conditions specified in Section 11-4-9, W.M.C. 
SPECIAL USES, indicated as "S" in the following table, may be allowed if they receive a Special Use Permit under Section 11-4-8, W.M.C. 
RESIDENTIAL USES: RE R1 RA R2 R3 R4 R5 T1 B1 C1 C2 M1 O1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling Units P P P P P P P P Duplexes P P P P Single-Family Attached Dwelling Units P P P Multi-Family Dwelling Units P P P Boarding & Rooming Houses P P P Nursing Home/Facilities P P P Mobile Home Parks P Group Homes C C C C C C C C Group Care Facility S S S S S Institutional Care Facility S S S Domestic Violence Home C C C  
GENERAL USES: RE R1 RA R2 R3 R4 R5 T1 B1 C1 C2 M1 O1 Public Utilities P P P P P P P P P P P P P Temporary Construction & Real Estate Buildings P P P P P P P P P P P P P All Uses Owned & Operated by the City P P P P P P P P P P P P P Small Cell Facility P P P P P P P P P P P P P Public Schools P P P P P P P P P P P P P  
OFFICE AND SIMILAR USES: RE R1 RA R2 R3 R4 R5 T1 B1 C1 C2 M1 O1 Accounting, Bookkeeping P P P P P Addressing/Mailing Service P P P P P Administrative Office P P P P P Adoption Agency P P P P P Advertising Office P P P P P Aerobics, Art, Ballet, Dance, Exercise Instruction, and Studios P P P P P Ambulance Service S S S Appraisal Service P P P P P Architecture, Landscape Architecture, Planning, Design Office P P P P P Bank & Financial Institution P P P P P Counseling/Consulting Service P P P P P Credit/Collection Agency P P P P P Data Processing Service P P P P P Detective Agency P P P P P Employment Agency P P P P P Engineering & Technical Office P P P P P Entertainment Services Office P P P P P Fraternal & Service Club P P P P P Insurance Office, Sales & Adjustors P P P P P Legal Service P P P P P Medical/Dental P P P P P Military Recruiting P P P P P News Office P P P P P Real Estate Office P P P P P Radio/TV/Recording Studio P P P P P Research & Testing Laboratory P P P P P Training Service P P P P P Veterinary Office and Clinic, Indoor P P P P Veterinary Office and Clinic, Outdoor S S S P  
BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL USES: RE R1 RA R2 R3 R4 R5 T1 B1 C1 C2 M1 O1 Animal Day Care, Indoor P P P P Animal Day Care, Outdoor S S P Antique Shop P P Apparel & Accessory Store P P P Art Galleries P P P Arts & Crafts/Drafting Supply P P P Assembly Halls, Event Centers, & Churches, includes private functions, such as weddings, receptions, conferences and meetings P P P Audio/Visual Sales, Service & Parts Store P P P Automobile Accessory Store P P P Automobile, Boat, Camper & Recreational Vehicle Showrooms for the purposes of lease only, without parts, service, outdoor storage, or operational demonstrations P P P P Automotive & Heavy Equipment Rental P P Automotive Wash Facility P P P Automotive Rental Office 1)limited to 1.5 vehicles per 100 square feet of lease space With a maximum of 20 vehicles 2) Vehicles must be in good condition (mechanically & exterior) 3) no car wash, maintenance or repair facilities 4) limited to 1 office per shopping center P P P Bakeries P P P Bar/Nightclub/Tavern P P P Barber & Beauty Shop P P P Beauty Supply Sales P P P Bed & Bath Shop P P P Bingo Establishment/Social Gaming Outlet P Book/Magazine/News Dealer, Excluding Dealers Selling Goods Not Available to All Ages P P P Brewery, Distillery, Winery S S S Brewpub P P P Bulk Fuel Sales P P Camera & Photographic Supply P P P Carpet & Rug Store P P P China & Glassware P P P Cleaning/Laundry/Tailor/Fur Storage P P P Computer Hardware, Software, and Accessories P P P Consignment Shop P P Costume Sales & Rental P P P Custom Crafts/Ceramics/Stained Glass P P P Day Care Facility P P P Department/Variety/Catalog Store P P P Donation Facility S S S Draperies & Window Coverings P P P Drug Store P P P Fabric Store P P P Fast Food Restaurant/Snacks P P P Florist & Plant Shop P P P Food Store P P P Funeral Home/Mortuary P P Furniture/Appliance Store P P P Furniture/Equipment Rental for Home Use Only P P P Gasoline Station/Convenience Store P P P P General Automobile Repair P P General Repair Shop P P Gifts/Novelties/Souvenirs, Excluding Dealers Selling Goods Not Available to All Ages P P P Greenhouse P P P Hardware P P P Home Furnishing/Home Improvement Centers P P P Hotel/Motel/Resort P P Indoor Entertainment Establishments, including Amusement Centers, Bowling, Billiards, Movie Theaters & Similar Uses P P P Jewelry/Watch & Clock/Watch & Clock Repair Store P P P Kennel S S S Kitchen, Cookware Store P P P Lawn & Garden Store P P P Leather Goods & Luggage Store P P P Liquor Store P P P Massage Therapist P P P Medical Equipment P P P Motor Vehicle, Recreational Vehicle & Commercial Equipment Dealer, including Automobile, Aircraft, Boats, Campers, Mobile Homes, Trucks, Trailers, Heavy Equipment, Construction Equipment & Farm Implements - New or Used P P Music, Records, Tapes, Video Sales & Rental P P P Office Furnishings & Supply/Typewriter Sales & Service P P P Optical Store P P P Outdoor Entertainment Establishment P Packaging & Postal Substation P P P Paint & Wallpaper Store P P P Pawn Shop P Pet Store/Pet Grooming P P P Photography/Processing Studio P P P Print Shop P P P Private Schools P P P Restaurants P P P Saddle & Tack Store P P P Shoe Sales/Repair P P P Sporting Goods P P P Stationery & Card Shop P P P Tanning Salon P P P Tattoo Parlor/Body Piercing Parlor S S S Toy/Hobby Store P P P Travel Agency P P P TV & Electronic Appliance Repair P P P Thrift Store (under 5,000 sf gross floor area) C C C Thrift Store (5,000 sf or greater gross floor area) S S S Used Motor Vehicle Parts Sales P Variety Store P P P Wholesale & Commercial Heating, Plumbing, Electrical, Lumber & Building Equipment & Material P P  
INDUSTRIAL USES: RE R1 RA R2 R3 R4 R5 T1 B1 C1 C2 M1 O1 Auto Body Repair & Paint Shops, Auto Auction P Builders Supply Yards, Sale of Lumber & Construction Products P Commercial Printing Establishment P Frozen Food Lockers, Ice & Cold Storage Plants P Furniture Refinishing P General Contractor Storage P Machine & Woodworking Shop P Printing & Publishing P Professional, Scientific & Control Instrument Manufacturing P Recycling Operations P Retail Sales in Conjunction with Warehousing and Wholesale Business P Sales of Agricultural, Equipment, Heavy Machinery P Secondary Product Manufacturing, Processing, Fabrication & Assembly P Warehousing, Mini Warehousing, Storage & Freight P Wholesale Business With Stock P  
OPEN AND AGRICULTURAL USES: RE R1 RA R2 R3 R4 R5 T1 B1 C1 C2 M1 O1 Crop Production, Dairy Farming, Pasture & Raising of Livestock, but Excluding Feedlots P Gravel, Mineral, Sand Extraction Upon Permit Granted Pursuant to this Code P Nurseries P P P Private Country Clubs P P P P P P P P P P P P P Public or Private Golf Courses P P P P P P P P P P P P P Riding Stables & Academies P Water Reservoirs P  
(2534 2896 2975 3295 3497 3664 3770; Ord. No. 3891, § 3, 6-26-2017 ; Ord. No. 3926 , § 2, 3-26-2018) 
11-4-5. - Density Schedule. 
(A)  In addition to the provisions of Section 11-4-6, W.M.C., the following regulations shall apply to lot area, lot width, lot frontage, lot depth, height, building setbacks, floor area, and coverage of lots and structures in all zoning districts except Planned Unit Development. In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between this section and the City's Comprehensive Plan, the Comprehensive Plan shall control. 
(B)  The City Manager or the Manager's designee may grant an increase in the height limit and/or a reduction in the setback requirements of up to ten percent if the Manager finds that such reduction does not constitute a significant change in the site plan for the property and does not create a significant negative impact on adjoining properties. 
DENSITY SCHEDULE RE R1 RA R2 R3 R4 R5 T1 B1 C1&C2 M1 O1 Minimum Lot Area/Sq. Feet: 9000 7700 7000 9000 9000 9000 (d) 9000 (a) (a) (a) (a) Maximum Density/Dwelling Units Per Acre: (a) (a) (a) (a) 14.5 22.0 (d) 14.5 (a) (a) (a) 0.1 Minimum Lot Width:  Interior 70' 70' 70' 75' 75' 75' (d) 75' (a) (a) (a) (a)  Corner 85' 85' 85' 85' 85' 85' (d) 85' (a) (a) (a) 200' Add. Lot Frontages For Each Unit in Excess of Two on Grade Level: (a) (a) (a) (a) 10' 10' (d) 10' (a) (a) (a) (a) Minimum Lot Depth: 100' 100' 100' 100' 100' 100' (d) 100' (a) (a) (a) 200' Minimum Front Setback - Principal Building: 30' 30' 30' 30' 25' 25' (d) 25' 30' 30' 30' 30' Minimum Side Setback; Interior Lot - Principal Building: 7' 5' 5' 5' 5' 5' (d) 5' (b) (b) 40' 30' Minimum Total - Both Side Setbacks: 20' 15' 15' 12' 12' 12' (d) 12' (a) (a) (a) (a) Minimum Side Setback; Corner Lot/Side Street - Principal Building: 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' (d) 15' 30' 30' 30' 30' Minimum Side Setback; Reverse Corner Lot - Principal Building: 30' 30' 30' 30' 25' 25' (d) 25' 15' 15' 30' 30' Minimum Rear Setback - Principal Building: 20' 20' 20' 20' 20' 20' (d) 20' (c) (c) (c) 30' Maximum Lot Coverage; Percent of Total Area - Principal Building: 30% 30% 30% 30% 30% 30% (d) 30% (a) (a) (a) 5% Maximum Building Height - Principal Building: 25' 25' 25' 25' 35' 35' (d) 35' 65' 65' 65' 25' Maximum Building Height - Accessory Building 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 35' Maximum Structure (non-building) Height 25' 25' 25' 25' 25' 25' 25' 35' 35' 35' 35' 35' Minimum Floor Area/SF Per Dwelling Unit: 1200 1000 850 600 450 600 (d) 450 (a) (a) (a) 1200  
(a)  None, none required, or not applicable. 
(b)  None required unless adjacent to residential district. In such cases, minimum side setbacks shall be the same as those of the adjacent residential area. 
(c)  Twenty feet (20') from the center of an alley or rear lot line, whichever is less. 
(d)  Licensed and permitted in accordance with this Code. 
(C)  For PUD zoned property in which the PDP and/or ODP has not established maximum heights, the maximum heights shall be as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height-principal building (residential uses): 40 feet; 
(2)  Maximum building height-principal building (non-residential or mixed uses): 65 feet; 
(3)  Maximum building height-accessory building (residential uses): 15 feet; 
(4)  Maximum building height-accessory building (non-residential or mixed uses): 35 feet; 
(5)  Maximum structure (non-building) height: 35 feet. 
(2534 2841 2975 3770; Ord. No. 3891, § 3, 6-26-2017 ; Ord. No. 3982 , § 1, 4-8-2019) 
11-4-6. - Special Regulations. 
    The following additional regulations apply as indicated below: 
(A)  Single-Family Detached Dwelling Units: Permitted in the R2, R3, R4, and T1 Districts in accordance with the RA "Density Schedule" provisions. Duplexes are also permitted in the R3, R4, and T1 Districts in accordance with the R2 "Density Schedule" provisions. Multiple-Family Dwelling Units are also permitted in the T1 District in accordance with the R3 "Density Schedule" provisions. In the B1 District, a caretaker's quarters is allowed on or above the main floor, if said use is clearly ancillary to the primary business or commercial use. 
(B)  Occupancy of Dwelling Units: Subject to the provisions of Chapter 12 of Title XI, "Rental Property Maintenance Code," W.M.C., no persons except the following persons shall occupy a dwelling unit: 
(1)  Members of a family, together with bona fide domestic employees of such family; or 
(2)  Up to four unrelated persons; or 
(3)  Two persons and any of either of their children by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship, including foster children placed by a state institution or licensed child placement agency; or 
(4)  Up to eight residents of a group home for the aged; or 
(5)  Up to eight residents, plus staff, of a group home for persons with mental illness; or 
(6)  Up to eight residents, plus staff, of a group home for developmentally disabled persons, provided, further, that, except as otherwise provided by law, no more than one individual who is required to register as a sex offender under the provisions of the Colorado Sex Offender Registration Act shall occupy a dwelling unit. 
    Additionally, dwelling units, or portions thereof, temporarily used as model homes or sales offices in a development must be restored to residential use and occupancy within thirty days after (i) the initial sale or lease of all units in the development, or (ii) the date that no building permit for the development has been issued in 365 days, whichever occurs first. 
(C)  Exceptions From Minimum Lot Area or Width: The minimum lot area and minimum lot width of any lot in the RE, R1, RA, R2, R3, R4, R5, T1, B1, C1, C2, M1, or O1 Districts in this Code may be reduced up to 30 percent of such minimum when applied to structures for a permitted use to be constructed on parcels of ground that were under separate ownership (whether consisting of one or more platted lots) on November 20, 1960, provided: 
(1)  Such separate ownership is other than the ownership of the property on either side of the subject parcel. 
(2)  This exception shall not apply to parcels having less than a fifty-foot (50') frontage or that are less than 5,000 square feet in area. 
(3)  This exception shall not apply to parcels having a total frontage in excess of 120 feet, unless at least 75 percent of the frontage of the property on both sides of the street in the block in which the subject parcel is located is already developed on 60 feet or less frontages, in which case the maximum frontage of the parcel to which this exception shall apply shall be increased to 209 feet. 
(4)  Notwithstanding this exception, all other requirements provided in zoning law shall be maintained, including, but not limited to, the side setback requirements and structures on corner lots shall be located thereon to conform with existing setbacks along the same street frontage in the area and in a manner that will provide an unobstructed view of intersection traffic. 
In addition to the foregoing exception, any lot separately designated in any plat heretofore, filed with and approved by the Planning Commission subsequent to November 14, 1950, may be developed for a permitted use notwithstanding the requirements in the previously designated Districts relative to minimum lot width or area. 
(D)  Minimum Setbacks: 
(1)  Developed Area. In all residential areas where lots comprising 50 percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street between intersecting streets have been improved with buildings, the City may require that the average front setback of such buildings shall be the minimum front setback required for all new construction in such block. 
(2)  Reduction. No part of a setback required for any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as a setback for another building; all setback areas shall be open and unobstructed, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(3)  Architectural Features. Cornices, canopies, eaves, awnings, or similar architectural roofline features may extend into a required setback not more than four feet. 
(4)  Decks. Open, unenclosed and uncovered decks or patios may extend into a required setback, provided they are constructed at ground level and do not conflict with any utility or other easements. 
(5)  Fire Escapes. Fire escapes may extend into a required setback not more than six feet. 
(6)  Flag Lots. For the purposes of measuring the setback requirements of Section 11-4-5, W.M.C., the "pole" portion of the lot shall not be included in the measurements. For example, the front setback for a building will not be measured from the street right-of-way line, but will instead be measured from the principal or accessory building to the lot line nearest and parallel to, but not coincident with, the street right-of-way line. 
(E)  Minimum Floor Area: All measurements shall be along outside walls of the living area, not including unfinished basement, garage, or carport areas. 
(F)  Side Setback Exception: There shall be excepted from the 15-foot aggregate side setback requirements for RA and R1 Districts all zone lots having a width of 63 feet or less at the building setback lines. Such exception shall apply only to zone lots which, on November 20, 1960, were platted to such 63 feet or less width, or which were under separate ownership as a single building site on such date, but such exception shall not apply to lots platted to a 25-foot width, not under separate ownership on November 20, 1960. The minimum side setback requirements for such lots shall be an aggregate of 12 feet for each zone lot with a five-foot minimum on each side. 
(G)  Adjacent Land Use Restrictions: 
(1)  In the R3 and R4 Districts, no single structure containing more than two units shall be located immediately adjacent to an existing one-family dwelling. 
(2)  No manufacturing is permitted in conjunction with sales in B1, C1, and C2 Districts. 
(3)  No wall of any drive-in business, automobile wash facility, or automobile service station is permitted within 100 feet of any residential district boundary. 
(H)  Outdoor Storage: 
(1)  In the B1 District, there shall be no overnight or permanent outdoor display or storage of merchandise, goods, or materials. 
(2)  Permanent outdoor display and storage of merchandise, goods, or materials is permitted in C1, C2, and M1 Districts. Said storage shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the total lot, unless otherwise approved on an Official Development Plan. City Council may approve more or less restrictive conditions with the approval of an Official Development Plan. 
(3)  Temporary outdoor display of merchandise, goods, or materials during normal working hours is permitted in B1, C1 and C2 Districts. 
(4)  Seasonal outdoor storage, such as garden supplies and Christmas tree sales, are permitted in B1, C1, C2, M1 and O1 Districts. 
(5)  Permanent, accessory, and seasonal outdoor storage in a district shall be as indicated on an approved Official Development Plan. If provisions permitting outdoor storage are not contained on an approved Official Development Plan, outdoor storage is prohibited. 
(I)  Screening of Outdoor Storage: In the C1, C2, and M1 Districts, outdoor storage, equipment, merchandise, and refuse shall be screened from view from abutting rights-of-way and adjacent properties. 
(J)  Environmental Requirements: Dust, fumes, odors, smoke, vapor, noise, lights, and vibration shall create no adverse off-site impacts in all districts. Any use that emits odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, radiation, vibration, danger of explosion, or similar effects must do so in conformance with State of Colorado Health Department Standards and Environmental Protection Agency Standards. For any type of repair shop, all activities must be conducted within an enclosed building and shall not create undue noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration, or other similar effects outside of the enclosed buildings in a C2 and M1 District. 
(K)  Loading: In B1, C1, C2, M1 and PUD Districts, all loading areas and loading docks must be located on the site and screened, so as not to be viewed from public roads, trails, or residentially zoned property. 
(L)  Measurement of the Maximum Height of Buildings: Shall be as determined pursuant to the currently adopted Building Code of the City. 
(M)  Screening of Trash Storage Areas in All Zone Districts: 
(1)  Trash storage for multi-unit dwellings, institutional buildings, and all business and industrial buildings or uses shall be accommodated within the structure or, if located outside, shall be screened, so as not to be visible from adjacent public streets or from adjacent residential development within 100 feet of the trash storage area. Screening shall be an opaque decorative wall or fence six feet in height and shall be constructed of materials compatible with building materials of the structure, such that the enclosure or screen wall or fence will be protected from damage by normal removal and replacement of the dumpster by a trash truck by incorporation of protective pipe bollards and concrete curbs outside and inside of the enclosure. 
(2)  One- and two-family dwellings and accessory uses, except for temporary construction purposes, shall not be permitted to maintain large trash dumpsters one cubic yard or larger, as such dumpsters are of a size and type normally associated with commercial uses. 
(3)  In no instance shall trash enclosures be permitted to encroach into sight distance triangles for driveways or street corners. No such enclosure shall displace required parking spaces. 
(4)  The requirements of this section shall apply to all new development prior to a certificate of occupancy. In addition, all such trash storage areas in existence as of the date of adoption of this ordinance (August 1997) shall come into conformance within one year of the adoption hereof. For the purpose of enforcement, the land owner shall be held legally responsible for compliance with this law. 
(N)  Accessory Buildings: 
(1)  Permitted Zone Districts. An accessory building is permitted in all residential zoning districts or residential planned unit developments in accordance with the requirements of this Code, unless restricted on an approved Official Development Plan. Accessory buildings in nonresidential zoning districts shall require an ODP waiver or ODP amendment meeting the requirements of this Code. 
(2)  Number Permitted. Unless stated otherwise on an Official Development Plan, in residential PUD districts, two accessory buildings will be permitted per building lot. In non-PUD residential zoning districts, one detached garage shall be permitted in addition to two accessory buildings. 
(3)  Architectural Character. Accessory buildings must maintain the character of the surrounding neighborhood and architecturally resemble and be constructed of like or similar materials of that used on the exterior of the existing principal building on the property. Pre-fabricated or corrugated metal, plastic, vinyl, canvas or similar material buildings are prohibited. 
(4)  Size. For all residential zoning districts and residential PUD districts, the total of any detached garage and accessory buildings shall be limited to five percent of the building lot area or 600 square feet, whichever is greater, unless a different size is provided for in the PUD district. In no case shall the combined square footage of all accessory buildings be more than 2,000 square feet per building lot. For all nonresidential PUD zoning districts, size will be determined in the ODP or ODP amendment. Maximum height of an accessory building shall be limited to 15 feet, except in O-1 zoning districts where maximum height shall be limited to 35 feet. 
(5)  Setbacks. This subsection (N) provides the setbacks for accessory buildings, except that the setbacks for accessory buildings in PUD zoning districts shall be as specified on an approved Official Development Plan. If setbacks are not specified in the ODP, then the setbacks shall follow the requirements of this subsection. The O-1 district is considered a nonresidential zoning district for the purpose of this subsection. 
(a)  Accessory Buildings 120 Square Feet or Less: the front setback shall be the same as required for the principal building. The side and rear setbacks shall be a minimum of three feet from the property line, but may not encroach into any easements. The side or rear setback adjacent to a public road shall be 15 feet. 
(b)  Accessory Buildings Greater Than 120 Square Feet: the front setback shall be the same as required for the principal building. The side and rear setbacks shall be a minimum of five feet feet from the property line, but may not encroach into any easements. The side or rear setback adjacent to a public road shall be 15 feet. 
(c)  Accessory Buildings in the O-1 Zoning District: the front setback shall be 100 feet. The side and rear setbacks shall be 30 feet. 
(d)  Architectural features such as cornices, canopies, eaves, awnings or similar architectural roofline features may not encroach into the required side or rear setback for any accessory building. 
(O)  Temporary Construction and Sales Trailers: 
(1)  Temporary construction and sales trailers are permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following restrictions: 
(a)  No person shall permit a construction trailer to remain on a site for more than 30 days after completion of construction or cessation of construction. 
(b)  No person shall permit a sales trailer to remain on a site past the date of the sale or lease of all dwelling units or lots within the boundaries of the development or subdivision. 
(c)  A construction trailer or sales trailer may be located only on the lot it serves or within the development or subdivision for which construction is occurring. 
(d)  A construction trailer or sales trailer shall meet the setback requirements for a principal building on a lot for the zoning district in which it is located, adequate parking and landscaping, and safe access to the site that does not impact public streets or surrounding uses. 
(e)  A sales trailer shall have adequate asphalt or concrete parking spaces provided. 
(f)  No person shall use, or permit to be used, a construction trailer or sales trailer as any type of dwelling unit. 
(2)  Upon removal of a construction trailer or sales trailer, the property owner is responsible for cleaning the site and restoring it to an orderly condition, which may include the removal of the asphalt or concrete parking spaces. 
(P)  Fences: 
(1)  General. Fences erected in the City shall comply with the provisions of this section. Fences and swimming pools shall also comply with the provisions of the building code as adopted by the City. 
(2)  Fence Classifications. Fences shall be classified as follows: 
Class 1: masonry walls 
Class 2: ornamental iron 
Class 3: woven wire 
Class 4: fences more than 50 percent open 
Class 5: fences less than 50 percent open 
(3)  Height Limitations, Residential/Business Districts. 
(a)  Fences erected in front of the front building line or in front of the required front setback may be of any class, provided the height of the fence does not exceed 36 inches. Class 2 and 3 fences more than 50 percent open may be erected to a height not to exceed 42 inches. Ornamental post caps shall not be included in any calculation of fence height. 
(b)  Fences erected in side yards that do not project beyond the front building line or required front setback, including rear yard perimeter fences, may be of any class and shall not exceed the height of six feet. 
(c)  Fences erected on top of retaining walls shall not exceed the height limitations specified in paragraph (1) and (2) of this subsection. The height of such fence shall be measured from the ground level on the high side of the retaining wall to the top of the fence. 
(4)  Height Limitations, Industrial Districts. Fences erected in industrial districts may be of any classification. Fences erected in required front yards shall not exceed a height of six feet. In other than required front yards, fences may be of any height. 
(5)  Mobile Home Fences. Individual lot perimeter fences may be erected at the lot line of individual mobile home spaces. Such fences shall be constructed of the chain link fencing and shall be of a standard design for the entire mobile home park. The top of such fences shall not exceed 36 inches in height. Fence permit issuance and fees therefor shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(6)  Prohibited Fences. 
(a)  Barbed wire or similar sharp pointed fences shall not be erected or maintained, unless approved on the Official Development Plan or the Preliminary Development Plan and, when approved, shall be installed at a height not less than six feet above the surrounding grade level. 
(b)  No electrically charged fence shall be erected or maintained. 
(7)  Intersection sight distance criteria. Fences and retaining walls erected within vehicular sight triangles or vehicular safe line of sight shall comply with the City standard specifications for design and construction. No fence or retaining wall shall be erected or maintained that obstructs the vision of motorists, as determined by the City's traffic engineer. Any fence or retaining wall that does obstruct the vision of the motorists may be abated as a nuisance as set forth in Title VIII, Chapter 4 of this Code. 
(Q)  Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs: Outdoor swimming pools, wading pools, hot tubs, spas, and similar facilities shall be constructed or installed so that there will be at least five feet between the side or rear property line and the rim of the facility and at least 50 feet between the front property line and the rim of the facility, except as follows: 
(1)  In the case of outdoor swimming pools, in conjunction with residential occupancies located on developer-owned or commonly owned land, the front setback shall be determined on the Preliminary Development Plan or the Official Development Plan. 
(2)  Portable wading pools constructed of flexible plastic, rubber, or similar materials shall not be subject to the spacing requirements specified in this section. 
(R)  City Exemption: All property, uses, structures, and facilities owned or operated by the City or the Westminster Urban Renewal Authority are exempt from complying with all zoning and subdivision regulations and are exempt from all Preliminary Development Plan, Official Development Plan, Specific Plan, and platting procedures contained in this Code. In addition, the purchase and sale of land by the City or the Westminster Urban Renewal Authority for open space, park, rights-of-way, or other public purposes is exempt from complying with all zoning and subdivision regulations and all Preliminary Development Plan, Official Development Plan, Specific Plan, and platting requirements contained in this Code. 
(S)  Applicability. For PUD and Specific Plan Districts, the provisions of this section shall apply to the extent not modified in an approved Official Development Plan or Specific Plan for the underlying development within such district. 
(2534 2841 2975 3427 3497 3531 3599 3634 3644 3739 3770) 
11-4-7. - PUD-Planned Unit Development District. 
(A)  Authorization: The provisions of this title concerning Planned Unit Development (PUD) districts are enacted pursuant to the home rule provisions of Article XX of the Colorado Constitution and the authority and powers contained in Chapters 2, 4 and 11.5 of the City Charter. 
(B)  General Provisions: The PUD District is intended to provide the means and the guidelines through which tracts of land are developed through an overall development plan that integrates the land uses and site considerations for the land as a unit, rather than the traditional standard treatment of land uses in other so-called Euclidian districts in this Code. It is intended to reflect maximum design freedom to make the best use of topography and land features and to permit the developer an opportunity to more fully utilize the physical characteristics of the site through the reduction of lot sizes and the absence of setback and bulk restrictions; to provide for diversification and flexibility in housing types, housing prices, and overall design; to encourage innovative development of smaller parcels of land that have been passed over; to encourage mixed-use developments, including uses such as residential, office, and commercial; and to encourage higher quality development than possible under traditional standard zoning regulations. Through the Planned Unit Development zoning process, it is the intent that property will be developed with a unified design providing continuity between the various elements. However, the PUD zoning process is not intended as a device to circumvent general development regulations, standards, and good planning practice. 
(C)  Permitted Uses. 
(1)  The following uses are allowed in a PUD district: 
(a)  All uses listed as permitted in the O1 District. 
(b)  Public utilities. 
(c)  Temporary, on-site construction and real estate sales. 
(d)  All uses, structures, and facilities owned or operated by the City. 
(2)  Any other use may be allowed in a PUD district if said use is listed as an allowed or permitted use in a Preliminary Development Plan and/or an Official Development Plan that has been approved in accordance with this title. Once a Preliminary Development Plan and/or an Official Development Plan has been approved by a particular PUD district, only the listed uses are allowed and the uses allowed under paragraph (1) above are no longer allowed, unless listed. Land uses listed as allowed or permitted on a Preliminary Development Plan shall be subject to further review, adjustment or modification, including elimination of particular uses, as part of the City's review and approval of an Official Development Plan for the property. Final land uses within a Planned Unit Development district shall be those listed on the Official Development Plan for the property. 
(3)  All proposed uses in a PUD district must conform with the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
(D)  Permitted Density: Permitted density and dimensional requirements shall be as included in a Preliminary Development Plan and/or Official Development Plan approved in accordance with this Code. 
(2534 2975 3497 3739) 
11-4-7.5. - SPD-Specific Plan District. 
(A)  General Provisions: The SPD is intended to provide a mechanism for establishing a more fluid and accessible form of classifying and regulating land uses and development within focus areas, defined as such in the Comprehensive Plan. The primary policy objectives and considerations behind a SPD designation include: 
(1)  The focus area to which it is attached presents uniquely important development or redevelopment opportunities and benefits to the City; 
(2)  The focus area, due to development or redevelopment complexities, is reasonably expected to develop over a longer period of time compared to other developments of the City of similar size; 
(3)  The development or redevelopment of the focus area in accordance with its corresponding Specific Plan is considered vital to the success in achieving the primary goals of the Comprehensive Plan; 
(4)  The SPD designation is deemed reasonably necessary to accomplish the land use and development objectives of the corresponding focus area; 
(5)  The focus area is located near major crossroads or transit centers, and its designation as a SPD is deemed reasonably necessary to develop the focus area as a major City gateway or transit oriented development; 
(6)  The SPD and the Specific Plan will promote the creation of a cohesive neighborhood identity within the focus area, which will attract new employers and residents. 
(B)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  The following uses are permitted in a SPD District: 
(a)  All uses listed as permitted by the Specific Plan for the SPD. 
(b)  Public utilities. 
(c)  Temporary, on-site construction and real estate sales. 
(d)  All uses, structures, and facilities owned or operated by the City. 
(2)  All uses in a SPD must conform with the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
(3)  All uses in a SPD shall be subject to the limitations, conditions, restrictions, and all other provisions of the SPD's Specific Plan and Official Development Plan, and all applicable provisions of this Code. 
(3739) 
11-4-8. - Uses by Special Permit. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, operate or conduct a use listed in subsection (B) below without having first obtained approval of a special use permit pursuant to this section, unless such use is specifically listed as an allowed use in the Official Development Plan of a property located within a PUD district. A permit for a special use may be granted by the Planning Commission after a public hearing meeting the notice requirements of Section 11-5-13, W.M.C. The applicant shall have the burden of establishing that the proposed use shall be for the public good and in the public interest. 
(B)  The following special uses may be granted according to the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Ambulance Service. 
(2)  Animal Day Care, Outdoor. 
(3)  Brewery, Distillery, or Winery. 
(4)  Donation Center. 
(5)  Group Care Facility. 
(6)  Institutional Care Facility. 
(7)  Kennel. 
(8)  Tattoo or Body Piercing Parlor. 
(9)  Thrift Stores 5,000 square feet or greater. 
(10)  Veterinary Office and Clinic, Outdoor. 
(11)  Any use listed in an SPD zone requiring special use approval pursuant to its respective specific plan. 
(C)  Application Requirements: All applications for special use permits must include the following information: 
(1)  A completed application form provided by the City. 
(2)  The required fees for review and public hearing. 
(3)  Written description of the proposed use in sufficient detail to allow review and analysis of the operation and its potential impact on the existing neighborhood. 
(4)  Legal description and address of the site. 
(5)  Detailed site plan showing location of existing and proposed buildings and other structures, parking areas and number of available parking spaces for the special use, ingress and egress, outside trash and storage areas, and type of screening, fencing, and landscaping. 
(6)  Vicinity map showing immediately adjacent property, structures, existing land use, existing zoning and Comprehensive Plan classification(s), streets, sidewalks, and curb cuts. 
(7)  Existing floor plan and elevation of buildings or proposed construction or modifications as may be applicable. 
(8)  Map and list of property owners within 300 feet of the subject property, based upon records of the County Assessor as of a date within 15 days of filing the application. The list and map shall meet the requirements in Section 11-5-13(A)(7), W.M.C. 
(9)  In the case of a Group Care Facility or Institutional Care Facility, a map to scale indicating the locations of any other Group Care Facility or Institutional Care Facility within 750 feet of the subject property, measured at the property line. 
(10)  In the case of a Tattoo or Body Piercing Parlor, a map to scale indicating the location of any other Tattoo or Body Piercing Parlor within 1,000 feet. Measurement shall occur as prescribed in Section 11-4-13, W.M.C. 
(11)  In the case of an Ambulance Service, a map to scale indicating a minimum distance of 500 feet from the boundary of any residential district or the property line of a lot devoted to a residential use regardless of the zoning designation, measured from the property line. 
(12)  In the case of a Thrift Store, a map to scale indicating the location of any other Thrift Store within 1,000 feet. Measurement shall occur as prescribed in Section 11-4-13, W.M.C. 
(13)  In the case of an Institutional Care Facility, the applicant shall also submit written plans for: security measures to prevent unplanned and unsafe activities on the part of residents; screening measures to prevent the placement of residents with a history of or high risk for violence or abuse of children; the ratio of supervisors to residents; programs for counseling or rehabilitation; the hours per day or week when counseling or rehabilitation programs will be administered; the education, training and other qualifications of all staff members; provisions for recreation, including the areas of the building and site to be used for recreation. 
(14)  In the case of an Institutional Care Facility or Group Care Facility, a copy of the approved State license or the application form for such State license showing the use requested. 
(15)  In the case of a Brewery, the floor plan must delineate the perimeter of the tap room and outdoor seating, showing maximum occupancy of each, and must show location of product storage. The applicant must also address the following in writing: products to be brewed and production limit of each; plans for wholesale of the manufactured product; plans for truck traffic; days per week and hours per day of operation for the tap room and the manufacturing facility; plans for safe storage and service of manufactured product, including training of servers or sellers; parking plans. The applicant must also provide state discharge permit, if any, and state liquor license and liquor license application. 
(16)  In addition, reasonable additional information, including, but not limited to, a traffic study prepared by a professional traffic consultant may be required by the City Manager or designee if required to evaluate the application. 
(17)  In the case of a use identified as a special use under Section 11-4-8(B)(11) above, the criteria identified in the respective specific plan must be addressed. 
(D)  Application Process: 
(1)  The applications for special use permits, together with the required fees, shall be submitted to the Planning Manager. 
(2)  The application shall be reviewed by the Planning Manager or designee, who, after review and such additional investigation as the Manager may deem necessary, shall schedule a public hearing before the Planning Commission. 
(3)  Notice of public hearing shall meet the notice requirements in Section 11-5-13, W.M.C. 
(E)  Planning Commission Review: Within 30 days of its public hearing on the application, or within such other time as the City and the applicant mutually agree, the Planning Commission will either grant the application, with or without modifications and conditions, or deny it. The Commission will review the application, giving due consideration to the criteria listed in this section in making their decision. The decision will set forth the Commission's written findings, stating in what respects the application meets or fails to meet the criteria set forth herein. When granting or denying a Special Use Permit, the Planning Commission may also impose conditions on the granting of a permit, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Requiring buffers or screening between the new activity and adjacent uses; 
(2)  Placing limitations on the hours of operation of the use; and 
(3)  Making changes in design or layout. 
(F)  Special Use Permit Criteria: When considering any application for a special use permit, the Planning Commission shall consider each of the criteria listed below, insofar as each is relevant to the proposed use: 
(1)  Impact on the character of the neighborhood. 
(2)  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and planned uses on adjacent properties. 
(3)  Activities or uses on the site that generate potential adverse impacts or nuisance effects, such as visual impacts, noise, vibrations, light intensity, odors, loitering, or level of police activity. 
(4)  Amount or degree of outdoor activity. 
(5)  Hours of operation and deliveries. 
(6)  Location and intensity of storage, loading, and delivery areas. 
(7)  Adequacy of parking and vehicular access and circulation. 
(8)  Traffic volume generated by the proposed use. 
(9)  Pedestrian safety. 
(G)  Standards of Review: After consideration of the foregoing criteria, the Commission will grant the special use permit if it determines: 
(1)  That the proposed use will be reasonably compatible with the surrounding neighborhood; 
(2)  That the proposed use will not be in conflict with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan; and 
(3)  That the proposed use will meet the following distance limitations: 
(a)  The location of any other Group Care Facility or Institutional Care Facility within 750 feet of a Group Care Facility shall preclude the approval of the special use permit. 
(b)  The location of any other Group Care Facility or Institutional Care Facility within 750 feet of an Institutional Care Facility shall preclude the approval of the special use permit. 
(c)  The location of any other Tattoo or Body Piercing Parlor within 1,000 feet of another such use shall preclude the approval of the special use permit. 
(d)  The location of any other Thrift Store within 1,000 feet of another such use shall preclude approval of the special use permit. 
(e)  The location of an ambulance service within 500 feet of the boundary of any residential district or the property line of a lot devoted to a residential use, regardless of the zoning designation, will preclude the approval of the special use permit. 
(4)  In the case of an Ambulance Service, that the primary vehicular access from the subject property is direct to a four or more lane street and that no outside storage of ambulances occurs. 
(5)  In the case of a use identified as a special use under a specific plan, that the criteria identified in the respective specific plan have been met. 
(H)  Appeal to City Council: An applicant or the City Manager may appeal to the City Council any final decision of the Planning Commission regarding a special use permit. An appeal shall be taken by filing a written notice of appeal of the decision of the Planning Commission with the City Manager within ten days after the date of such decision. Such notice of appeal shall include the following: 
(1)  The action of the Planning Commission that is the subject of the appeal. 
(2)  The date of such action. 
(3)  The name, address, and telephone number of the appellant. 
(4)  A statement setting forth the basis of the appellant's appeal. 
Upon the receipt of a timely notice of appeal, the City Manager shall schedule a date for a public hearing before the City Council as expeditiously as possible. The City Manager shall provide the appellant at least ten days' written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. The City Manager shall also issue the published and posted notices provided for by Section 11-5-13, W.M.C., in advance of the City Council hearing. At its public hearing, if City Council determines all the requirements have been met for perfecting an appeal of the Planning Commission decision pursuant to this section, the City Council shall conduct a de novo hearing on the merits. 
(I)  Council Call-Up: Upon the vote of at least four members of Council, any decision of the Planning Commission on a special use permit may be reviewed de novo by Council, if such vote occurs within 14 days of the Planning Commission decision. Notice and scheduling of such hearing shall proceed in the same manner as for an appeal by an applicant or the City Manager, except that the notice shall also state that the hearing is being held upon the request of Council pursuant to this section. 
(J)  Transfer: A special use permit shall not be transferred to another person, business, or location. 
(K)  Termination: 
(1)  A special use permit shall terminate automatically whenever the permitted use is inactive for a period of one year or more. 
(2)  The Planning Commission may terminate any special use permit for cause if, after notice and hearing as provided above, it determines that the conditions of approval under which the permit was initially approved are no longer being met. 
(L)  State Licensing: In the event a proposed use requires a special use permit, no approval for a business license or a building permit shall be issued until the special use has been approved by the City and the appropriate State license has been issued, and evidence thereof has been provided to the Planning Manager. 
(2534 2975 3053 3497 3770; Ord. No. 3869, §§ 1-3, 5-8-2017 ) 
11-4-9. - Conditional Uses. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, operate, or conduct a use listed in subsection (B) below, without having first met the conditions for approval established by the City. 
(B)  The following conditional uses are permitted if they meet the conditions for the particular use, unless a reasonable accommodation has been granted pursuant to subsection (D) below. 
(1)  Group home for persons with intellectual and developmental disabilities. 
(a)  Receive and maintain state license, if necessary. 
(b)  Maintain adequate off-street parking for employees. 
(c)  Locate no nearer than 750 feet from another group home. 
(2)  Group home for persons with behavioral or mental health disorders. 
(a)  Receive and maintain state license, if necessary. 
(b)  Maintain adequate off-street parking for employees. 
(c)  Locate no nearer than 750 feet from another group home. 
(3)  Group home for the aged. 
(a)  Receive and maintain state license, if necessary. 
(b)  Maintain adequate off-street parking for employees. 
(c)  Locate no nearer than 750 feet from another group home. 
(d)  Residents do not require life care or nursing facilities as defined by state statute. 
(4)  Group home other than (1), (2), or (3) above that are allowed under the provisions of the federal Fair Housing Act, as amended, for any type of protected class or pursuant to any other applicable law. 
(a)  Receive and maintain state license, if necessary. 
(b)  Maintain adequate off-street parking for employees. 
(c)  Locate no nearer than 750 feet from another group home. 
(5)  Domestic violence shelter home. 
(a)  Maintain adequate off-street parking for employees. 
(6)  Thrift store less than 5,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
(a)  No outdoor storage of materials. 
(b)  No outdoor donation bins. 
(c)  No outdoor display of merchandise. 
(7)  Any use in a SPD zone requiring conditional use approval pursuant to its respective Specific Plan shall meet the criteria in said plan. 
(C)  Application Requirements: Applicants for conditional uses shall include the following information: 
(1)  A completed application form provided by the City. 
(2)  The required fee for review, except that no fee shall be charged for the review of any conditional use for any group home. 
(3)  Written description of the proposed use. 
(4)  Legal description and address of the site. 
(5)  The zone district and Comprehensive Land Use designation of the subject property. 
(D)  Application Process: 
(1)  An application for a conditional use shall be submitted to the Planning Manager. 
(2)  The application shall be reviewed by the Planning Manager or designee to determine that the conditions required by subsection (B) above have been met. Review of a conditional use to ensure compliance with the conditions established by this section shall be obtained prior to establishing any of the uses listed above. If the review determines that one or more of the conditions required to establish a conditional use have not been met, the City will notify the applicant in writing describing the condition or conditions that have not been satisfied. 
(3)  In the event a proposed use is allowed as a conditional use, no approval for a business license or building permit shall be issued until the conditional use has been reviewed by the City to ensure that the conditions established in this section have been met. 
(4)  In the event that an applicant requests a reasonable accommodation to the Code requirements for a group home, in addition to providing information listed in subsection (C) above, the applicant shall provide an explanation of the need for the reasonable accommodation addressing the following criteria: 
(a)  Demonstrate that the group home serves residents that meet the definition of disability in the federal Fair Housing Act. 
(b)  Demonstrate that there is a relationship between the disability and the need for the requested reasonable accommodation. 
(c)  Demonstrate that without the reasonable accommodation the property cannot be fully used by the residents. 
(d)  Demonstrate that the reasonable accommodation, if granted, will not adversely affect the use of adjacent property. 
(e)  Demonstrate that the reasonable accommodation, if granted, will not constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of any residents of the City. 
(f)  For group homes requesting a reasonable accommodation relief from the minimum 750-foot spacing requirement, demonstrate that adequate parking will be available for the group home's residents and employees. 
(5)  In order to grant any requested reasonable accommodation, the Planning Manager shall find that the criteria listed in subsection (4) above have been satisfied and that the reasonable accommodation will not fundamentally alter the intent or purposes of Title XI, W.M.C. 
(6)  An applicant may appeal a Planning Manager's denial of a request for reasonable accommodation by filing a written request for appeal to the City Manager within ten days of said denial, which appeal shall be decided by the City Manager within 30 days of its receipt. 
(E)  Transfer: A conditional use shall not be transferred to another person, business, or location. 
(F)  Termination: 
(1)  A conditional use shall terminate whenever the permitted use is inactive for a period of one year or more. 
(2)  A conditional use shall automatically terminate if the conditions of approval are no longer being met. 
(G)  Conditional Uses Permitted: Conditional uses listed in subsections (B)(1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) above that meet the requirements of this section may be located in any residential zone districts and residential areas of a PUD or SPD zone district. 
(2534 2975 3053 3497; Ord. No. 3869, § 4, 5-8-2017 ; Ord. No. 3926 , § 3, 3-26-2018) 
11-4-10. - Home Occupations. 
(A)  Occupations Permitted: Home occupations that meet the criteria of this chapter may be operated in connection with the occupation of a dwelling unit within any zoning district, including the residential areas of a PUD zone. 
(B)  Limitations to Home Occupations: The home occupations herein permitted shall only be operated subject to all of the following additional limitations: 
(1)  The use shall operate in its entirety within the dwelling unit and only by persons residing in the dwelling. 
(a)  With the exception of the use of outdoor swimming facilities for limited water safety instruction purposes, outdoor activity will be limited to the following: 
(i)  No more than two students instructed at any one time (preparing for the lesson or being instructed). 
(ii)  This activity can only be conducted during the months of April, May, June, July, August, September and October. 
(iii)  The participants must be no older than seven years of age. 
(iv)  Instruction may occur only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(v)  Any such home occupation shall be certified by the requirements of the American Red Cross or certified by programs such as the Infant Swimming Research Program. 
(2)  The use shall not have a separate entrance from outside the building, unless otherwise required by State law or regulation, except for the limited outdoor pool instruction noted in (1)(a) above, which may be accessed through an outside gate. 
(3)  The operator of the home occupation shall not display or create outside the building any external evidence of the operation of the home occupation, except one unanimated, non-illuminated flat wall or window sign having an area of not more than one square foot. 
(4)  The use shall not exclusively utilize more than 20 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling as defined by the International Building Code, or 300 square feet, whichever is less. A garage shall not be utilized for, or in conjunction with, a home occupation. 
(5)  The home occupation shall not employ, for a fee or otherwise, any person in the conduct of the home occupation who does not reside in the dwelling unit. 
(6)  No motors shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation, except electric motors having two horsepower or less. 
(7)  The home occupation shall clearly be incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and shall not change the character of the dwelling or of the neighborhood by excessive noise, lights, traffic, or other disturbances. 
(8)  An occupation, activity, or use that requires a special use permit pursuant to Section 11-4-8, W.M.C., is not a home occupation under this chapter. 
(C)  License Required: It shall be unlawful to operate a home occupation otherwise permitted under this Code without first obtaining a license for such occupation. Licensing procedures are established in Chapter 3 of Title V of this Code. 
(D)  Nuisance: A home occupation being conducted without a home occupation license or in violation of any provision of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to Title VIII, Chapter 4, of this Code. 
(2534) 
11-4-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3891, § 5, adopted June 26, 2017, repealed § 11-4-11, which pertained to Antennas, Towers and Telecommunication Facilities and derived from 2534 3135 3555 3586 3634. 
11-4-12. - Satellite Earth Stations. 
(A)  Purpose and Intent: The City hereby recognizes that satellite earth stations are an important means of audio and visual communication for the convenience of the public. It is the intent of this chapter to address the rights to use satellite earth stations; to promote the free flow of information; to encourage the development of new communication technologies and services; to insure that satellite earth stations do not negatively impact the public health, safety, visual environment and welfare of the community; to protect the public from the hazard of satellite earth stations that are structurally unsafe or that obscure the vision of motorists; and to promote the use of satellite earth stations that are well designed and compatible with the surroundings. 
(B)  Definitions: The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Neutral Color shall mean a color of a blending character that is unobtrusive and natural. 
    Satellite Earth Station shall mean an antenna, often dish-shaped, designed to receive television broadcasts. A satellite earth station has the following elements: a low-noise amplifier (LNA) that is situated at the focal point of the receiving component, and that magnifies and transfers signals; and a coaxial cable that carries signals to the interior of a building. Satellite earth station includes, but is not limited to, an antenna or satellite dish capable of receiving signals from direct broadcast satellites (DBS), multichannel multipoint distribution (wireless cable) providers (MMDS), and television broadcast stations (TVBS). 
(C)  Installation Permit Required: 
(1)  A satellite earth station shall be considered a structure. No person shall install a satellite earth station exceeding one meter (39 inches) or mounted on a mast higher than 12 feet in the City, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a building permit. 
(2)  A temporary use permit for use of a satellite earth station exceeding one meter (39 inches) or mounted on a mast higher than 12 feet may be obtained in nonresidential districts for a period not to exceed 30 days in any year. The Department of Community Development shall establish criteria for such permits for purposes that shall include, but not be limited to, teleconferencing. 
(3)  Procedures for obtaining a building permit or temporary use permit shall be established by the Department of Community Development. 
(4)  The fee for a building permit to install a satellite earth station exceeding one meter (39 inches) or mounted on a mast higher than 12 feet shall be $25.00 plus use tax pursuant to Chapter l2, Title V, of this Code. The fee for a building permit to install a temporary satellite earth station shall be $10.00. 
(5)  A current business license and contractor's license shall be required for any person installing a satellite earth station within the City limits of the City. 
(6)  The lawful use and location of any satellite earth station existing at the time of enactment of this section may be continued, even though such use or location does not conform to the requirements of this section. Ordinary repairs and maintenance of a nonconforming satellite earth station shall be permitted. Whenever a nonconforming satellite earth station has not been used for a period of one year, such use thereafter shall not be reestablished and any future use shall be in conformance with the provisions of this section. 
(D)  Restrictions on Satellite Earth Stations Installed in Residential Districts: 
(1)  Dimension. 
(a)  A satellite earth station antenna shall not exceed ten feet (10') in diameter or width or length. 
(b)  A satellite earth station shall not rise more than 13 feet from the ground in height. Height shall be measured vertically from the ground immediately adjacent to the base that supports the antenna to the highest point of the antenna or dish when positioned for operation. 
(2)  Location. 
(a)  Satellite earth stations shall be installed behind the front setback of the principal building. Not more than one satellite earth station may be installed on an individual lot. A satellite earth station may be located in the side setback of a corner lot when the rear setback location does not provide acceptable reception. Approval for a side setback installation shall be noted on the building permit. 
(b)  The minimum setback from the property line for a satellite earth station shall be ten feet, or as necessary for the maintenance of a clear vision zone for adjacent street traffic. 
(3)  Foundation. A satellite earth station shall be permanently ground mounted on a foundation that is adequate for design wind loads, pursuant to provisions of the International Building Code and local basic wind speed criteria. No satellite earth station may be installed or operated from a portable or movable structure, such as a trailer, except for temporary demonstration purposes not to exceed 72 hours. 
(4)  Electrical Connection. The electrical connection to the satellite earth station shall be low voltage direct or pulsed current; except that, where the device connected is Underwriter Laboratory approved, alternating current will be acceptable pursuant to National Electric Code requirements. 
(5)  Maintenance. Satellite earth stations shall be kept painted, clean and otherwise maintained in good condition. 
(6)  Chains or Gears Shall Not be Exposed. 
(7)  Color. A satellite earth station shall be a neutral color, black or earth tones. 
(8)  Satellite earth stations shall not be allowed to display any advertising in a residential district. 
(E)  Restrictions on Satellite Earth Stations Installed in Nonresidential Districts. 
(1)  Dimension. 
(a)  A satellite earth station foundation shall not exceed 13 feet in diameter or in width or in length. 
(b)  A ground mounted satellite earth station shall not rise more than 15 feetfeet in height. Height shall be measured vertically from the bottom ground immediately adjacent to the base that supports the antenna to the highest point of the antenna or dish when positioned for operation. 
(2)  Location. 
(a)  A satellite earth station shall be installed either to the rear or side of the building, and the support system shall be recessed, or it shall be mounted on the roof pursuant to subsection (E)(3) of this section. Approval for an installation that varies from this requirement shall be noted on the building permit. 
(b)  A ground mounted satellite earth station shall be no further from the building than is required for proper operation, and in no case shall the setback be less than the mounted height of the satellite earth station. 
(3)  Foundation or Mount. 
(a)  A satellite earth station foundation shall be stationary, unless approved for temporary use not to exceed 72 hours. The permanent foundation shall be adequate for design wind loads pursuant to the provision of the International Building Code and local basic wind speed criteria. 
(b)  A satellite earth station may be installed on the roof of a building no less than 25 feet from all sides of roof parapets, and shall be designed and constructed to resist all gravity loads and wind effects pursuant to the International Building Code. When deemed necessary by the Building Division, the City shall have the option to require that structural calculations be provided and stamped by a State-licensed engineer. 
(4)  Electrical Connection. The electrical connection to the satellite earth station shall be low voltage direct or pulsed current; except that, where the device connected is Underwriter Laboratory approved, alternating current will be acceptable pursuant to National Electric Code requirements. 
(5)  Maintenance. Satellite earth stations shall be kept painted, clean and otherwise maintained in good condition. 
(6)  Chains or Gears Shall Not be Exposed. 
(7)  Color. A satellite earth station shall be a neutral color, black or earth tones. 
(8)  Satellite earth stations shall not be allowed to display any advertising in a nonresidential district. 
(F)  Inspection: Every installation of a satellite earth station exceeding one meter (39 inches) or mounted on a mast higher than 12 feet shall be inspected by the Building Division. 
(G)  No exterior display or storage of satellite earth stations shall be allowed in conjunction with the wholesale and retail sale of satellite earth stations. 
(H)  Penalty: It shall be unlawful to violate a provision of this section. Any person convicted of a violation of this section may be fined an amount not to exceed $300.00. 
(I)  Variances: 
(1)  Any person may seek to vary the provision of subsection (D)(2) of this section by applying to the Planning Manager. The decision of the Planning Manager may be appealed to the Planning Commission. 
(2)  All requests to vary the setback requirements of subsection (D)(2) shall be made in writing on a form provided by the City. 
(3)  Special circumstances or conditions, such as the following, may justify the granting of a variance: 
(a)  Existence of buildings, topography, vegetation, satellite structures, or other matters on adjacent lots or within the adjacent public right-of-way that would substantially restrict the effectiveness of the satellite earth station. Such special circumstances or conditions must be peculiar to the particular residence, business, or enterprise of the applicant and not applicable generally to all residences, businesses, or enterprises. 
(b)  The variance, if authorized, will weaken neither the general purpose of the satellite earth station ordinance nor the regulations prescribed for the zoning district on which the satellite earth station is located. 
(c)  The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the zoning district in which the satellite earth station is located. 
(d)  The variance, if authorized, will not substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent conforming property. 
(2534 3555) 
11-4-13. - Adult Businesses. 
(A)  Findings of Fact: The City Council hereby finds: 
(1)  There are a substantial number of adult businesses in the Denver metropolitan area that require special supervision from the public safety agencies, in order to protect and preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the patrons of such businesses, as well as the citizens of the area. 
(2)  Adult businesses are frequently used for unlawful and unhealthful sexual activities, including prostitution and sexual liaisons of a casual nature. 
(3)  The concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate health concern of the City that demands reasonable regulation of adult businesses in order to protect the health and well-being of the citizens. 
(4)  There is convincing documented evidence that adult businesses, because of their very nature, have a deleterious effect on both the existing businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas, causing increased crime and the downgrading of property values. 
(5)  It is recognized that adult businesses, due to their nature, have serious objectionable characteristics, particularly when they are located in close proximity to each other, thereby contributing to urban blight and downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent area. 
(6)  The City Council desires to minimize and control these adverse effects and thereby protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry; protect the citizens from increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods and deter the spread of urban blight. 
(7)  The City Council has previously acted to regulate the location and operation of other types of businesses that cause secondary effects, such as pawnshops and social gaming outlets. This ordinance is part of an overall plan to improve and protect the quality of life from the secondary effects of a variety of activities through reasonable regulation and land use controls. 
(8)  It is not the intent of this ordinance to suppress any speech activities protected by the First Amendment, but to enact a content neutral ordinance that addresses the secondary effects of adult businesses. 
(9)  It is not the intent of the City Council to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material, and the Council recognizes that State law prohibits the distribution of obscene materials and expects and encourages law enforcement officials to enforce anti-obscenity laws against any such illegal activities that are now occurring or may occur in the future within the City. 
(B)  Purpose and Intent: It is the purpose of this ordinance to regulate adult businesses to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the continued deleterious location and concentration of adult businesses within the City. The provisions of this ordinance have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. It is not the intent nor effect of this ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(C)  Definitions: The definitions contained in Section 5-17-2, W.M.C., shall apply to the same terms found in this section. 
(D)  Location of Adult Businesses: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated an adult business outside a designated PUD district. All adult businesses shall be located within a PUD district and are subject to the same regulation as all other PUD uses. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated an adult business within 1,000 feet of: 
(a)  A church; 
(b)  A public or private preschool, day care center, elementary or secondary school; 
(c)  A public park; 
(d)  A boundary of any residential district; 
(e)  The property line of lot devoted to residential use, regardless of the zoning designation. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of an adult business within 1,000 feet of another adult business. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one adult business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor areas of any adult business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another adult business. 
(5)  For the purpose of this ordinance, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where an adult business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or private preschool, day care center, or elementary or secondary school, a public park, or to the nearest boundary of a residential district or residential lot. 
(6)  For purposes of subsection (3) of this section, the distance between any two adult businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(7)  Any adult business lawfully operating on September 25, 1990, that is in violation of subsection (1) through (6) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use shall be permitted to continue to operate unless abandoned as provided in Section 11-4-15, W.M.C. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. 
(8)  An adult business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location of a church, public or private preschool, day care center, or elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, or a residential lot within 1,000 feet of the adult business. This applies only to the renewal of a valid license and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after the license has expired or has been revoked. 
(E)  Exemptions: The restrictions contained in this section shall not apply to any business that is not required to be licensed pursuant to Chapter 23 of Title V. 
(F)  Penalties: It shall be unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this chapter or knowingly to permit any patron to violate the requirements of this chapter. Violators shall be subject to the penalties provided by Section 1-8-1, W.M.C., and may also be subject to civil remedies provided by Chapter 4 of Title VIII of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such person is in violation of this chapter. 
(G)  Severability. If any provision of this section is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, the remaining provisions of this section are valid, unless it appears to the court that the valid provisions of this section are so essentially and inseparably connected with, and so dependent upon, the void provision that it cannot be presumed that the City Council would have enacted the valid provisions without the void provision, or unless the court determines that the valid provisions, standing alone, are incomplete and are incapable of being executed in accordance with the legislative intent. 
(2534 2687 2975) 
11-4-14. - Land Use Regulation of Oil and Gas Operations. 
(A)  Purpose. This ordinance is enacted to protect and promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity or general welfare of the present and future residents of the City of Westminster, Colorado (hereinafter "the City"). It is City Council's intent by enacting this ordinance to mitigate potential land use conflicts arising as a result of the development of oil and gas resources within the City. 
    It is recognized that under Colorado law the surface and mineral estates are separate and distinct interests in land and that one may be severed from the other. Owners of subsurface mineral interests have certain legal rights and privileges, including the right to use that part of the surface estate reasonably required to extract and develop their subsurface mineral interests, subject to compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and any other applicable statutory and regulatory requirements. The State has a recognized interest in fostering the efficient development, production and utilization of oil and gas resources and in the prevention of waste and protection of the correlative rights of common source owners and producers to a fair and equitable share of production profits. Owners of surface estates have certain legal rights and privileges, including the right to have the mineral estates developed in a reasonable manner. Local governments have the recognized, traditional authority and responsibility to protect the health, safety and welfare of persons and property and to regulate land use within their jurisdictions. This ordinance is intended as an exercise of the City's police power and regulatory authority to ensure the compatible coexistence of oil and gas drilling and extraction activities with residential, commercial and other types of development within the City. 
(B)  Definitions: All terms used in this chapter that are defined in the Act or in Commission regulations and are not otherwise defined in this section shall be defined as provided in the Act or in Commission regulations in effect as of the date of this Ordinance. All other terms used in this chapter shall be given their usual, customary and accepted meaning, and all words of a technical nature, or peculiar to the oil and gas industry, shall be given that meaning that is generally accepted in said oil and gas industry. 
    Accessory Equipment shall mean any equipment that is integral to the production and operation of an oil or gas well, including but not limited to, tanks, treaters, separators and production pits. 
    Act shall mean the Oil and Gas Conservation Act of the State of Colorado, as from time to time amended. 
    Berm shall mean an earthen barrier of compacted soils preventing the passage of liquid materials, or providing screening from adjacent uses, as may be specified in an applicable design standard. 
    Code shall mean the City of Westminster Municipal Code. 
    Commission or OGCC shall mean the Oil and Gas Conservation Commission of the State of Colorado. 
    Developing Area shall mean an area of at least one square mile of land that is determined by the Planning Commission to contain an average residential density of less than one dwelling unit per two and one-half (2.5) acres or to contain less than an average of 50,000 square feet of gross floor area devoted to non-residential structures that require a certificate of occupancy. 
    Injection Well shall mean any hole drilled into the earth into which fluids are injected for the purposes of secondary recovery, storage, or disposal, pursuant to authorizations granted by the OGCC. 
    Inspector shall mean any person designated by the City Manager, or designee thereof, who shall have the authority to inspect a well site or production site to determine compliance with this chapter and other applicable ordinances of the City. 
    Oil and Gas Well shall mean a hole drilled into the earth for the purpose of exploring for or extracting oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substances. 
    Operating Plan shall mean a general description of an oil or gas well facility identifying purpose, use, typical staffing pattern, seasonal or periodic considerations, routine hours of operation, source of services, infrastructure, and any other information related to regular functioning of such facility. 
    Operator shall mean the person designated as operator in OGCC Form 2 or a subsequently filed OGCC Form 10. 
    Owner shall mean any person with a working interest ownership in the oil and gas well or a leasehold interest therein. 
    Production Pits shall mean those pits used for initial settling, temporary storage, or disposal of produced water by permeation or evaporation after drilling and initial completion of a well. 
    Production Site shall mean the surface area immediately surrounding proposed or existing production pits, or other accessory equipment necessary for oil and gas production activities, exclusive of transmission and gathering pipelines. 
    Reentering shall mean accessing an existing well bore for either the original or amended purpose when such well has not been abandoned. 
    Sidetracking shall mean entering the same well from the surface, but not necessarily following the same well bore throughout its subsurface extent, when deviation from such well bore is necessary to reach the objective depth. 
    Treatment Facilities shall mean any plant, equipment or other works used for the purpose of treating, separating or stabilizing any substance produced from a well. 
    Twinning shall mean the drilling of a well adjacent to or near an existing well when the existing well cannot be drilled to the objective depth and/or produced due to an engineering problem, such as collapsed casing or formation damage. 
    Urbanized Area shall mean an area of a minimum of one square mile of land that is determined by the Planning Commission to contain an average residential density equal to or greater than one dwelling unit per two and one-half acres or to contain an average of 50,000 square feet or greater of gross floor area devoted to non-residential structures. 
    Well shall mean an oil and gas well or an injection well. 
    Well Head shall mean the equipment attaching the surface equipment to wellbore equipment at the well. 
    Well Site shall mean that area surrounding a proposed or existing well or wells and accessory structures, containment berm and equipment necessary for drilling completion, recompletion, workover, development, and production activities. 
(C)  General Provisions: 
(1)  Violations. Within all zoning districts, it shall be unlawful for any person to drill a well, or reactivate a plugged or abandoned well, or extract resources from a well, or install accessory equipment or pumping systems unless an Official Development Plan (hereinafter "ODP") authorizing such activity or use has first been granted by the City in accordance with the procedures defined in this chapter. This prohibition shall not apply to a well that has been approved by the City in an ODP prior to the effective date of this chapter. When a well has been approved pursuant to this chapter, the twinning, sidetracking, or reentering of such well for the purposes of deepening, recompleting, or reworking shall not require a subsequent approval under this chapter. The approval of such ODP shall not relieve the owner or operator from otherwise complying with all applicable regulatory requirements of the City, State of Colorado and United States. 
(2)  Inspections. In recognition of the potential impacts associated with oil and gas drilling and well operation in an urban setting, all wells and accessory equipment and structures shall be subject to inspection by the inspectors of the City at reasonable times to determine compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter, the International Fire Code, the International Building Code, and other applicable City health/safety standards. For the purpose of implementing and enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the City personnel have the right to enter upon private property after reasonable notification to the operator, which provides the operator an opportunity to be present. 
(3)  Sales and Use Tax License. An operator of a well subject to the provisions of this chapter shall at all times have a valid City sales and use tax license. Such license may be obtained by filing an application with the City Clerk. All operators must comply with applicable provisions of Title IV of this Code relating to taxation. 
(4)  Building Permit. Building permits shall be obtained prior to the construction of any above-ground structure to the extent required by the City Building Code then in effect. 
(D)  Application Elements: An application for an ODP pursuant to this chapter shall be filed with the City Department of Community Development and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Site Plan. The site plan shall be submitted in accordance with the format prescribed for an ODP application in Title XI of the Code, showing: 
(a)  A legal description of the property upon which the well site and production site are to be situated, 
(b)  A true north arrow, 
(c)  The location of the proposed well site and production site, including well, twinning locations, motors, tank battery, separators and treaters, storage facilities, production pits, containment berm, transmission and gathering pipelines and other accessory equipment to be used during the drilling, maintenance and operation of the proposed well, 
(d)  The location of all other proposed structures, including fencing and signs, 
(e)  All proposed access ways associated with the well site and production site, 
(f)  Intended color of paint for storage tanks and other permanent structures, fencing and berming for the site, 
(g)  A description and location of proposed landscaping, 
(h)  All existing physical features, including drainageways, floodplains, roads and rights-of-way, designated wild-life areas, trees and City open-space, parks and recreation property within 1,000 feet of a well site or production site, 
(i)  Existing subdivision boundaries, buildings, structures, property lines, public and private utility easements of record and utility facilities and improvements within 400 feet of the well site or production site, 
(j)  The signature and seal of a professional land surveyor, and 
(k)  Any other information required by the provisions of this title relating to the content of an application for an ODP. 
(2)  Vicinity Maps. Vicinity maps shall be submitted with the application for an ODP on one or more maps or plats showing the following: 
(a)  Location of all existing bodies of water and watercourses, including direction of water flow. This information shall be submitted on United States Geological Service (USGS) 7.5 minute series, assessor base maps that indicate topographic detail and show all existing bodies of water and watercourses with a physically defined channel within a 1,000-foot radius of the proposed well. 
(b)  Location of existing oil and gas wells as reflected in OGCC records. This information shall be submitted on a map and shall include any and all wells (including abandoned wells) within a 1,000-foot radius of the proposed location for the well. 
(c)  Location of proposed well site and proposed production site. This information shall be that contained on OGCC Form 2 and shall be graphically depicted on a map of the section in which the sites are to be located and shall include the parcel tax identification number of the property on which the sites are to be located. 
(3)  Narrative Elements. In addition to the site plans and the vicinity maps required in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, the application shall also include: 
(a)  The names and addresses of the operator and surface owner, and copies of any lease agreements with the surface owner and applicable OGCC Forms 1 and 2. 
(b)  An operating plan. 
(c)  A listing of all permits or approvals obtained or yet to be obtained from local, State or federal agencies other than OGCC. 
(d)  An emergency response plan that includes, but is not limited to, a listing of local telephone numbers of the public and private entities and individuals to be notified in the event of an emergency, a description of the best emergency access to the well, drilling equipment and related facilities and structures, and a description of arrangements that will be made to allow access by emergency response personnel to secured facilities. 
(e)  A plan for weed control at the well site. 
(f)  A schedule of drilling and anticipated completion events related to the proposed well. 
(g)  The drainage and erosion control plan for on-site and off-site drainage. 
(h)  A site reclamation and restoration plan including the reclamation schedule. 
(i)  A waste disposal plan. 
(E)  Application Fee: An application for review of an ODP pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee of $1,000.00. The fee shall not be refunded if the application is withdrawn or denied. 
(F)  Determination of Application: 
(1)  The City shall approve an application for an ODP filed pursuant to this chapter if the application meets the following requirements: 
(a)  The application submission requirements set forth in Sections 11-4-14(D) and 11-4-14(E), W.M.C., 
(b)  The applicable development standards contained in subsections 11-4-14(I) and 11-4-14(J), W.M.C., and 
(c)  The International Building Code and International Fire Code requirements. 
(2)  The City shall deny an application for an ODP filed pursuant to this chapter that does not meet the requirements listed above. 
(3)  The City's determination of the application shall be made pursuant to the procedures set forth in this title for approval of an ODP, except that a hearing before the City Planning Commission shall be required on any application filed under this chapter. 
(G)  Variances From Development Standard: 
(1)  The City Council shall grant a variance from a development standard in either of the following cases: 
(a)  The applicant establishes that a particular application of a development standard to the applicant's property results in a direct conflict with the statutory responsibilities of the Commission; or 
(b)  The applicant establishes that a particular application of a development standard to the applicant's property constitutes a taking or damage in violation of the United States Constitution or Article 2, Section 3 of the Colorado Constitution. 
(2)  The City Council may grant a variance from a development standard if it finds that the requirements set forth in Section 2-2-8(B), W.M.C., have been met. 
(H)  Notice to Proceed: Prior to commencement of operations for which an ODP has been granted, a "Notice to Proceed" shall be obtained from the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. The following documentation must be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of the Notice to Proceed: 
(1)  A copy of the City Council ordinance approving an ODP for the well, 
(2)  A copy of the City sales and use tax license, 
(3)  A copy of all necessary state or federal permits issued for the oil or gas operation, if not previously submitted. 
(I)  Development Standards: 
(1)  Well Site and Production Site Setbacks. In all areas of the City, the following shall apply: 
(a)  A well site shall be set back a minimum of 350 feet from any occupied building or building permitted for construction and shall be set back a minimum of 75 feet from any public right-of-way. 
(b)  A production site shall be set back a minimum of 350 feet from any occupied building or building permitted for construction and shall be set back a minimum of 75 feet from any public right-of-way. 
(2)  Production Site Containment. 
(a)  To the maximum extent possible, all accessory equipment shall be located within a central battery area that conforms to the production site setback requirements. 
(b)  All permanent production tanks shall be located within a containment berm. Such containment berm shall be designed to permit reasonable and adequate access and service. The containment berm shall be so designed to be capable of impounding an amount of fluid equal to 100 percent of the capacity of the largest tank within said berm. 
(3)  Noise Regulation. 
(a)  State law and regulations concerning noise abatement (Title 25, Article 12, C.R.S.) shall apply to all operations, together with applicable local government ordinances, rules or regulations. 
(b)  Exhaust from all engines, motors, coolers and other mechanized equipment shall be vented in a direction away from all occupied buildings to the extent practicable. 
(c)  All power sources used in pumping and production operations shall have electric motors or muffled internal combustion engines. 
(4)  Special Mitigation Measures-Noise. 
(a)  Where a well site or production site is located in an area of particular noise sensitivity, additional noise mitigation may be required. An area of particular noise sensitivity includes without limitation an area that includes the following: a hospital, a school, dwelling units, a nursing home, a hotel, a church, and designated wildlife preserves, open space, parks, and recreation areas. 
(b)  In determining the need for special noise mitigation, specific site characteristics shall be considered, including, but not limited to, the nature and proximity of adjacent development, prevailing weather patterns, vegetative cover and topography. 
(c)  One or more of the following additional noise abatement measures may be required: 
(i)  Acoustically insulated housing or cover enclosing a motor or engine; 
(ii)  Noise management plan identifying hours of maximum noise emissions, type, frequency, level of noise to be emitted, and proposed mitigation measures, or 
(iii)  Any abatement measures required by OGCC for high density areas, if applicable. 
(5)  Visual Impacts and Aesthetics. In all areas of the City, the following shall apply: 
(a)  To the maximum extent practicable, a well site and production site shall be located away from prominent natural features, such as distinctive rock and land forms, vegetative patterns, river crossings, City-owned and designated open space, parks and recreation areas, and other designated landmarks. 
(b)  To the maximum extent possible, a well site and production site shall be located to avoid the tops of hills and ridges, in order to prevent the appearance of pumpjack and accessory equipment profiles on the horizon. 
(c)  Electric pumping systems shall be required in areas where feasible. 
(d)  In urbanized areas, no tanks located in a production site shall exceed six feet in height. In developing areas, no tanks located in a production site shall exceed nine feet in height. 
(e)  In urbanized areas, no treatment facilities located in a production site shall exceed six feet in height, with the exception of venting pipes which shall not exceed 16 feet in height. In developing areas, no treatment facilities located in a production site shall exceed nine feet in height, with the exception of venting pipes, which shall not exceed 16 feet in height. 
(f)  To the maximum extent possible, the applicant shall locate facilities at the base of slopes to provide a background of topography and/or natural cover. 
(g)  To the maximum extent possible, the applicant shall align access roads to follow existing grades and minimize cuts and fills. 
(h)  Facilities shall be painted as follows: 
(i)  Uniform, non-contrasting, non-reflective color tones, similar to Munsell Soil Color coding system. 
(ii)  Color matched to land, not sky, slightly darker than adjacent landscape. 
(iii)  Exposed concrete colored to match soil color. 
(i)  Electrical lines servicing pumping and accessory equipment shall be installed below ground only. 
(j)  Oil and gas shall be transported from a well to treatment facilities by buried pipeline, unless an above-ground line is approved by the City. 
(k)  After commencement of production operations, all excavation slopes, both cut and fill, shall be planted and maintained with grasses, plants, or shrubs for the purposes of adequate erosion control. 
(6)  Special Mitigation Measures-Visual. In urbanized areas, the applicant shall be required to submit a Visual Mitigation Plan, including one or more of the following standards, as appropriate: 
(a)  All pumping systems and accessory equipment used in the operation of a completed well shall be screened on all sides by a fence of a height equal to the highest accessory equipment, with the exception of venting pipes associated with said equipment. The owner shall be responsible for landscaping the perimeter of the fence immediately surrounding the well site and production site. The design and specific material used for the fence and landscaping shall be determined by the Planning Commission during the review process, based on compatibility with adjacent development. 
(b)  To the maximum extent practicable, exterior lighting shall be directed away from residential areas, or shielded from said areas to eliminate glare. 
(c)  The applicant shall be required to provide one or more of the following landscaping practices, on a site specific basis: 
(i)  Establishment and proper maintenance of ground covers, shrubs, trees; 
(ii)  Shaping cuts and fills to appear as natural forms; 
(iii)  Cutting rock areas to create irregular forms; 
(iv)  Designing the facility to utilize natural screens, or 
(v)  Construction of fences for use with or instead of landscaping. 
(d)  To the maximum extent possible under O.G.C.C. rules and regulations, the location of the well site and production site shall be compatible with the uses designated for the surface estate. 
(J)  Open Space, Parks and Recreation Areas: City-owned open space, parks, or recreation areas shall be subject to the following special requirements: 
(1)  Whenever possible, drilling and production operations shall be located and conducted so as to prevent or minimize effects on trails, recreational activities, trees, grasses, water bodies, wetlands, flora and fauna, stream boundaries, and the natural condition of the land. 
(2)  Development standards in this chapter that apply to an "urbanized area" shall also apply to City-owned open space, parks and recreation areas. 
(3)  Whenever possible, in order to minimize surface impact, the applicant shall develop multiple reservoirs or locations by drilling from common pads or by multiple completions or commingling in existing wellbores, provided such operations are authorized by the OGCC. 
(4)  Concrete pads or barriers underlying tanks shall be required where necessary to prevent seepage or infiltration. 
(5)  Access roads on the property shall be located and constructed pursuant to City requirements. Security fences and gates shall be installed as required by the City, in order to control public access to the property. 
(6)  A detailed reclamation and restoration plan shall be submitted with the application. The plan shall meet or exceed City reseeding standards and shall provide for the complete reclamation of the site in a reasonable period of time to the same or a better condition than existed prior to the commencement of operations in a manner approved by the City. 
(7)  The applicant shall also submit an Irrevocable Letter of Credit, Performance and Reclamation Bond or other security, in form and content acceptable to the City Attorney, in the amount of $5,000.00 per well, to cover the costs of reclamation, and a copy of an insurance policy in an amount sufficient to insure the applicant against all claims or causes of action for damages to persons or property, including environmental damage, arising out of its drilling, operation or production activities. The City shall be named as an additional insured on this insurance policy. 
(K)  Compliance eith State Environmental Requirements: The approval of an ODP pursuant to this chapter shall not relieve the operator from complying with all applicable City, State and federal statutes, regulations and standards concerning air quality, water quality, ground contamination and waste disposal. 
(L)  Abandonment and Plugging of Wells: The approval of an ODP shall not relieve the operator from complying with all OGCC rules with respect to abandonment and plugging of wells. The operator shall provide the City with Commission Form 4 at the time that it is filed with the Commission. 
(M)  Seismic Operations: The approval of an oil and gas permit shall not relieve the operator from complying with all OGCC rules with respect to seismic operations. All notices that an operator is required to file with the Commission with respect to seismic operations shall be filed with the City on a timely basis. The City shall comply with the same confidentiality requirements that bind the Commission. 
(N)  Signage: The approval of an oil and gas permit shall not relieve the operator from complying with all OGCC rules with respect to signs. In addition, the owner or operator shall maintain in good, readable condition all signs required by such Commission regulations. 
(O)  Reclamation: The approval of an ODP shall not relieve the operator from complying with all Commission rules with respect to site reclamation. 
(P)  Floodplain Regulations: The well site and production site shall comply with the floodplain regulations of this Code. 
(Q)  Access Roads: 
(1)  All private roads used to access a well site or a production site shall be improved prior to the drilling of the well and maintained according to the following standards: 
(a)  Access roads to the production site shall be subject to review by the City Engineer in accordance with City standards and specifications and the following minimum standards: 
(i)  A graded roadway having a prepared subgrade and an aggregate base course surface a minimum of six inches thick compacted to a minimum density of 95 percent of the maximum density determined in accordance with generally accepted engineering sampling and testing procedures approved by the Department of Community Development. The aggregate material, at a minimum, shall meet the requirements for Class 3, Aggregate Base Course, as specified in the Colorado Department of Transportation's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction" latest edition. 
(ii)  Graded so as to provide drainage from the roadway surface and constructed to allow for cross drainage of waterways (i.e., roadside swales, gulches, rivers, creeks, etc.) by means of an adequate culvert pipe. Adequacy of the pipe shall be subject to approval by the Department of Community Development. 
(iii)  Constructed so as to provide surface widths and clearances sufficient to accommodate City fire equipment. 
(iv)  Maintained so as to provide a passable roadway generally free of ruts and of snow. 
(b)  Access roads to well sites shall be subject to review by the City Engineer in accordance with the following minimum standards: 
(i)  A graded, dirt roadway compacted to a minimum density of 95 percent of the maximum density determined in accordance with generally accepted engineering sampling and testing procedures. 
(ii)  Graded so as to provide drainage from the roadway surface and constructed to allow for cross drainage of waterways by means of an adequate culvert pipe. Adequacy of the pipe shall be subject to approval by the Department of Community Development. 
(iii)  Constructed so as to provide surface widths and clearances sufficient to accommodate City fire equipment. 
(iv)  Maintained so as to provide a passable roadway generally free of ruts and of snow. 
(R)  Wildlife Impact Mitigation: 
(1)  When a well site or production site is located in a significant wildlife habitat, as defined by the Colorado Division of Wildlife, the applicant shall consult with the Division of Wildlife to obtain recommendations for appropriate site specific and cumulative impact mitigation procedures. The operator or owner shall implement such procedures as recommended by the Division of Wildlife after consultation with the City. 
(2)  The applicant shall not engage in activities that the Colorado Division of Wildlife determines threaten endangered species. 
(S)  Emergency Response Costs: The operator shall reimburse the City for any emergency response costs incurred by the City in connection with activity at the well site or production site, except that the operator shall not be required to pay for emergency response costs where the response was precipitated by the mistake of the City or a third party. 
(T)  Enforcement: 
(1)  Penalty. Any person that violates any provision of this chapter or a condition or requirement of an ODP approved pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(2)  Civil Action. In addition to other remedies provided by law, the City Attorney may institute an action for injunction or abatement, or other appropriate action or proceeding, to remedy a violation of this chapter or a violation of a condition or requirement of an ODP approved pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)  False or Inaccurate Information. The City may revoke approval of an ODP if it is determined at a public meeting, held after at least ten days' notice to the applicant, that the applicant provided information and/or documentation upon which approval was based, which the applicant, its agents, servants or employees, knew, or reasonably should have known, was false, misleading, deceptive, or inaccurate. 
(U)  Severability: If any provision of this chapter is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the remaining provisions of this chapter will remain valid, it being the intent of the City that the provisions of this chapter are severable. 
(2534) 
11-4-15. - Nonconforming Uses and Structures. 
(A)  Continuing Uses: Except as provided in this section, the lawful use and location of any structures existing at the time of enactment of this chapter, or any amendments thereto, may be continued, even though such use or location does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(B)  Repairs and Maintenance: Ordinary repairs and maintenance of a nonconforming building shall be permitted. 
(C)  Restoration: A nonconforming structure that has been damaged by fire or other causes may be restored to its original condition, provided such work is commenced within one year of such calamity and cost of repairing such structure does not exceed 50 percent of the total replacement cost of the structure. 
(D)  Abandonment: Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of one year, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished, and any future use shall be in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, except as provided in subsection (C) above. 
(E)  Change in Use: A nonconforming use shall not be changed to a use of less restrictive classification; such nonconforming use may, however, be changed to another use of the same or more restrictive classification. 
(F)  Extensions: A nonconforming use shall not be extended. 
(G)  Conforming Uses Made Nonconforming by Public Projects: If a conforming use is made nonconforming due to a purchase or condemnation of land by a public entity for the purpose of constructing a public improvement, the following exemptions from this section shall apply: 
(1)  If a use is made nonconforming due to loss of required parking spaces, the structure may be restored pursuant to subsection (C) up to and including 100 percent of the total replacement cost. Such use shall be subject to subsections (E) and (F), unless the change in use or extension is otherwise permitted by this Code and would not require additional parking spaces. The use shall not be subject to subsection (D). 
(2)  If a use is made nonconforming due to encroachment into a required setback, the structure may be restored pursuant to subsection (C) up to and including 100 percent of the total replacement cost. Such use shall be exempt from subsections (D), (E) and (F), except that no extension of the use shall encroach further into the setback than was previously encroached upon as a result of the public improvement project. 
(3)  The exemptions contained in this subsection (G) shall apply only in the Westminster Urban Renewal area, as defined by the Westminster Urban Renewal Plan, adopted pursuant to Resolution No. 43, Series of 1992, as enacted by the Westminster City Council. 
(2534) 
11-4-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3919 , § 4, adopted Feb. 26, 2018, repealed § 11-4-16, which pertained to adoption, implementation and compliance with City's Comprehensive Plan and derived from Ords. 2534, 3770. 
11-4-17. - Temporary Uses on Private Property. 
(A)  Scope: A temporary use permit allows for the displaying, selling, offering for sale, offering to give away or giving away of anything of value, including any good, service or amusement that is not permanent in nature and does not involve any permanent structure, but which occupies any single location within the City for more than two hours at a time. Examples include a Christmas tree lot, pumpkin patch, parking lot sale, carnival and other promotional use involving a temporary outdoor display, wagon, handcart, pushcart or motor vehicle. The selling or giving away of used merchandise is not permitted as a temporary use. 
(B)  Zoning Compliance: All temporary uses conducted pursuant to this chapter shall conform to the zoning provisions of this Code, including the Sign Code, unless otherwise provided herein. 
(C)  Time Period: The temporary use permit shall designate the specific location for the use and the time period for which the permit is to be issued. Permits may not be issued for any temporary use for more than 60 days per calendar year. The 60 days may run consecutively or be broken into increments, such as weekends; however, because of the intended temporary nature of the use, incremental periods shall not extend beyond 30 cumulative weeks or weekends per calendar year. 
(D)  Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a temporary use within the city limits of Westminster without first obtaining a permit as provided herein. 
(E)  Exemptions: 
(1)  This section does not apply to persons who knock on the door or otherwise attempt to contact or speak to the occupant of a private residence for the purpose of: (a) selling, distributing or offering to sell or distribute, services, food, beverages, goods or merchandise, or (b) distributing information about services, food, beverages, goods or merchandise, or (c) inviting or attempting to discuss verbally or in written form, ideas and issues, or (d) distributing written information, or (e) seeking funds or other forms of assistance. 
(2)  This section shall not be construed to require a temporary use permit for the temporary outdoor extension of regular indoor commercial activity, such as a sidewalk sale, so long as the outdoor use is allowed pursuant to the zoning for the property. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to yard sales, garage sales or estate sales in a residential area, unless such a sale is subject to the sales and use tax provisions of this Code. Children selling drinks, such as lemonade, at their own homes shall be exempted from the application of this chapter. 
(4)  This section shall not apply to the temporary use of parks, community buildings and recreational facilities, which are addressed in Chapter 2 of Title XIII. 
(F)  Application: An applicant for a temporary use permit shall submit to the Community Development Department a completed, signed application on a form to be furnished by the Planning Division, as well as the following information: 
(1)  Written authorization from the real property owner of the applicant's right to use such property. 
(2)  A written description of the nature of the activity. 
(3)  An illustration or picture of any proposed stand, including measurements. 
(4)  An illustration or picture of any proposed signage, including measurements. 
(5)  When requested, a list of the individuals or employees who will be operating on behalf of the business within the City. 
(6)  Documentation of nonprofit tax status, if applicable. 
(7)  Site plan to include: 
(a)  The location where the activity will be conducted; 
(b)  All buildings and structures, including entrance and exit locations; 
(c)  All parking spaces, drive aisles, and emergency access aisles, including any area proposed to be blocked off or barricaded for the activity and method of barricade; 
(d)  All trash enclosures or receptacles; 
(e)  Location of on-site restrooms to be available to employees and/or the public, if any; 
(f)  All landscaped areas; 
(g)  All freestanding light fixtures; and 
(h)  All freestanding signs. 
(8)  Additional information, as needed, to assess the proposed temporary use. 
(G)  Conditions of Approval: All temporary uses must meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The temporary outdoor use is of a seasonal or special event nature; 
(2)  All structures subject to any building, construction or fire codes shall comply with such codes; 
(3)  Permitted signage may include: 
(a)  One wall sign. The wall sign shall be no larger than 20 square feet, inclusive of frame. The wall sign shall be securely attached to a structure used in conjunction with the temporary use or a primary building structure. In no event shall a wall sign be attached to any structure in the public right-of-way. If the wall sign is to be attached to the primary building, written permission from the owner of such building is required. 
(b)  Up to three incidental signs, such as menu boards or hours of operation, securely affixed to a structure used in conjunction with the temporary use. Each sign shall not exceed two square feet. 
(4)  The location of the use shall not obstruct any sight visibility triangle. 
(5)  If customers are required to park in order to gain access to the temporary use location, sufficient parking, as determined by the Planning Manager or his/her designee, is available without interfering with the public rights-of-way on sidewalks or streets and without requiring customers to park at another location on private property without the consent of the property owner. A parking study or traffic study may be required. 
(6)  Safe access is available by vehicular and pedestrian traffic to the temporary use location without requiring illegal or unsafe turning movements by vehicles or trespass across private property without the consent of the property owner. 
(7)  The use shall not: 
(a)  Impede access to the entrance of any adjacent building or driveway, 
(b)  Be located in such a manner as to interfere with a fire hydrant, fire escape, bus stop, loading zone, or driveway of a fire station, police station, hospital or handicapped parking space or access ramp. 
(8)  Adequate trash receptacles shall be provided, as determined by the Planning Manager or his/her designee. 
(9)  Adequate restroom facilities, if needed, as determined by the City, shall be provided either within an existing building or as port-o-lets. 
(10)  If needed, as determined by the City, adequate barriers and directional signs shall be installed. 
(11)  All other permits and licenses as required by the City for the use have been applied for or obtained. 
(H)  Review and Issuance of Permit: Upon receipt of an application for a temporary use permit, the application shall be reviewed by the Department of Community Development and referred to other departments as needed for review. 
(1)  If the review determines that one or more of the conditions in (G) above have not been met, the Planning Division will notify the applicant in writing describing the condition or conditions that have not been satisfied. 
(2)  An application for a temporary use permit may be denied if any of the conditions in (G) above have not been met, as determined by the Planning Manager or his/her designee. The applicant may appeal a denial to the City Manager, who shall have the final decision. 
(3)  No approval for any business license or building permit shall be issued until the temporary use has been reviewed and approved by the City to insure that the conditions established in this section have been met. 
(4)  The permit shall be issued in the individual's name, except as otherwise provided herein. Any permit issued to a firm, association or corporation shall include the name of the authorized representative of the firm, association or corporation, which representative's name shall appear on the application, badge, and permit. No other representative of the same firm, association or corporation shall use the same permit, except as provided in this section. 
(a)  If a firm, association or corporation applies for and is granted a permit at the fee set forth in this chapter, it shall obtain badges that identify such entity for purposes of identification and enforcement for its employees under its permit. 
(b)  Each business applying for a permit, and wishing to permit employees pursuant to such temporary permit, shall provide such proof as may be required by the City Manager to demonstrate that it is a bona fide business entity separate from its alleged employees. 
(I)  Issuance of a permit under this chapter does not in any way relieve an applicant from responsibility for obtaining permission from respective property owners to set up displays and sell goods on private property. 
(J)  Conditions of Operation: 
(1)  If permitted, each permittee shall carry his or her permit at all times while engaged in the temporary use and shall display it upon request. 
(2)  A permit shall be not be transferable to any other location or used by any other person or other legal entity, except as provided in this section. 
(3)  Temporary uses may operate at times other than the permanent on-site user, subject to City review and approval. 
(4)  All trash or debris accumulation caused by a permittee's activities shall be collected and deposited in a proper trash container daily. Any accumulation of trash or debris that causes the City to incur expense in removing the accumulation shall be cause for the City to revoke the temporary use permit. 
(5)  A sales and use tax license shall be obtained, and sales and use taxes shall be paid upon the schedule set by this Code. 
(6)  Any permittee issued a permit under this chapter shall comply with all Code requirements, conditions of such permit, and all applicable laws of the City of Westminster and the State of Colorado. 
(7)  The permittee shall return the property to its original condition upon conclusion of doing business on the site. 
(K)  Fees: The fee to be charged upon application of a temporary use permit shall be as outlined in the Land Use and Development Review Fee Schedule of the City, as amended. 
(L)  Inspection: Upon request from a City official who presents his or her City identification, the permittee or permittee's employee shall produce his or her permit and property for inspection. 
(M)  Revocation and Termination: If, upon inspection by a City official, a permittee is found to be operating in an unsafe or unlawful manner, or violating any provisions of the Code or the subject permit conditions, a permit may be immediately revoked and denied renewal. In such event, the temporary use shall immediately cease and the permittee shall return the property to its original condition. 
(N)  Violation and Penalty: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this chapter. Violators shall be subject to the penalties provided under Title I of this Code and may also be subject to civil remedies provided by Title IX of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such person is in violation of this chapter. 
(2)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to alter or amend Section 6-3-5, Trespassing, W.M.C. 
(1959 3017 3563) 
CHAPTER 5. - DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3919 , § 5, adopted Feb. 26, 2018, retitled Ch. 5 from "Procedures and Requirements for the Approval of Annexations, Rezonings, Development Plans, and Plats" to read as herein set out. 

11-5-1. - Annexations. 
    The annexation of property to the City shall occur pursuant to and be governed by the provisions of Sections 31-12-101, et seq., C.R.S., also known as the Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as the same may from time to time be amended. 
(2534) 
11-5-2. - Rezoning requirement. 
(A)  No zoning or rezoning for any property within the City shall be granted unless the zoning or rezoning is to Planned Unit Development, Specific Plan District, or O1, provided, however: 
(1)  For property without Planned Unit Development or Specific Plan zoning, such property may be rezoned to a zoning classification other than Planned Unit Development or Specific Development, if such property is: 
(a)  Less than two acres; and 
(b)  Previously developed or partially developed, or, if undeveloped, such property abuts an existing zone of the same zone being requested. 
(2)  For property with current Planned Unit Development zoning, such property may be rezoned to a zoning classification other than Planned Unit Development or Specific Plan, at the discretion of City Council, based on Council's finding of all of the following conditions: 
(a)  The surrounding land uses are zoned for residential use or are zoned O1; 
(b)  The size of the property is not more than two acres in size; 
(c)  The change in zoning to a zoning other than Planned Unit Development will not adversely impact the surrounding neighborhood; and 
(d)  the proposed zoning will result in a project of lower residential density than the PUD existing at the time. 
(B)  Any application for zoning or rezoning, including any City-initiated zoning or rezoning, shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 11-5-13, W.M.C. Individual land uses within a Planned Unit Development district may be added or changed pursuant to approval, by motion of City Council, of an Amended Preliminary Development Plan setting forth the permitted land uses within the Planned Unit Development. Individual land uses within a Specific Plan District may be added or changed pursuant to approval, by motion of City Council, of a Specific Plan Amendment setting forth the permitted land uses within the Specific Plan District. No zoning or rezoning of one zoning district to another shall be effective, except pursuant to a duly adopted ordinance of the City Council. Preliminary and Official Development Plans, and amendments thereto, may be approved by motion of the City Council. 
(C)  A non-refundable application fee as specified in the Land Use and Development Review Fee Schedule set forth in Section 11-1-6, W.M.C., shall be paid at the time of application for any rezoning from one classification to another. 
(2534 2598 3739) 
11-5-3. - Standards for Approval of Zonings and Rezonings. 
(A)  The following criteria shall be considered in the approval of any application for zoning or rezoning to a zoning district other than Planned Unit Development (PUD): 
(1)  The proposed zoning or rezoning is in conformance with the City's Comprehensive Plan and all City policies, standards and sound planning principles and practice. 
(2)  There is either existing capacity in the City's street, drainage and utility systems to accommodate the proposed zoning or rezoning, or arrangements have been made to provide such capacity in a manner and timeframe acceptable to City Council. 
(B)  The City may initiate a rezoning of any property in the City without the consent of the property owner, including property annexed or being annexed to the City, provided a City-initiated zoning or rezoning shall not take effect unless City Council finds, as part of the final rezoning ordinance, at least one of the following: 
(1)  The current zoning is inconsistent with one or more of the goals or objectives of the City's Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
(2)  The current zoning is incompatible with one or more of the surrounding land uses, either existing or approved. 
(3)  The surrounding development is or may be adversely impacted by the current zoning. 
(4)  The City's water, sewer or other services are or would be significantly and negatively impacted by the current zoning and the property is not currently being served by the City. 
(C)  Any City-initiated rezoning shall satisfy the standards set forth in subsection (A) above. 
(D)  Any application for zoning or rezoning to PUD shall satisfy the requirements of Section 11-5-14, W.M.C. 
(E)  Any zoning or rezoning to Specific Plan District shall satisfy the standards set forth in Section 11-5-20, W.M.C. 
(2534 3739 3770) 
11-5-4. - Preliminary Development Plan (PDP) Requirement. 
(A)  Unless otherwise approved by City Council, any request for rezoning to Planned Unit Development shall be accompanied by a request for approval of a PDP. 
(B)  A Preliminary Development Plan for any property zoned Planned Unit Development or any property that would be required to rezone to Planned Unit Development shall be required prior to the use, improvement or development of such property. The Preliminary Development Plan shall reflect a plan for development, redevelopment, or non-development of all contiguous land under the same or substantially the same ownership as determined by the City. This requirement shall apply, even if the owner has no immediate plans for the development or redevelopment of a portion of the land. The Preliminary Development Plan may include portions of the property for which a land use is not designated. 
Where a land use is not designated, no application for approval of an Official Development Plan shall be made until land uses are established by an amendment to the Preliminary Development Plan in accordance with this chapter. 
(C)  Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for the owner, or the agent of the owner, of any unplatted or unsubdivided land located within the City to transfer, sell, agree to sell, or negotiate to sell any portion less than the whole of all contiguous land under or substantially under the same ownership prior to the approval by the City and the recording in the Office of the County Clerk and Recorder of a Preliminary Development Plan or a final plat for all contiguous land under the same or substantially the same ownership. This provision shall not apply to an owner or the agent of the owner transferring or selling land to the City pursuant to Section 11-4-6(R), W.M.C. A Preliminary Development Plan may be used as the basis for a subdivision and subsequent sale or transfer of land under this paragraph, provided that said Preliminary Development Plan contains legally defined and described boundaries of the parcels being created by the subdivision. 
(D)  The requirement set forth above for a separate Preliminary Development Plan may be waived by the City Manager or his or her designee if it is determined that the information required in this Code for the Preliminary Development Plan can be reasonably combined with the information required for the Official Development Plan. In such cases, an application for approval of a Combined PDP/ODP for the property shall be submitted and processed in accordance with the procedures for the approval of a PDP as set forth in Section 11-5-7, W.M.C. The application for approval of the Combined PDP/ODP shall contain all the information required for PDPs and ODPs as set forth in Sections 11-5-7 and 11-5-8, W.M.C. 
(2534 3634 3770) 
11-5-5. - Official Development Plan (ODP) Requirement. 
(A)  No property in the City shall be used, improved or developed, and no building permit shall be issued, nor shall any utility improvements be permitted, unless an ODP for the property has been approved or an ODP waiver has been granted in accordance with this chapter. 
(B)  Neither an ODP nor an ODP waiver shall be required for: 
(1)  Tenant finish permits. 
(2)  Grading permits for which the City Engineer has determined an ODP is unnecessary. 
(3)  A change of use or occupancy, if there are no changes or improvements to any structure on the site and all other provisions of this Code are met. 
(C)  For any property zoned Planned Unit Development or Specific Plan, the City shall have the option to require that any ODP filed with the City cover the entire ownership or substantially the same ownership as determined by the City. 
(D)  For any property not zoned Planned Unit Development or Specific Plan, any ODP filed with the City shall reflect a plan for the development or redevelopment of all contiguous land under the same ownership or substantially the same ownership. This requirement shall apply to all ODPs, even if the landowner has no immediate plans for the development or redevelopment of such land. The intent is to insure that a unified plan is approved for all land held by the same ownership or substantially the same ownership. 
(E)  No development shall commence, no building shall be occupied, and no lots shall be sold until the requirements of this chapter and all additional requirements in the ODP or ODP waiver for the property have been met. Failure to comply with the ODP or ODP waiver at any point in the construction process shall be cause for the issuance of a stop work order or correction notice. 
(F)  No certificate of occupancy shall be granted unless and until all provisions of the approved ODP or ODP waiver have been met, except the City Manager, in his or her discretion, may authorize a certificate of occupancy to be issued prior to completion of landscaping improvements, upon receipt of an agreement guaranteeing the completion of such improvements incorporating one of the forms of guarantees specified in Section 11-6-4, W.M.C. 
(G)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to complete the sale of, hold a real estate closing upon, transfer, convey, or permit to be occupied any building or structure, until the City has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor. 
(2534 3739 3770) 
11-5-6. - Official Development Plan (ODP) Waiver. 
(A)  No ODP waiver shall be granted for any property zoned Planned Unit Development or Specific Plan. 
(B)  The requirement for an ODP may be waived by the City Manager if the City Manager determines (1) that the proposed improvements are minor site improvements, including, but not limited to, additions, remodeling and accessory buildings; the construction of a single-family dwelling on a platted lot in a standard residential district; or advertising signs, fences, and landscaping that are to be made in accordance with this Code and (2) the improvements will have no adverse impacts on surrounding lots and parcels nor the public health, safety, or general welfare. The City Manager may condition the approval of any such waiver upon the development satisfying any or all of the criteria set forth in Section 11-5-15, W.M.C., Standards for Approval of Official Development Plans and Amendments to Official Development Plans. 
(C)  A waiver of the ODP requirement may also be granted by the City Manager for the purpose of combining nonconforming lots or portions of nonconforming lots with continuous frontage in single ownership in a manner that creates conforming lots. Such nonconforming lots or portions of lots shall be considered for the purpose of this Code to be an unsubdivided parcel. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any structure on such lots, a final plat in accordance with this Code shall be required to be submitted and approved. The plat shall bring the lots into conformance with the density requirements of the district in which they are located. Upon the denial by the City Manager of an ODP waiver, an ODP approval shall be required prior to development or redevelopment. 
(D)  An application for an ODP waiver shall be in a form and contain such information as may be required by the City Manager. 
(E)  An application fee as specified in the Land Use and Development Review Fee Schedule set forth in Section 11-1-6, W.M.C., shall be paid at the time of application for an ODP waiver. 
(2534 2598 3664 3739) 
11-5-7. - Format and Approval Process for Preliminary Development Plans (PDPs). 
(A)  Application Procedures for PDPs: 
(1)  Pre-application meeting. No PDP application shall be accepted before the applicant attends a pre-application meeting with City staff. The purpose of the meeting is for the applicant to gather information regarding City policies, codes, standards and procedures. A pre-application meeting shall be scheduled by the Planning Manager upon receipt of a pre-application request in a format specified by the Community Development Department. Any opinions expressed by City staff during pre-application meetings are informational only and do not represent a commitment on behalf of the City regarding the acceptability or approval of the development proposal. 
(2)  Following the pre-application meeting, the Community Development staff will furnish to the applicant direction on how to proceed with future submittals to the City. 
(3)  Upon completion of the pre-application process, the applicant shall prepare an application for a PDP in the form and with such information as may be required by the Community Development Director. The application may be provided to reviewing entities for comment and feedback. Any comments and feedback received shall be compiled and provided to the applicant. Additional submittals may be required at the option of the City. Any comments or opinions expressed during application review are informational only and do not represent a commitment on behalf of the City regarding the acceptability or approval of the development proposal. 
(4)  Following the initial application review, and prior to commencing any additional review of a proposed PDP, the applicant shall complete a neighborhood notification process as specified by the Community Development Department. The City Manager or the Manager's designee may waive this requirement for neighborhood notification, if the Manager determines, based upon the project's likely and foreseeable impacts on the surrounding neighborhood, that no neighborhood notification is required. 
(5)  Prior to any review of a proposed PDP, the applicant shall provide: 
(a)  Written consent of all owners of the property within the proposed PDP; 
(b)  Evidence of ownership and encumbrances satisfactory to the City and such other information as may be reasonably required to evaluate the proposed development; 
(c)  A non-refundable application fee as specified in the Land Use and Development Review Fee Schedule set forth in Section 11-1-6, W.M.C., shall be paid at the time of application for any proposed ODP. 
(B)  Approval Process for PDPs: All original PDPs shall be subject to Planning Commission review and recommendation to the City Council, who shall have final approval authority. 
(2534 2598 2975 3599 3664 3770; Ord. No. 3919 , § 6, 2-26-2018) 
11-5-8. - Format and Approval Process for Official Development Plans (ODPs). 
(A)  Application Procedures for ODPs: 
(1)  Pre-application meeting. No ODP application shall be accepted before the applicant attends a pre-application meeting with City staff. The purpose of the meeting is for the applicant to discuss the project concept and to gather information regarding City policies, codes, standards and procedures. A pre-application meeting shall be scheduled by the Planning Manager upon receipt of a pre-application request in a format specified by the Community Development Department. Any opinions expressed by City staff during pre-application meetings are informational only and do not represent a commitment on behalf of the City regarding the acceptability or approval of the development proposal. 
(2)  Following the pre-application meeting, the Community Development staff will furnish to the applicant direction on how to proceed with future submittals to the City. 
(3)  Upon completion of the pre-application process the applicant shall prepare an application for an ODP in the form with such information as may be required by the Community Development Director. The application may be provided to reviewing entities for comment and feedback. Any comments and feedback received shall be compiled and provided to the applicant. Additional submittals may be required at the option of the City. Any comments or opinions expressed during application review are informational only and do not represent a commitment on behalf of the City regarding the acceptability or approval of the development proposal. 
(4)  Following the initial application review, and prior to commencing any additional review of a proposed ODP, the applicant shall complete the neighborhood notification process as specified by the Community Development Department. The City Manager or the Manager's designee may waive this requirement for neighborhood notification, if the Manager determines, based upon the project's likely and foreseeable impacts on the surrounding neighborhood, that no neighborhood notification is required. 
(5)  Prior to any review of a proposed ODP, the applicant shall provide: 
(a)  Either the written consent of all owners of the property in the proposed ODP or evidence otherwise satisfactory to the Planning Manager of the applicant's authority to represent the owners of the property; 
(b)  Evidence of ownership and encumbrances satisfactory to the City and such other information as may be reasonably required to evaluate the proposed development; 
(c)  A non-refundable application fee as specified in the Land Use and Development Review Fee Schedule set forth in Section 11-1-6, W.M.C., shall be paid at the time of application for any proposed ODP. 
(6)  All recording fees shall be paid for all plans and plats that have been approved by the City prior to their recording. 
(B)  Approval Process for ODPs: 
(1)  Administrative Approvals. The City Manager may, but shall not be required to, approve any ODP or ODP waiver, without hearing or notice, that: 
(a)  Does not introduce a new land use not allowed by the PDP. 
(b)  Meets all requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, and the requirements of any PDP for the property. 
(c)  Does not involve a parcel or lot more than ten acres in size, or involves a proposed non-residential development of 20 acres or less in size, exclusive of property intended for or designated for future public ownership or dedication for open space, parks, rights-of-way or other public uses, that is determined by the City Manager to further the City's economic development goals and if such development meets guidelines established by City Council to qualify for economic development assistance. 
(2)  ODPs Requiring Public Hearings. 
(a)  The City Manager may, in his sole discretion, elect to refer any ODP to the Planning Commission and City Council for their consideration at a public hearing. 
(b)  Any ODP not administratively approved by the City Manager or not eligible for such administrative approval shall, upon the request of the applicant, be referred to the Planning Commission and City Council for consideration pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 11-5-13, W.M.C. 
(3)  Final Approval by Planning Commission. The decision of the Planning Commission regarding an original or amended ODP shall be final, unless a timely appeal of such decision is filed in accordance with Section 11-5-13(B), W.M.C. 
(2534 2598 3027 3028 3599 3664 3770; Ord. No. 3919 , § 7, 2-26-2018) 
11-5-9. - Format and Approval Process for Amendments to Preliminary Development Plans (PDPs). 
(A)  Application Procedures for PDP Amendments: 
(1)  The application procedures, format and fee for a PDP amendment shall be the same as for an original PDP approval as set forth in Section 11-5-7(A), W.M.C. 
(2)  An amendment to a PDP may be initiated by: 
(a)  The owner(s) of the property in the are proposed for PDP amendment; or 
(b)  By the City, when the City Council determines that: 
(i)  Approved land uses for the Planned Unit Development are no longer appropriate, due to changed conditions in the vicinity, revisions to the City's Comprehensive Plan, any incompatibilities between an existing land use and surrounding zoning or development, or Council finds that the PDP no longer meets the requirements of Section 11-5-14, W.M.C. 
(ii)  Public facilities are inadequate or do not meet current standards; or 
(iii)  Natural hazards or other environmental problems exist that threaten the public health, safety or welfare. 
(B)  Approval Procedures for PDP Amendments: 
(1)  Administrative Approvals. After considering the criteria set out in Section 11-5-14, W.M.C., the City Manager may, but shall not be required to, approve any amendment to a PDP, without hearing or notice, that does not: 
(a)  Add a new land use to the PDP; or 
(b)  Change the land area devoted to any use in the PDP by more than ten percent; or 
(c)  Change the density or intensity of use within the PDP by more than ten percent; 
(d)  Change the setback or height of any building in the PDP by more than ten percent; or 
(e)  Constitute a significant change in the PDP, in the opinion of the City Manager, after he applicant certifies that notice of the proposed amendment has been mailed to any property owners within the Preliminary Development Plan that are within 300 feet of the area proposed for PDP amendment. 
A report of any administratively approved PDP amendment shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council detailing action taken by the City Manager under this procedure. 
(2)  Amendments to PDPs Requiring Public Hearings. Any amendment to a PDP not administratively approved by the City Manager or not eligible for such administrative approval shall, upon the request of the applicant, be referred to the Planning Commission and City Council for their review and determination at a public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 11-5-13, W.M.C., provided, however, the City Manager shall also have the option to refer any proposed PDP amendment otherwise eligible for administrative approval to the Planning Commission and City Council for their review and determination. 
(2534 3599 3770) 
11-5-10. - Format and Approval Process for Amendments to Official Development Plans (ODPs). 
(A)  Application Procedures for ODP Amendments: 
(1)  Pre-application meeting. No ODP amendment application shall be accepted before the applicant attends a pre-application meeting with City staff. The purpose of the meeting is for the applicant to discuss the project concept and to gather information regarding City policies, codes, standards and procedures. Applicants may propose an amendment to an ODP for all or only a portion of the entire land area within the previously approved ODP, except that an amendment to a residential ODP for an individual single-family lot within a detached single-family housing development that does not meet a criteria for administrative approval described in subsection (B)(1) below, shall proceed under the variance process set forth in Section 2-2-8, W.M.C. A pre-application meeting shall be scheduled by the Planning Manager upon receipt of a pre-application request in a format specified by the Community Development Department. Any opinions expressed by City staff during pre-application meetings are informational only and do not represent a commitment on behalf of the City regarding the acceptability or approval of the development proposal. 
(2)  Following the pre-application meeting, the Community Development staff will furnish to the applicant direction on how to proceed with future submittals to the City. 
(3)  Upon completion of pre-application meeting, the applicant shall prepare an application for an ODP amendment in the form and with such information as may be required by the Community Development Director. The application may be provided to reviewing entities for comment and feedback. Any comments and feedback received shall be compiled and provided to the applicant. Additional submittals may be required at the option of the City. Staff review and feedback concerning an ODP amendment shall not be construed as a type of approval or pre-approval of any aspect of the submittal. 
(4)  Following the initial application review, and prior to commencing any additional review of a proposed ODP amendment, the applicant shall complete the neighborhood notification process as specified by the Community Development Department. The City Manager or the Manager's designee may waive this requirement for neighborhood notification, if the Manager determines, based upon the project's likely and foreseeable impacts on the surrounding neighborhood, that no neighborhood notification is required. 
(5)  Prior to any review of a proposed ODP amendment, the applicant shall provide: 
(a)  Either the written consent of the owner(s) of the property in the area proposed for ODP amendment or evidence otherwise satisfactory to the Planning Manager of the applicant's authority to represent the owner(s) of such property; 
(b)  Evidence of ownership and encumbrances satisfactory to the City and such other information as may be reasonably required to evaluate the proposed development; and 
(c)  A non-refundable application fee, as specified in the Land Use and Development Review Fee Schedule set forth in Section 11-1-6, W.M.C., shall be paid at the time of application for any proposed ODP amendment. 
(6)  All recording fees shall be paid for all plans and plats that have been approved by the City prior to their recording. 
(B)  Approval Process for ODP Amendments: 
(1)  Administrative Approvals. The City Manager may, but shall not be required to, approve any amendment to an ODP, without hearing or notice, that: 
(a)  Does not change the land area devoted to any approved use by more than ten percent, or 
(b)  Does not change the density or intensity of any approved use by more than ten percent, or 
(c)  Does not constitute a significant change in the ODP in the opinion of the City Manager, or 
(d)  Does not deviate from any development standard, including, but not limited to, setbacks and building height, by more than ten percent, or 
(e)  Adds a land use that was previously approved on the underlying PDP for the property. 
A report of any administratively approved ODP amendment shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council. 
(2)  Amendments to ODPs Requiring Public Hearings. 
(a)  Any amendment to an ODP not administratively approved by the City Manager or not eligible for such administrative approval shall, upon request of the applicant, be referred to the Planning Commission for their review and determination at a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of Section 11-5-13, W.M.C., provided, however, the City Manager shall also have the option to refer any proposed ODP amendment otherwise eligible for administrative approval to the Planning Commission for its review and determination. 
(b)  The decision of the Planning Commission regarding an ODP amendment shall be final unless a timely appeal of such decision is filed in accordance with Section 11-5-13(B)(2), W.M.C. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be deemed final as of the date its decision is announced. 
(2534 3599 3634 3664 3770; Ord. No. 3919 , § 8, 2-26-2018) 
11-5-11. - Format and Approval Process for Final Plats. 
(A)  Application Procedure for Final Plats: 
(1)  An application for review and approval of a final plat shall be submitted in the format specified by the Community Development Department. 
(2)  A non-refundable application fee as specified in the Planning and Engineering Development Review Fee Schedule set forth in Section 11-1-6, W.M.C., shall be paid at the time of application for a Final Plat. In addition, a recording fee of $20.00 per sheet shall also be paid for any plats that have been approved by the City prior to their recording. 
(3)  The City Manager may, in his or her sole discretion, on a case-by-case basis, waive any of the normal submittal requirements for Final Plats within his or her administrative approval authority that the City Manager deems to be minor in substance and scope and reduce the fee for such minor amendments to $75.00. 
(B)  Approval Process for Final Plats: 
(1)  All Final Plats shall be subject to review and approval by the City Manager, in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 11-5-16, W.M.C., whose decision shall be final. 
(2)  No Final Plat shall be approved by the City Manager prior to the approval of an Official Development Plan or Official Development Plan Waiver for the subject property. 
(3)  Upon its approval, the Final Plat shall be signed by the City Manager and the City Clerk, and such plat shall then be filed of record in the office of the appropriate County Clerk and Recorder's Office. 
(4)  No Final Plat shall be approved unless it is possible, without undue delay, to provide the necessary public improvements required pursuant to this Code. 
(2534 2598 3664 3770) 
11-5-12. - Application Format and Content for Landscape and Irrigation Drawings and Private Improvements Agreement. 
(A)  As required by the Community Development Department's Plan Submittal Guidelines, a copy of which is available in the Planning Division office, and the City's landscape regulations, landscape and irrigation plans shall be reviewed and approved by the City. 
(B)  The format and content for landscape and irrigation drawings and private improvements agreements shall be as specified by the Community Development Department, the City's landscape regulations, and as set forth in this Code. 
(C)  No construction of landscape improvements can occur until the City approves the landscape and irrigation construction plans, and the private improvements agreement. 
(D)  As-built landscape and irrigation drawings shall be presented by the developer to the owner/owner's association/homeowner's association and the City prior to final acceptance of the project. 
(2534 3133 3664 3770) 
11-5-13. - Public Hearings for Land Development Approvals. 
(A)  The following public hearing procedure shall apply to any application for the approval of Comprehensive Plan Amendment (property owner initiated), PDP, amended PDP, ODP, amended ODP, Specific Plan, or Specific Plan Amendment and any zoning or rezoning for which a public hearing is required pursuant to this chapter. For any City-initiated application, the term "applicant" shall mean the City. 
(1)  A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be scheduled by the City. 
(2)  Notice of public hearings scheduled before the Planning Commission shall be published and posted at least ten days prior to such hearing. 
(3)  Notice of public hearings scheduled before the City Council shall be published and posted at least four days prior to such hearing. 
(4)  Notice of the public hearing shall be published by the City by one publication in the official newspaper of the City. 
(5)  The notice of the public hearing shall also be posted on the property by the City using at least one sign with a minimum area of 30 square inches, with lettering not less than one and one-quarter inches in height, at an appropriate location on site that is reasonably visible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic passing adjacent to the site. 
(6)  Mailed notice of the public hearing shall be given by the applicant by sending such notice by first-class mail to all owners within the area covered by the application and any owners and any homeowner's associations registered with the City within 300 feet of the subject property; provided, however, the City may extend this distance beyond 300 feet, based on the location and configuration of adjacent properties, neighborhoods and business areas. 
(7)  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to: 
(a)  Prepare the list of property owners who are required to receive notice under subsection (6), above. Such list shall contain the name and mailing address of property owners from the County Assessor's records. 
(b)  Prepare an accurately scaled map using County Assessor's maps identifying the subject site, and the location of the properties to be notified. 
(c)  Deliver to the Planning Manager the items listed in paragraphs (a) and (b) above in a City-approved format at least 15 days prior to the date of hearing. 
(d)  Mail, by first-class mail, the individual notices to the listed property owners, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Also, the applicant shall provide the Planning Manager, prior to the hearing, a certification that the required notices were mailed and the date of such mailing(s). 
(8)  The City shall prepare the form of the notice to be issued. At the public hearing, the Planning Manager shall verify that the required notices were issued. Any person with actual notice of the public hearing shall have no standing to object to the commencement or conduct of the public hearing, even if such person failed to receive one or more of the forms of notice prescribed above. 
(B)  A party-in-interest may appeal to the City Council any final decision of the Planning Commission regarding any Official or amended Official Development Plan, in accordance with the provisions of this section. A decision of the Planning Commission shall be deemed final as of the date of the meeting at which the Planning Commission's vote is taken. 
(1)  "Party-in-interest," as used in this section, shall mean any of the following: 
(a)  The applicant. 
(b)  Any person or entity to which notice of the hearing of the Planning Commission was mailed. 
(c)  Any person or entity that sent written comments to the Planning Commission prior to the action that is to be appealed. 
(d)  Any person or entity that testified before the Planning Commission on the action that is to be appealed. 
(e)  The City Manager. 
(2)  An appeal shall be taken by filing a written notice of appeal of the decision of the Planning Commission with the City Manager within ten days after the date of such decision. Such notice of appeal shall include the following: 
(a)  The action of the Planning Commission that is the subject of the appeal. 
(b)  The date of such action. 
(c)  The name, address, telephone number and relationship of the appellant to the subject of the action of the Planning Commission. 
(d)  A statement setting forth the basis of the appellant's standing to appeal such decision as a party-in-interest within the meaning of this section. 
(3)  Upon the receipt of a timely notice of appeal, the City Manager shall schedule a date for a public hearing before the City Council as expeditiously as possible. The City Manager shall provide the appellant and the applicant at least ten days written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing, as well as the grounds for the appeal as contained in the written notice of appeal. The City Manager shall also issue the published and posted notices provided for by this section in advance of the City Council hearing. 
(4)  At its public hearing, if City Council determines all the requirements have been met for perfecting an appeal of the Planning Commission decision pursuant to this section, the City Council shall conduct a de novo hearing on the merits. 
(C)  Upon the vote of at least four members of Council, any decision of the Planning Commission may be reviewed de novo by Council, if such vote occurs within 14 days of the Planning Commission decision. Notice and scheduling of such hearing shall proceed in the same manner as for an appeal by a party-in-interest, except that, in lieu of a statement of the appellant's standing, the notice shall state that the hearing is being held upon the request of Council pursuant to this section. 
(D)  A City-initiated amendment to a Preliminary Development Plan or Official Development Plan shall be authorized only after notice and hearing before City Council. In addition to the notice and hearing requirements set forth above, a City-initiated amendment shall be preceded by registered, mailed notice to the owner, setting forth the grounds for the proposed amendment and a statement that a copy of the proposed amended Preliminary Development Plan is on file and available for inspection in the offices of the Director of Community Development. A City-initiated amendment to a Preliminary Development Plan shall be effective immediately upon its approval by City Council after notice and hearing pursuant to this section. Constructive notice of the amendment shall be given immediately following its approval by City Council by recording the findings and order of Council, together with a copy of the plan as amended, in the real estate records of the county in which the property is located. No application or fee shall be required for a City-initiated Preliminary or Official Development Plan amendment. 
(E)  No application or fee shall be required for a City-initiated application. 
(2534 3368 3739 3770; Ord. No. 3919 , § 9, 2-26-2018) 
11-5-14. - Standards for Approval of Planned Unit Development Zoning, Preliminary Development Plans and Amendments to Preliminary Development Plans. 
(A)  In reviewing an application for approval of Planned Unit Development zoning and its associated Preliminary Development Plan, or an amended Preliminary Development Plan, the following criteria shall be considered: 
(1)  The Planned Unit Development (PUD) zoning and the proposed land uses in the associated Preliminary Development Plan are in conformance with the City's Comprehensive Plan and all City Codes, ordinances, and policies. 
(2)  The Preliminary Development Plan exhibits the application of sound, creative, innovative, and efficient planning principles. 
(3)  Any exceptions from standard Code requirements or limitations are warranted by virtue of design or special amenities incorporated in the development proposal and are clearly identified on the Preliminary Development Plan (PDP). 
(4)  The PDP is compatible and harmonious with existing public and private development in the surrounding area. 
(5)  The PDP provides for the protection of the development from potentially adverse surrounding influences and for the protection of the surrounding areas from potentially adverse influence from within the development. 
(6)  The PDP has no significant adverse impacts upon existing or future land uses nor upon the future development of the immediate area. 
(7)  Streets, driveways, access points, and turning movements are designed in a manner that promotes safe, convenient, and free traffic flow on streets without interruptions, and in a manner that creates minimum hazards for vehicles and pedestrian traffic. 
(8)  The City may require rights-of-way adjacent to existing or proposed arterial or collector streets, any easements for public utilities and any other public lands to be dedicated to the City as a condition to approving the PDP. Nothing herein shall preclude further public land dedications as a condition to ODP or plat approvals by the City. 
(9)  Performance standards are included that insure reasonable expectations of future Official Development Plans being able to meet the Standards for Approval of an Official Development Plan contained in Section 11-5-15, W.M.C. 
(10)  The applicant is not in default or does not have any outstanding obligations to the City. 
(B)  Failure to meet any of the above-listed standards may be grounds for denial of an application for Planned Unit Development zoning, a Preliminary Development Plan or an amendment to a Preliminary Development Plan. 
(2534 3770) 
11-5-15. - Standards for Approval of Official Development Plans and Amendments to Official Development Plans. 
(A)  In reviewing an application for the approval of an Official Development Plan or amended Official Development Plan, the following criteria shall be considered: 
(1)  The plan is in conformance with all City Codes, ordinances, and policies. 
(2)  The plan is in conformance with an approved Preliminary Development Plan or the provisions of the applicable zoning district, if other than Planned Unit Development (PUD). 
(3)  The plan exhibits the application of sound, creative, innovative, or efficient planning and design principles. 
(4)  For plans in PUD zones, any exceptions from standard code requirements or limitations are warranted by virtue of design or special amenities incorporated in the development proposal and are clearly identified on the Official Development Plan. 
(5)  The plan is compatible and harmonious with existing public and private development in the surrounding area. 
(6)  The plan provides for the protection of the development from potentially adverse surrounding influences and for the protection of the surrounding areas from potentially adverse influence from within the development. 
(7)  The plan has no significant adverse impacts on future land uses and future development of the immediate area. 
(8)  The plan provides for the safe, convenient, and harmonious grouping of structures, uses, and facilities and for the appropriate relation of space to intended use and structural features. 
(9)  Building height, bulk, setbacks, lot size, and lot coverages are in accordance with sound design principles and practice. 
(10)  The architectural design of all structures is internally and externally compatible, in terms of shape, color, texture, forms, and materials. 
(11)  Fences, walls, and vegetative screening are provided where needed and as appropriate to screen undesirable views, lighting, noise, or other environmental effects attributable to the development. 
(12)  Landscaping is in conformance with City Code requirements and City policies and is adequate and appropriate. 
(13)  Existing and proposed streets are suitable and adequate to carry the traffic within the development and its surrounding vicinity. 
(14)  Streets, parking areas, driveways, access points, and turning movements are designed in a manner that promotes safe, convenient, and free traffic flow on streets without interruptions, and in a manner that creates minimum hazards for vehicles and pedestrian traffic. 
(15)  Pedestrian movement is designed in a manner that forms a logical, safe, and convenient system between all structures and off-site destinations likely to attract substantial pedestrian traffic. 
(16)  Existing and proposed utility systems and storm drainage facilities are adequate to serve the development and are in conformance with the Preliminary Development Plans and utility master plans. 
(17)  The applicant is not in default or does not have any outstanding obligations to the City. 
(B)  Failure to meet any of the above-listed standards may be grounds for denial of an Official Development Plan or an amendment to an Official Development Plan. 
(2534 3770) 
11-5-16. - Standards for Approval of Final Plats. 
(A)  The City Manager shall approve a Final Plat, if he finds all of the following: 
(1)  The Final Plat shows the same subdivision and is in conformance with the approved Official Development Plan or a waiver of the Official Development Plan. 
(2)  The Final Plat has been submitted for approval within 12 months of the date of approval of the Preliminary Plat, Official Development Plan or a waiver of the Official Development Plan, or the Final Plat has been submitted for approval in accordance with a phasing schedule on an approved Official Development Plan. 
(3)  The Final Plat contains all information required by this Code, along with any other information required by Colorado law. 
(4)  A final landscape and irrigation plan has been reviewed and approved in accordance with Section 11-5-12, W.M.C. 
(5)  The Final Plat satisfies the public improvement requirements set forth in Chapter 6 of this title. 
(B)  The City Manager may approve a Final Plat prepared solely for the subdivision of land to accomplish the acquisition of land by the City for open space, parks, rights-of-way, or other public purposes, upon a finding that such platting is the most efficient method of creating separate ownership parcels. 
(2534 3634) 
11-5-17. - Duration of Plan Approvals. 
(A)  City Council finds that changes to the City's Comprehensive Plan, the City's standards governing land use and site development, and other land use and development policies and regulations may be warranted over time. City Council further finds that it is in the best interest of the City and its citizens to assure that future land development reflects the best in modern planning, site development, architecture, and other land use considerations. City Council further finds that over time, previously approved preliminary and official development plans may no longer reflect these interests. City Council therefore finds that it is appropriate to establish a time period for implementing previously approved preliminary and official development plans, after which such plans shall be subject to further review and approval by Council, based on then-current standards, policies and development criteria. Nothing in the preceding, however, shall be deemed or construed as exempting any land development from complying with the City's Comprehensive Plan, as required pursuant to Section 11-3-2(C), W.M.C. 
(B)  No building permits shall be issued, nor shall any further plan approvals be considered, for any land development that falls into one or more of the following categories, until such time as the proposed development receives the further review and approval required by subsection (C) below. 
(1)  The date of approval of the PDP or the latest PDP amendment for the development is more than five years old, and there is no ODP for the development. 
(2)  The date of approval of the ODP or latest ODP amendment for the development is more than three years old and no building permits within the ODP have been issued. 
(C)  (1)  PDPs. In the event the date of approval of a property's PDP amendment is more than five years old, the PDP or amended PDP shall be required to be submitted for review and reconsideration in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 11-5-13, W.M.C., and all applicable standards pursuant to Chapter 5 of this title. 
(2)  ODPs. In the event the date of approval of a property's ODP or latest ODP amendment is more than three years old, the ODP or amended ODP shall be required to be submitted for review and reconsideration in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 11-5-13, W.M.C., and all applicable standards pursuant to Chapter 5 of this title. 
(3)  Combined PDP/ODPs. In the event the date of approval of a property's combined PDP/ODP is more than three years old, the combined PDP/ODP shall be required to be submitted for review and reconsideration in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 11-5-13, W.M.C., and all applicable standards pursuant to Chapter 5 of this title. 
(D)  Vested Rights: The provisions of this section shall not be deemed, construed, or applied so as to affect any vested development rights that may exist for any given development. 
(2534; Ord. No. 3919 , § 10, 2-26-2018) 
11-5-18. - Vested Property Rights. 
(A)  Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide the procedures necessary to implement the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, which article establishes a vested property right to undertake and complete development use of real property under the terms and conditions of a Site-Specific Development Plan. The City expressly reserves all rights, powers and prerogatives granted and reserved by the Colorado Constitution, State law and the Westminster Municipal Code to the City and its citizens, particularly with respect to the rights of initiative and referendum and to the zoning and regulation of real property within the jurisdiction of the City. 
(B)  Site-Specific Development Plan: In the case of an application for approval of a development plan for property zoned Planned Unit Development, the Preliminary Development Plan shall constitute a Site-Specific Development Plan. In any case that a Preliminary Development Plan is not required by this Code, or if a public hearing is not required to be held before the City Council, no vested property rights shall be granted and no document shall be construed to be a Site-Specific Development Plan, unless: 
(1)  The applicant requests in writing that the City Council hold a public hearing and approve a document that will constitute a Site-Specific Development Plan, and 
(2)  State law requires that a vested property right be granted, in which case the City Council shall determine, in its discretion, which document shall constitute a Site-Specific Development Plan. No Preliminary Development Plan that is combined with any other plan for development shall be considered a Site-Specific Development Plan. 
(C)  Vested Property Right: A vested property right is the right to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of a Site-Specific Development Plan. No action of the City shall be construed or deemed as creating any vested property right, other than the approval of a Site-Specific Development Plan pursuant to the provisions of this section. The duration of any vested property right shall be no longer than required by State law, unless a different duration is provided by written agreement between the applicant and the City. The failure to comply with any condition of approval of a Site-Specific Development Plan shall result in the forfeiture of any vested property right. 
(D)  Notice and Hearing: No Site-Specific Development Plan shall be approved until after a public hearing, preceded by notice of such hearing. Such notice shall be published at the time and in the manner required by Section 11-5-13, W.M.C., regarding the review of Preliminary Development Plans. At such hearing, owners of the property described in the Site-Specific Development Plan, their representatives and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(E)  Effective Date: A Site-Specific Development Plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of the City Council action relating thereto. No amendment of a Site-Specific Development Plan shall extend or change the effective date of vesting of a property right, unless specifically provided in the amending ordinance or agreement authorized by the City Council. 
(F)  Conditions Applicable Generally: In addition to any other conditions that may be imposed in connection with the approval of a Site-Specific Development Plan, the following conditions shall be deemed to apply to all such Site-Specific Development Plan approvals, the violation of which will result in the forfeiture of the landowner's vested rights under the Plan: 
(1)  The owner shall, within 14 days after approval of the Site-Specific Development Plan, satisfy the notice requirements contained under C.R.S. Section 24-68-103 (1) by publishing at his expense a notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the City advising the general public of the site specific development plan approval and creation of a vested property right pursuant to state law, together with a legal description of the property covered by the site specific development plan. 
(2)  That the owner shall, within 14 days after the approval of the site-specific development plan, acknowledge by written instrument, duly executed by an authorized official or representative of the owner, that the owner acknowledges its obligation to satisfy all other requirements under City Code for the development and use of property within the City, including, but not limited to, obtaining City approval of all additional plans that may be required under City Code subsequent to the approval of the Site-Specific Development Plan prior to commencing actual development of the property, which plan approvals may include, but are not limited to, the approval of an Official Development Plan for the property and all studies that may be required under City Code, including, but not limited to, studies concerning traffic, drainage, utilities, and erosion control. 
(G)  Notice of Approval: Each Site-Specific Development Plan shall contain the following language: "This plan constitutes a Site-Specific Development Plan within the meaning of Section 24-68-102, C.R.S. Approval of this plan creates a vested property right pursuant to Section 24-68-103, C.R.S. This plan is subject to all conditions of approval, including, but not limited to, those imposed as a condition to the approval of a Site-Specific Development Plan by virtue of the provisions of Section 11-5-18(F), W.M.C." 
(H)  Other Provisions Unaffected: Approval of a Site-Specific Development Plan shall not constitute an exemption from or waiver of any other provisions of this Code pertaining to the annexation, development and use of property. 
(I)  Limitations: 
(1)  Nothing in this section is intended to create any vested property right, but only to implement the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended. In the event of the repeal of said article, this section shall be deemed to be repealed, and the provisions hereof no longer effective. 
(2)  No document approved prior to January 1, 1988, shall constitute a Site-Specific Development Plan. 
(3)  Any provision of this section may be modified by written agreement between the applicant and the City, subject to the approval of the City Council. Any partial or full waiver of a vested property right shall be recorded in the county where the property is located. 
(4)  Any landowner requesting annexation shall waive in writing any preexisting vested property rights in the petition for annexation. 
(2534) 
11-5-19. - Disclosure Requirements. 
    Developers of property within the corporate limits of the City and within a Planned Unit Development District shall post, in a prominent location in the sales or rental office for said property, the following materials: 
(A)  A sign containing, in prominent, bold lettering the following statement: "All questions concerning the future use or development of property located outside the boundaries of this project should be addressed to the City of Westminster." 
(B)  A sign containing, in prominent, bold lettering, the following statement: "A copy of the Preliminary Development Plan and the current Official Development Plan and Plat for this subdivision is maintained in this office and is available for inspection upon request." 
(2534 3664) 
11-5-20. - Specific plans. 
(A)  General Intent: Specific Plans are intended to serve as comprehensive, self-contained, and generally self-executing regulatory documents for the governance, control and implementation of land uses and development within a Specific Plan District, consistent with the goals and objectives of the Specific Plan District's Focus Area designation in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(B)  Specific Plan and Official Development Plan Requirement: No property within a Specific Plan District may be used, improved or developed without the prior approval of a Specific Plan and an Official Development Plan for the property proposed to be developed. 
(C)  Applicability of Municipal Code to Specific Plan Districts: Municipal Code provisions related to land use and development in the City shall apply to land use and development in Specific Plan Districts, unless such provision is specifically negated or modified in an applicable Specific Plan. 
(D)  Specific Plan Initiation: 
(1)  A Specific Plan may be initiated by the City Council or by an application signed by at least 50 percent of the owners who own at least 50 percent of the property in the Specific Plan District. 
(2)  Amendments to a Specific Plan may be initiated by the City Council or by at least 50 percent of the owners who own at least 50 percent of the property in the Specific Plan District. 
(E)  Specific Plan Content: A Specific Plan shall include, but not be limited to text and illustrations sufficient, in the opinion of the Planning Manager, to specify all of the following in detail: 
(1)  The distribution, location and extent of individual land uses, including open space, within the area covered by the plan; 
(2)  The proposed distribution, location, extent and intensity of major components of public and private transportation, waste water, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy, parks, schools and other essential facilities proposed to be located within the area covered by the plan and needed to support the land uses described in the plan; 
(3)  Land use regulations and development, design and performance standards that govern each use or physical area identified by the specific plan. These regulations and standards may include, but not be limited to the following: 
(a)  A listing of allowable uses within each land use designation and applicable definitions, use classifications, supplemental standards (height, intensity, etc.) and requirements for discretionary entitlement application and other permits 
(b)  Standards governing site coverage, lot size and dimensions (where applicable), yard and setback requirements, usable open space, landscaping and related performance standards; 
(c)  Site development standards that address adjacent zoning district and development, where applicable; 
(d)  Standards and guidelines for the architectural, landscaping, streetscape and other urban design features for development within the specific plan area. Streetscape design shall include, but not be limited to, plant and materials palette, landscape design and placement, lighting, street furniture and equipment screening; and 
(e)  Supplemental illustrations establishing the basic architectural and environmental character to be attained throughout the specific plan area. 
(4)  A program of implementation measures, including regulations, programs, public works projects, financing measures and a statement of consistency with any existing master/capital improvements plan necessary to carry out subsections (1), (2) and (3) listed above; and 
(5)  A statement of relationship of the specific plan to the Comprehensive Plan, including a statement of how the specific plan implements the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(6)  All necessary maps within the area covered by the proposed plan; 
(7)  A legal and physical description of the site including boundaries, easements, existing topography, natural features, existing buildings, structures and utilities; 
(F)  Official Development Plans: In addition to all other requirements in this chapter pertaining to ODPs and ODP amendments, the Planning Manager may require an application for the approval of an ODP or ODP Amendment within a Specific Plan District to include any or all of the following: 
(1)  A site plan, drawn to scale that depicts all proposed on-site improvements and utilities and the locations of same in accordance with the standards established in the Specific Plan; 
(2)  A landscape plan drawn to scale that sets forth information pertinent to the landscape requirements of the relevant specific plan and the Westminster Municipal Code and shows all existing trees and shrubs on the site; 
(3)  Grading and drainage plans unless the City Engineer determines they are unnecessary for the review process; 
(4)  Architectural plans and exterior elevations indicating profiles, glazing and materials drawn to scale. Colored architectural elevations and a materials board with physical samples shall be submitted with drawings; 
(5)  Three dimensional massing model demonstrating mass, articulation, building placement and cast shadow analysis; 
(6)  Scale drawings of all signs and light standards with details of height, area, color and materials specified therein, including a photometric plan; 
(7)  A Phasing Plan if applicable; and 
(8)  Any other documents or information necessary to determine compliance of the ODP or ODP amendment with the requirements of the applicable Specific Plan. 
(G)  Approval Process: All Specific Plans and Specific Plan Amendment shall be approved by motion of the City Council, after review by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the public hearing requirements set forth in Section 11-5-13 of this Code. 
(H)  Standards for Approval of Specific Plans and Specific Plan Amendments: Prior to the approval of a Specific Plan or Specific Plan Amendment, the City Council shall find all of the following: 
(1)  The proposed plan or plan amendment is in conformance with the City's Comprehensive Plan and all City policies, standards and sound planning principles and practices. 
(2)  There is either existing capacity in the City's streets, drainage and utility systems to accommodate the proposed plan or plan amendment, or arrangements have been made to provide such capacity in a manner and timeframe acceptable to City Council. 
(3)  The proposed plan or amendment is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code, including but not limited to this Section 11-5-20. 
(4)  The proposed plan advances and implements the objectives and policies set forth in Section 11-4-7.5 and the property's associated Focus Area as set forth in the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
(I)  Subdivision: An Official Development Plan may be used as the basis for a subdivision and subsequent sale or transfer of land within a Specific Plan District provided that a Specific Plan has been approved and the Official Development Plan contains legally defined and described boundaries of the parcels being created by the subdivision. 
(3739; Ord. No. 3869, § 5, 5-8-2017 ) 
11-5-21. - Standards for Approval of Land Use Plan Amendments. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish consistent review procedures and criteria for property owner initiated requests to amend the Land Use Plan pursuant to Section 11-3-2(D), W.M.C. 
(A)  Submittal and Review. 
(1)  A pre-application meeting is not required. 
(2)  Applications for such an amendment shall be made to the Planning Manager, in the form and with such information as may be required by the Community Development Director. At a minimum the owner shall provide: 
(a)  A completed application in a format established by the Community Development Department. 
(b)  Payment of required application and public hearing fees. 
(c)  Property owner signature, and if necessary, the Statement of Authority Form provided by the Department of Community Development. 
(d)  Statements of compliance with the criteria listed in Section 11-5-21(B), W.M.C. 
(e)  Traffic impact summary in a format established by the Department of Community Development. 
(f)  Acreage and legal description of the parcel or parcels subject to the request with lot and block references if contained within a recorded platted subdivision, or if not platted with a property survey, metes-and-bounds description via field notes. 
(g)  Citizen participation plan describing timing, types and sequence of outreach efforts including a list of property owners who are required to received notice pursuant to Section 11-5-13(A)(6), W.M.C., and an accurately scaled map using County Assessor's maps identifying the subject site, and the location of the properties to be notified. 
(3)  The Planning Manager shall arrange for review by applicable City Departments and, as appropriate, outside referral agencies. The Planning Manager shall provide each applicant with comments and the applicant shall be afforded the opportunity to respond to comments and amend the application as needed. Upon satisfactory responses by the applicant to all comments the Planning Manager shall schedule the comprehensive plan amendment(s) for public hearing in accordance with Section 11-5-13, W.M.C. Payment of public hearing fees is required prior to the required notices of hearing established in Section 11-5-13(A), W.M.C. 
(B)  In reviewing an application for an amendment to the Land Use Plan, the following criteria shall be considered: 
(1)  The proposed amendment is consistent with the vision, intent and applicable policies of the Comprehensive Plan and other adopted plans, policies and guidelines. 
(2)  The proposed amendment serves a substantial public purpose and will not be substantially detrimental to the surrounding lands. 
(3)  The proposed amendment shall consider the nature and degree of impacts on neighboring lands. Individual parcels or groups of parcels shall not be subject to a change in land use in such way that the new designation is substantially inconsistent with the uses of the surrounding area. 
(4)  The proposed amendment is necessary in order to address substantially changed conditions in the immediate area of the subject tract since adoption of the Land Use Plan or an error contained in that document. 
(5)  The proposed amendment provides for the orderly physical growth of the City. 
(6)  The proposed amendment furthers an important public policy, including but not limited to a need for affordable housing, protection of historic resources, preservation of open space, or reduction in water demand by virtue of a different land use category. 
(7)  The proposed amendment is appropriate in order to address a uniqueness in the size, shape and character of the parcel in relation to neighboring lands. Proof that a small parcel is unsuitable for use as presently designated or that there have been substantial changes in the immediate area may justify an amendment subject to evidence furnished by the applicant. 
(8)  The proposed amendment will not negatively impact the transportation system, drainage, water and sewer infrastructure, water supply, fire and police services, the parks and open space system, or the City's general fund revenue. 
(9)  The proposed amendment will not negatively impact referral agencies such as the Colorado Department of Transportation, local school districts, the Rocky Mountain Metropolitan Airport, or other agencies pertinent to the location and nature of the requested amendment. 
(10)  The proposed amendment establishes minimal environmental impacts or has sufficiently mitigated any identified impacts. 
(C)  Scope of Approval. 
(1)  The approval of an amendment to the Land Use Plan shall not be deemed to authorize development of land. Such an amendment shall authorize an applicant to apply for additional municipal approvals necessary to develop land. Such amendment does not supersede any requirement for preliminary development plan, official development plan, subdivision plat or other approval required by this title. 
(2)  Where City Council has formally taken action to deny a Land Use Plan amendment, no application requesting the identical land use designation on the same parcel or lot shall be considered by the City for a period of one year from the date the previous application was denied by City Council. An applicant may withdraw an application up to the time that it is called forward and the City staff begins presentation of the application during a duly advertised public hearing. 
( Ord. No. 3919 , § 11, 2-26-2018) 
CHAPTER 6. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 

11-6-1. - Public Roadways, Easements, and Land for Public Improvements. 
(A)  Duty to Provide: As a condition to any approval required under this title, the City may require the dedication of public roadways or rights-of-way for public access, utility easements and other lands for public use and the construction or installation of such public improvements as the City may deem are reasonably necessary to address such impacts as may be caused by a proposed development on public facilities or services. Further, the City may require the payment of an equivalent amount of cash in lieu of any required dedication. 
(B)  Oversizing: Subject to the cost recovery provisions of this title, the City may also require, as a condition to any approval required under this title, the dedication of such additional roadway, public access rights-of-way, and easements and the construction or installation of such other or additional public improvements as the City may deem are reasonably necessary for the orderly and logical extension of City facilities and services within the City as a whole. 
(2534 3421) 
11-6-2. - General Requirements. 
    Except as provided in Subsection 11-6-3(B), W.M.C., no final plat shall be approved nor shall a building permit be issued, unless the developer agrees, pursuant to Section 11-6-4, W.M.C., to provide the following public improvements required to serve the development: 
(A)  Water mains, fire hydrants, valves, and other appurtenant devices in such number, quantity, and dimension as will provide adequate service to the site being developed. 
(B)  Sanitary sewer mains, manholes, and sewer system appurtenances in such number, quantity, and dimension as will provide adequate service to the site being developed. 
(C)  Paved, improved streets with sidewalks, curb, and attendant structures in such dimension and location as will meet the pedestrian and traffic needs of the site being developed. 
(D)  Storm sewers, detention facilities, channels, culverts, and attendant structures in such size and location as will provide adequate service to the site being developed, and as may reasonably be required by the City to provide a safe, functional, comprehensive storm drainage system for removal or attenuation of urban storm runoff to meet the overall needs of the City. 
(E)  Natural gas mains, telephone and electric lines, conduits, and attendant facilities as will provide adequate service to the site, as designed by the appropriate public utility agency. 
(F)  Street lighting and appurtenant conduits and structures necessary to serve the fully developed project, as designed by the appropriate electric utility or the City using their standard design criteria. 
(G)  Dedication of land for and improvements to public parks and open space and other public lands as may be identified on the official development plan for the site. 
(H)  Survey monuments at such subdivision boundary points as may be required by the City and Colorado Revised Statutes to verify and retrace the lines and points defined by the final plat. 
(I)  Rights-of-way and easements as may be required by the City to adequately accommodate placement and maintenance of the above-listed public facilities. 
(2534) 
11-6-3. - Undergrounding of Electric and Communication Lines. 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided below, no plat shall be approved nor shall a building permit be issued, unless the developer agrees to underground existing overhead electric and communication utility lines as required by subsection (B) below. 
(B)  All electric and communication utility lines and services and all street lighting circuits, except as hereinafter provided, shall be installed or relocated underground, both within and adjacent to the subdivision or development, except as follows: 
(1)  Transformers, switching boxes, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, ducts, and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such underground and street lighting facilities, when placed above ground within the utility easement provided therefor, or within the street or other public right-of-way, as appropriate. 
(2)  All facilities reasonably necessary to connect underground facilities or permitted overhead or above-ground facilities. 
(3)  As approved by the City, overhead electric transmission and distribution feeder lines and overhead communication long distance trunk and feeder lines, existing or new. 
(4)  Owners of improved residential lots or parcels shall not be required to participate in the cost of undergrounding utilities adjacent to the improved residential property. 
(C)  All work related to the undergrounding of utilities required by this section shall be guaranteed in writing and surety shall be provided, in accordance with Section 11-6-4, W.M.C., below. 
(D)  The City Engineer shall have the discretion of authorizing a cash payment in lieu of the undergrounding of utilities otherwise required by this section, if the City Engineer determines that the amount of the proposed payment is reasonably equivalent to the cost of such work and that the undergrounding may be more effectively and efficiently accomplished as part of a larger project at a future date. 
(E)  The City Council may waive or reduce the undergrounding requirements of this section for any redevelopment or new subdivision or development where compliance with the regulations set forth in this section would result in an unusual or unnecessary hardship or would be impractical as determined by the City Council. The City Council may also grant such waivers within the Westminster Urban Renewal Area, based on a finding that the waiver will promote or is necessary to further the goals and objectives of the urban renewal plan for the area. 
(F)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed as in any way limiting or otherwise restricting the authority of the City to use any other means provided by state law to accomplish the undergrounding of utilities. 
(2534) 
11-6-4. - Public and Private Improvement Agreements and Surety Requirements. 
(A)  Except as provided in Subsection 11-5-16(B), W.M.C., before the City Manager shall approve a final plat or, in the event that a final plat is not required, prior to issuing a building permit, the developer shall have submitted the following agreements and surety for the construction of public and private improvements for the development: 
(1)  A written agreement between the owner and the City for the installation of all public improvements, and a separate agreement for all private improvements, within one year from the date of plat approval, or such other period as may be approved by the City. Such agreements shall be in accordance with the City's standard forms of these agreements. 
(2)  Separate surety for the public and private improvements shall be required in form and amount sufficient to guarantee the performance of the obligations identified in the improvements agreements. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided below, acceptable forms of surety are as follows: 
(i)  Surety Bond. A good and sufficient surety bond executed by a corporate surety duly licensed to do business in the State of Colorado, or by another appropriate institution having adequate assets to perform the terms of the surety, as determined by the City, in an amount at least equal to 115 percent of the current cost of public facilities, such cost to be identified by the developer and approved by the City. 
(ii)  Cash Bond. A deposit with the Finance Director of Cash or Certified Funds in an amount at least equal to 115 percent of the current cost of public facilities, such cost to be identified by the developer and approved by the City. Any interest earned on the cash bond shall be the property of the City. 
(iii)  Irrevocable Letter of Credit. An irrevocable letter of credit on a form established by the city, executed by a commercial bank insured by FDIC or other appropriate institution having adequate assets to perform the terms of the letter of credit, as determined by the city. The form and conditions of such irrevocable letter of credit shall be approved by the City Attorney. The letter of credit shall be in an amount at least equal to 115 percent of the current cost of public facilities, such cost to be identified by the developer and approved by the City. 
(iv)  Plat Restriction. The owner's agreement, which shall appear on the final plat, that no lot, lots, tract, or tracts of land within the platted property shall be conveyed, sold or transferred until the required public facilities are constructed and are accepted by the City. The plat restriction may be utilized only for single-family detached residential subdivisions and in only those phases in which a building permit has not been issued. A plat restriction may be used as surety for public improvements only. The release of any plat restriction prior to the completion of all public improvement obligations pursuant to the public improvements agreement shall be given in the sole discretion of the City. No release shall be given unless the City has received an acceptable substitute form of surety in an amount equal to 100 percent of the current cost of completing any improvement at the time the release is requested, plus 15 percent warranty surety for all improvements, or, if all the required improvements have been constructed and accepted into warranty, equal to 15 percent of the current cost of constructing the improvements at the time the public improvements agreement was executed. 
(v)  Other Guarantees. An owner may guarantee the construction of public improvements by such other methods as may be specifically approved by City Council. 
(b)  Any surety scheduled to expire prior to the completion of the obligations identified in the improvements agreement shall be renewed for a period of at least six months, at least 30 days prior to the scheduled date of expiration. Failure to provide for the renewal of any surety in accordance with this subsection (b) shall be deemed a default by owner of owner's obligations under the improvements agreement and shall be grounds for demanding performance and/or cashing the surety. 
(c)  Surety amounts shall not be reduced without the prior written consent of the City. In its sole discretion, the City may agree to a reduction in the amount of any surety provided pursuant to this section to not less than 15 percent of the current cost of the improvements at the time the improvements agreement was executed, if the owner has satisfied all of owner's obligations under said agreement, except for owner's warranty obligations. 
(3)  For the purpose of this Section 11-6-4, W.M.C., "private improvements" shall include all on-site and off-site landscaping required to be installed pursuant to the official development plan for the project, whether on private or public property, as well as all on-site amenities to be privately owned and maintained in areas of private or common ownership, including, but not limited to, parking lots, fencing, screening, trash enclosures, walkways, trails, swimming pools, tennis courts, and community recreation facilities. 
(B)  If no public or private improvements are required to be constructed, and if the sole purpose of the proposed final plat is to facilitate the transfer of ownership, then the City may waive the surety requirements of this section. 
(2534 3634 3664 3770) 
11-6-5. - Design and Construction of Improvements. 
(A)  Standards: The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to develop, promulgate, and determine the applicability of, enforce, and from time to time amend the following design and construction standards: standards and specifications for the design and construction of public improvements (standards and specifications) and the City of Westminster Storm Drainage Design and Technical Criteria Manual (SDDTCM), and the City of Westminster Landscape Regulations for public and private landscaping. 
(B)  Preparation and Approval of Plans for Public Improvements: 
(1)  All construction plans, specifications, and associated engineering reports required pursuant to this Code shall be prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a professional engineer duly registered and licensed to practice engineering in the State of Colorado and shall bear the seal of said engineer. 
(2)  All construction plans, specifications, and associated engineering reports required pursuant to this Code shall be prepared in compliance with the City of Westminster Standards and Specifications for the Design and Construction of Public Improvements and the City of Westminster Storm Drainage Design and Technical Criteria Manual (SDDTCM). 
(3)  The approval by the City of any construction plan, specification, or report shall indicate only that the plan, specification, or report appears to be in conformance with the City's submittal requirements and that standard engineering principles and practices appear to have been followed. Any such approval shall not be deemed as an indication that any assumption, calculation, or conclusion contained therein has been verified by the City. The professional engineer submitting the plans, specifications, and reports shall, at all times, be solely responsible for their accuracy and validity. If, during the construction process, or at any time within one year following the acceptance by the City of the completed improvements, any deficiencies or errors are discovered in the plans, specifications, reports, or in the actual improvements as built, the City shall have the right to require any and all corrections that may be deemed necessary by the City. The costs associated with any such corrections shall be the sole responsibility of the developer. 
(4)  If the review and approval of any construction plan, specification, or report by the City has occurred more than 12 months prior to execution of the public improvements agreement or commencement of construction activities, or if construction activities have been abandoned for a period of 12 months and the improvements are not substantially complete, the city shall have the right to require the submittal of such new or supplemental plans, specifications, and reports to insure compliance with the City's current standards and design criteria. 
(5)  If, after approval of the construction drawings by the City, but prior to substantial completion of the public improvements, a court order, change in Colorado or federal law, or similar legal requirement occurs requiring the previously approved design to be changed, the City shall have the right to reevaluate the plans and require that any such change be completed. The cost for such change shall be the sole responsibility of the developer. 
(C)  Streets, Sidewalks and Bikeways: The arrangement, character, extent, and location of all streets shall conform to applicable City street and transportation plans and access control plans. In the planning, design, and construction of any new streets within the City, consideration shall be given to their relation to existing and other planned streets, to topographical conditions, to drainage, to public convenience and safety, and to the uses of land served by such streets. The arrangement of streets and sidewalks shall be planned with due regard to existing roads, future road plans, topography, soil conditions, drainage and erosion, convenience, and aesthetics and in accordance with this Code and all ordinances and policies of the City. Unless otherwise approved by the City: 
(1)  The street layout shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties, when such continuation is necessary for convenient traffic flow, fire protection, or provision of utilities. 
(2)  If the adjacent property is undeveloped and a street must dead-end temporarily, a temporary cul-de-sac may be required. 
(3)  Streets shall be named in accordance with the Denver metro grid system, unless otherwise approved on an official development plan. 
(4)  All streets shall intersect at right angles with each other. 
(5)  Street widths, lengths, grades, off-sets, and pavement sections shall be designed according to the anticipated needs of the area and the standards and specifications for the design and construction of public improvements. 
(6)  Wherever an existing or approved railroad and railroad crossing will be affected by a proposed road or street, provision shall be made for any grade separations, buffer strips, and safety protection devices as the City may determine is required for the public's safety, welfare, and convenience. Prior to the approval of an official development plan, or in the event an official development plan is not required prior to the issuance of a building permit, it shall be the applicant's responsibility to obtain any necessary approval from the affected railroad company or the Colorado Public Utilities Commission. 
(7)  Sidewalks shall be constructed as may be required by the City to accommodate pedestrian traffic. 
(8)  Streets shall be designed with grades, storm sewers, and surfacing to provide storm drainage protection for the 100-year storm without flooding or property damage and to prevent erosion and fugitive dust. 
(9)  The design shall provide for the safe and convenient arrangement of roadways and parking spaces, facilities for waste disposal, as well as open and recreational areas. 
(10)  When a property proposed for development is adjacent to, or contains a planned bikeway or trail as indicated on the City's bikeway plan, provisions for the bikeway shall be included in the preliminary and official development plans and construction of the bike path or bikeway or trail shall occur concurrently with project development at the owner's expense. 
(11)  Street rights-of-way, curb cuts, street grades, intersections and crossings shall be designed to facilitate the convenient and safe movement of motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists, and storm water as deemed necessary by the City. 
(12)  New development shall provide both bicycle and pedestrian facilities that facilitate movement between residential areas and activity areas, such as public buildings, schools, shopping areas, playgrounds, open space and recreation areas. The developer shall prepare a bicycle/pedestrian movement plan in accordance with the City plan to accomplish this, subject to the City's approval. 
(D)  Utilities: The arrangement of utilities shall be planned with due regard to existing and future utilities, topography, soil conditions, convenience, aesthetics, applicable master plans, and in accordance with this Code and all ordinances and policies of the City. 
(1)  Easements shall be of sufficient width and length for utility installation, maintenance, and access. The City may require easements at least 20 feet in width for City-owned utilities including, but not limited to, waterlines, sanitary sewers, and storm sewers. Easements at least five feet in width shall be dedicated or reserved on each side of all rear lot lines and along sufficient side lot lines where necessary for utility installation and maintenance including gas, telephone, electric, and other services. Where the rear lot line abuts property outside of the subdivision on which there are no easements at least five feet in width, then the easements on the rear lot lines in the subdivision shall be at least ten feet in width. 
(2)  Easements dedicated to the City for City-owned utilities shall provide for the exclusion of buildings, trees, shrubs and like improvements from within the easement area. The City shall have the right of access at any time to maintain and inspect such utilities. 
(E)  Construction of Improvements: 
(1)  No construction of any public improvement shall commence until the city has issued a written notice to proceed. 
(2)  The construction of all public and private improvements in areas of common ownership shall be completed in accordance with the approved construction drawings and specifications, the City of Westminster Standards and Specifications for the Design and Construction of Public Improvements, the City of Westminster Storm Drainage Design and Technical Criteria Manual (SDDTCM), and the City of Westminster Landscape Regulations. 
(F)  Inspection of Improvements: 
(1)  The City shall have the authority to inspect the work and all materials furnished as part of the work. Inspections may extend to all or any part of the work and to the preparation, fabrication, or manufacture of all materials for the work. 
(2)  Inspections made by the City are for the sole benefit of the City and do not relieve the developer or contractor of any obligations or liabilities. 
(G)  Stop Work Orders: 
(1)  The Engineering Division of the Department of Community Development shall have the authority to stop any or all construction activities as deemed necessary by issuing a written stop work order. Stop work orders may be issued for: 
(a)  A violation of any condition of the improvements agreement or of the approved construction drawings or specifications; or 
(b)  Any violation of any provision of this chapter; or 
(c)  Any violation of any other ordinance of the City, state law, or federal law pertaining to the work; or 
(d)  The existence of any condition or the occurrence of any act that may constitute a condition endangering health, life, safety, or damage to property. 
(2)  Stop work orders shall take effect immediately upon notice to the person performing the work in the field and shall remain in effect until such time as the City cancels the order in writing. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a stop work order, the contractor shall be responsible for taking such precautions as may be necessary to prevent damage to the project, prevent inconvenience or hazardous conditions for the general public, provide for normal drainage, and to erect any necessary barricades, signs, or other facilities that may be necessary. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly violate any stop work order issued pursuant to this section. Upon conviction, any such violation shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $900.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days, or both fine and imprisonment. Each day that a stop work order is violated shall constitute a separate offense under this section. 
(H)  Acceptance Into Warranty: 
(1)  Before the City shall assume ownership and maintenance responsibility for any public improvement, the public improvement must be completed in conformance with the approved construction drawings and all applicable City standards and specifications, and must be formally accepted in writing by the City. 
(2)  Acceptance of the public improvements by the City shall not relieve the developer or contractor from any obligations or liabilities with respect to the proper construction of the improvements. 
(3)  All public improvements to be constructed in connection with any development shall be completed in their entirety before any part thereof will be accepted, except as the City Engineer may otherwise agree by separate agreement with the developer. 
(I)  Warranty: 
(1)  The developer shall warrant the construction of and materials used in all public improvements for a warranty period of at least one year from the date the improvements are accepted by the City. It is the intent of the City that, at the end of the warranty period, the developer shall deliver the improvements to the City, free of any defects, damage, or debris. 
(2)  The City shall have the authority to require a warranty period in excess of one year if, in the opinion of the City, the scope of the construction or other conditions dictate such a need. 
(3)  During the term of the warranty period, the developer shall be responsible for making any repairs or replacements required due to: 
(a)  Defective materials, workmanship, or design; or 
(b)  Such damage that may be done to the improvements during the warranty period regardless of cause, except such damage that is directly attributable to City equipment or personnel, and which, in the opinion of the City, are necessary to maintain or conform the improvements to the same standards in effect at the time of the City's acceptance. 
(4)  The warranty period shall not expire until such time as the City acknowledges, in writing, that all necessary warranty corrections are complete and the warranty period is over. 
(5)  During the warranty period, the developer shall maintain a surety in one of the forms authorized pursuant to Section 11-6-4, W.M.C., in the amount of 15 percent of the cost of the improvements. 
(J)  Failure to Perform: 
(1)  A developer shall be deemed in default under this section upon any of the following events: 
(a)  A failure to satisfy any condition or obligation of the developer's improvements agreement or the approved construction drawings or specifications; 
(b)  A failure to satisfy any requirement identified on the official development plan; 
(c)  A violation of any provision of this chapter; or 
(d)  A violation of any other ordinance of the City, state law or regulation, or federal law or regulation pertaining to the work. 
(2)  In the event the City determines a developer is in default under this section, the City may take any or all of the following actions: 
(a)  Exercise the City's rights under the developer's surety; 
(b)  Deny or revoke building permits for structures; 
(c)  Withhold certificates of occupancy for structures located in the project; or 
(d)  Institute any legal actions the City Attorney may deem to be warranted. 
(2534 3133 3659) 
11-6-6. - Local Improvement Districts. 
(A)  City to Contract: The City shall have the power to contract for, construct, acquire, or install special or local public improvements; to assess the cost thereof wholly or in part against the property specially benefitted; to jointly make and jointly contract for a local public improvement and a general public improvement, and to pay from any lawful fund that portion of the cost that is general public benefit; and to accept contributions or grants-in-aid to supply the whole or any part of the cost apportioned to the City, or to accept and apply such contribution or grants-in-aid wholly or in part to the credit of the appropriate public improvement district. 
(B)  Contract: In all cases where the cost of local public improvements is to be assessed wholly or in part upon the property benefitted, the improvements shall be constructed by independent contract or contracts. All such contracts shall be authorized by the City Manager with the approval of the City Council. All such contracts shall be let to the lowest reliable and responsible bidder after publication of notice to bidders once a week for two consecutive weeks by two insertions in a newspaper of general circulation within the City, and such other newspaper or newspapers as may be designated by the City Council. The right to reject any and all bids is reserved. No such contract shall be made without bond for its faithful performance with sufficient surety or sureties thereon. 
    The aggregate payments under any contract shall not exceed either the aggregate estimate of the City Engineer or the amounts appropriated. Upon notice and for substantial cause, the work under such contracts may be suspended or terminated forthwith by the City Council or the City Manager. 
    Every contract shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any ordinance authorizing the improvements or contracts. 
    In the letting of contracts, the City Manager may impose such conditions upon bidders with regard to bonds and securities and such guarantees of good faith and responsibility on the part of the bidders for the faithful completion of the work, and providing for any other material matter or thing in connection therewith as may be considered advantageous to the City. 
    Upon default in the performance of any contract, the City Manager may advertise and let a contract for the incomplete work in a like manner and, without further ordinance, charge the cost thereof to the original contractor upon his contract and, when a deficiency shall in such case occur, the City Manager, with the approval of the City Council, may advance the amount thereof out of any available funds in the City and recover the same by suit on the original contract and bond. 
(C)  Assessment of Property: In all cases where the cost of a local public improvement is to be assessed wholly or in part upon the property benefitted, the cost shall be assessed in proportion to benefits received. Such assessments may be in proportion as the frontage of each lot or tract of land is to the frontage of all the lots and lands so improved, or may be in proportion as the area of each piece of real estate in the district is to the area of all the real estate in the district, or may be by any other method that will result in assessment being most equitably in proportion to benefits received. If, at the time of the passage of the ordinance authorizing any improvement, any piece of real estate has the whole or any part of the proposed improvement conforming to the general plan and acceptable to the City Engineer, the existing improvement may be adopted in whole or in part, or necessary changes thereof may be made to make the same conform to the general plan, and the owner of such real estate shall, when the assessment is made, be credited with the amount that is saved by reason of adopting or adapting such existing improvement. 
(D)  Exceptions of Assessment: In all cases where the cost of a local public improvement is to be assessed wholly or in part upon property benefitted, the improvement shall be initiated by the City Manager, without receiving a petition therefor, except that, when the owners of the real estate that would bear 35 percent or more of the estimated cost of the proposed improvements have filed a regularly executed petition therefor, the City Manager shall advertise such improvement for remonstrances, unless, in his judgment, the proposed improvement is not good and sufficient for the particular locality; provided, however, that no improvement proposed by petition shall be advertised for remonstrances, if the preliminary informal estimate of the City Engineer exceeds, by more than ten percent the maximum unit cost stated in the petition. The estimate of the City Engineer shall be conclusive for this determination. 
(E)  Rules of Petition: Every petition for a proposed improvement shall describe the real property owned by each signer as being benefitted by the proposed improvement, shall state the nature and location of the proposed improvement and the proposed maximum unit cost thereof, which unit cost shall be exclusive of the cost of collection of the assessments, other incidentals and all interest on any bonds issued in payment of construction and other costs from the time of issuance of said bonds to the time that interest commences on assessments; shall authorize advertising of the proposed improvement for remonstrances, if a preliminary, informal estimate of the City Engineer indicates that the cost of the proposed improvement will not exceed, by more than ten percent, the maximum unit cost set forth in the petition; and shall authorize an increase of the proposed maximum unit cost by not more than ten percent thereof, and the assessment of such increase, if the estimate of the City Engineer determines that such increase is necessary. 
    All signatures on petitions shall be subscribed and acknowledged in the manner provided by law for the acknowledgment of deeds of conveyance of real estate; provided, however, that the signature of any owner or owners of real property may be attached to a petition by their agents duly authorized by power of attorney accompanying the petition. No petitioner, his heirs, or assigns shall be permitted to withdraw from a petition after such petition has been filed with the City Manager, unless the proposed improvement is not advertised for remonstrances within nine months from the filing of the petition with the City Manager, and any petitioner who fails to withdraw prior to advertising shall be deemed to have waived his right to withdraw. 
(F)  Public Notice of Proposed Improvement: Public notice of the proposed improvements shall be given in all cases where the cost of local public improvements is assessed wholly or in part upon property benefitted. When it is proposed to assess real estate that is not abutting, adjoining, contiguous, or adjacent to any proposed improvement, the notice shall state the exterior boundaries of the real estate proposed to be so assessed or of the proposed district. The City Manager shall, by advertisement once a week for three consecutive weeks by three insertions in a newspaper of general circulation within the City, give notice to the owners of the real estate benefitted and to all persons interested generally and, without naming such owners or persons, of a description of each proposed improvement and of the real property that would be benefitted thereby, a proposed method of assessment and the manner of payment therefor, and the date, place and time for hearing written remonstrances to the proposed improvement, which date shall be not less than 20 days after the first publication of the notice of the hearing. In addition, the City Manager shall mail by first-class mail, not less than ten days prior to the hearing, a printed copy of such notice to the owners of record of all real estate in the proposed district, as such owners of record are determined by reference to the current records in the office of the county assessor, as such records are kept by that official for the purpose of performing the function of county assessor. 
(G)  Hearing of Advertised Proposed Improvements: On the day and at the time and place specified in the notice hereinabove set forth, the City Manager shall conduct a hearing for the purpose of considering the desirability of and the need for such advertised proposed improvements. If, for any reason, the hearing is postponed and not held until a later hour or date, and the City Manager is hereby authorized to postpone any hearing to a fixed later hour and date, written remonstrances to a proposed improvement shall be accepted up to the opening of the postponed session of the hearing; otherwise, such written remonstrances must be filed prior to the date and hour of the original hearing. 
    All written objections or protests to a proposed improvement shall be subscribed and acknowledged in the same manner required for petitions for proposed improvements. No person who has signed his name for an improvement shall be permitted to sign a remonstrance to the same improvement, unless such person has regularly withdrawn from such petition as herein provided. 
    If a duly executed written remonstrance is timely filed by persons constituting a majority of the owners of the property to be assessed, except in those cases where the City is to pay one-half or more of the total cost of the improvements made, the proposed improvements shall not be ordered. After the hearing and subject to the foregoing limitations, the City Manager shall enter an order approving those proposed improvements that he considers proper and disapproving those proposed improvements that he considers improper. All proceedings by the City Manager may be modified or rescinded wholly or in part at any time prior to the passage of the ordinance authorizing the improvements; provided that no substantial change in the district, details, preliminary plans or specifications or estimates shall be made after the first publication of notice to property owners, except the deletion of improvements and property from the proposed program and district; and provided, further, that the City Manager shall have the right to make minor changes in the time, plans, and materials entering into the work at any time before its completion. Any objection to the regularity, validity, and correctness of the proceedings and instruments taken, adopted, or made prior to the date of said hearing shall be deemed waived, unless presented by remonstrance at the time and in the manner herein specified. 
(H)  Formation: After the hearing hereinabove set forth, the City Engineer shall combine into suitable construction units those proposed local public improvements that have been approved by the City Manager. Each such construction unit, whether composed of non-contiguous parts or sections or not, shall constitute a local public improvement district and shall be so referred to hereinafter. More than one kind of improvement may be combined in one local public improvement district. The City Council may provide for a local public improvement district to consist of more than one assessment unit, if the council determines that, due to differences in cost, character, nature, or location of the improvements, the costs can be more equitably assessed by means of separate assessment units within the local public improvement district. In the formation of such local public improvement district or districts, the City Engineer shall make such condition as, in his judgment, will make for efficiency in construction and will result in the lowest possible construction cost. For each such local public improvement district, the City Engineer shall submit to the City Manager a detailed estimate of the total cost of the improvements, and a detailed estimate for each improvement included within the district, exclusive of the cost of collection and other incidentals, and of all interest on bonds issued in payment of construction and other costs from the time of issuance of said bonds to the time that interest commences on assessments; full details and specifications for the proposed construction, which said details and specifications shall permit and encourage competition among bidders; a map showing the real property to be assessed for the cost of construction; and that portion, if any, of the cost of such construction that is not to be assessed for local public improvement. 
(I)  Approval: Whenever the City Manager approves a local public improvement district as submitted by the City Engineer, he shall cause to be prepared and submitted to the City Council an ordinance authorizing creation of the district and the construction of the improvements proposed, which ordinance shall be in the form recommended by the City Manager by his endorsement thereon. 
    The finding of the City Council by ordinance that any local public improvements were duly ordered after notice duly given, or that a petition or remonstrance was or was not filed, or was or was not duly subscribed and acknowledged as herein required, shall be conclusive in every court or other tribunal. 
(J)  Owners of Abutting Real Estate: Before beginning any authorized construction, the City Manager may order the owners of the abutting real estate to connect their several premises with the gas, water, and sewer mains or with any other conduits in the street or alley adjacent to their several premises. In case of a failure or refusal by the owners of the abutting real estate to make the ordered connections, such connections shall be made incidental to the authorized construction and the cost thereof assessed upon the appropriate abutting real estate. 
(K)  Notice of Cost: Upon completion of any local improvement and upon acceptance thereof by the City Manager, or whenever the whole cost of an improvement or a complete unit thereof can be definitely ascertained, the City Manager shall publish notice once a week for three consecutive weeks, by three insertions in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, a notice to the owners of the real estate to be assessed and all persons interested generally, and, without naming such owners or persons, that said improvements have been or are about to be completed and accepted, specifying the whole cost of the improvements, the portion, if any, to be paid by the City, and the proposed apportionment on the real property benefited, and a statement that any written complaints, objections and remonstrances to the proposed apportionment that are filed with the City Manager at any time within 20 days after the first publication of the notice will be heard and determined by the council, sitting as a board of equalization, at its first regular meeting thereafter, giving the time and place of such meeting, or at an adjournment thereof, before the passage of any ordinance assessing the cost of such improvement. Any objection to the regularity, validity, or correctness of the proceedings, or of said proposed apportionment, or of any assessment based thereon, and of the amount thereof levied on each tract and parcel of land, shall be deemed waived, unless presented in writing at the time and in the manner herein specified. In determining the whole cost of the local public improvement, there shall be included therein, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the cost of constructing or otherwise acquiring such improvement or improvements, the cost of acquiring necessary rights-of-way and easements, engineering and clerical services and supplies, cost of inspection, cost of collecting assessments, advertising, printing, interest on bonds until interest on assessments commences to defray such, fiscal services, legal services for preparing proceedings, and advising in regard thereto and other incidental costs. 
(L)  Complaints: After the period specified in such notice, the City Council, sitting as a board of equalization, at its next regular meeting, or an adjournment thereof, shall hear and determine all written complaints, objections, and remonstrances filed with the City Manager and may confirm the apportionment proposed or make any modifications that may seem equitable and just. 
    After the consideration of all objections to the apportionment, if any change in the apportionment shall be made by council, it shall certify such change to the City Manager, who shall prepare a new apportionment and an assessing ordinance in accordance therewith and transmit the same to council. The assessing ordinance shall assess the cost of the improvement against the real estate to be assessed in the district in the proportion finally determined. The passage of the assessing ordinance shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that the property assessed is benefitted in the amount of the assessment, and that such assessments have been lawfully made. 
(M)  Assessment Roll: The City Clerk shall, from said assessing ordinance, prepare a local assessment roll in book form showing in suitable columns each piece of real estate assessed, the amount of the assessment, the amounts of each installment of principal and interests if, in pursuance of this ordinance, the same is payable in installments and the date when such installments will become due, with suitable columns for use in case of payment of the whole amount, or of any installment or penalty, and deliver the same duly certified, under the corporate seal, to the Finance Director for collection. 
(N)  Lien Against Property: From the date of the final publication of the assessing ordinance, all assessments made pursuant thereto shall be a lien in the several amounts assessed against each lot or tract of land, and such assessments shall have priority over all other liens, except general taxes. As to any subdivisions of any real estate assessed pursuant thereto, the assessments in each case shall be a lien upon all the subdivisions in proportion to their respective areas or frontages. No delays, mistakes, errors, defects, or irregularities in any act or proceeding authorized herein shall prejudice or invalidate any final assessment, but the same shall be remedied by subsequent or amended acts or proceedings as the case may require, and, when so remedied, the same shall take effect as of the date of the original act or proceeding. 
    If, in any court of competent jurisdiction, any final assessment is set aside for irregularity in the proceedings or for any other reason, then the council, upon notice as required in the making of an original assessment, may make a new assessment in accordance with the provisions herein. 
(O)  Assessments Due and Payable: Without demand, all assessments shall be due and payable within 30 days after the publication of the assessing ordinance after its passage, provided that the City Council may provide that the owners of the property to be assessed may elect to pay such assessments in annual installments not exceeding 20 installments, which installments shall include interest on the unpaid assessment annually at such rate as may be set forth in the assessing ordinance. The number of installments, periods of payment and rate of interest shall be determined and fixed by the City Council in the assessing ordinance. Payments may be made to the Finance Director at any time within 30 days after the publication of the assessing ordinance after its passage, and an allowance of the per centum added for costs of collection shall be made on all payments during said period of 30 days. 
    Failure to pay the whole assessment within said period of 30 days shall be conclusively considered and held as an election on the part of all persons interested, whether under disability or otherwise, to pay in such installments. All persons so electing to pay in installments shall be conclusively considered to have consented to said improvements. Such election shall be conclusively considered and held a waiver of any and all right to question the power or jurisdiction of the City to construct or acquire the improvements, the quality of the work, the regularity or sufficiency of the proceedings, the validity or correctness of the assessment, or the validity of the lien thereof. 
    The owner of any piece of real estate not in default as to any installment or payment may, at any time, pay the whole unpaid principal of his assessment with the interest to the time the next installment of interest or principal becomes due and payable. 
    The owner of any divided or undivided interest may pay his share of any assessment. 
(P)  Default of Payment: At the expiration of said 30-day period provided in the preceding Section, the Finance Director shall return the local assessment roll to the clerk, showing all payments made thereon with the date of each payment. Said roll shall be certified by the City Clerk under the corporate seal of the City and delivered to the County Treasurer of Adams County or Jefferson County, as the case may be, with his warrant for collection of the same, and the City Clerk shall obtain a receipt from the County Treasurer for the same. The County Treasurer shall receive payment of all assessments appearing upon the assessment roll with interest. In case of default in the payment of any installment of principal or interest when due, the County Treasurer shall advertise and sell any and all property, for which such default is suffered and apply such proceeds to payment of the whole of the unpaid assessments, including interest and penalties thereon. Said advertisements and sales shall be made at the same time and in the same manner, under all the same conditions and penalties, and with the same effect as are provided by general law for sales of real estate in default of payment of general taxes. 
(Q)  Failure to Pay: Failure to pay any installment, whether of principal or interest when due or a determination by the City Council that a pending tax sale affecting any property subject to an assessment threatens to extinguish or materially impair the lien of such an assessment, shall cause the whole of the unpaid principal and accrued interest to become due and payable immediately, and the whole amount of the unpaid principal and accrued interest shall thereafter draw penalty interest at a rate per month equal to the monthly rate applicable to installments, plus an additional one and one-quarter percent per month or fraction of a month until the day of sale; but, at any time prior to the date of sale, the owner may pay the amount of all delinquent installments, with all penalty interest accrued, and thereupon shall be restored to the right thereafter to pay in installments in the same manner as if default had not been suffered. No statute of limitations shall apply until the last installment of assessments becomes due and payable. 
(R)  Sale of Unpaid Assessments: At any sale by the County Treasurer of any real estate in the City for the purpose of paying any special assessments for local improvements, the finance director, having the written authority from the City Council, may purchase such real estate without paying for the same in cash and receive a certificate of purchase from the County Treasurer in the name of the City. Such certificates shall be received and credited at their face value, with all interest and penalties accrued, on account of the assessments in pursuance of which the sale was made. The certificates may thereafter be sold by the finance director for the best price obtainable at public sale, at auction, or by sealed bids, in the same manner and under the same conditions as is hereinafter provided in respect to the sale of property owned by the City, and the proceeds, in the event that all bonded indebtedness incurred in payment for said local improvements has not been discharged in full, credited to the fund created by the ordinance for the payment of such assessments; or, in the event that all bonded indebtedness incurred in payment for said local improvements has been discharged in full, the proceeds shall be credited to the special surplus and deficiency fund provided for by subsection (U) of this section. 
    Such assignments shall be without recourse, and the sale and assignment shall operate as a lien in favor of the purchaser and assignee as provided by law in the case of sale of real estate in default of payment of the general taxes. 
    Cumulatively, with all other remedies, the City, being the owner of the property by virtue of a tax deed or being the owner of property otherwise acquired in satisfaction or discharge of the liens represented by such certificates of sale, may sell such property for the best price obtainable at public sale, at auction, or by sealed bids. Such sale shall be after public notice by the Finance Director to all persons having or claiming any interest in the property to be sold or the proceeds of such sale, such public notice to be by publication, once a week for three consecutive weeks by three insertions in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. Such notice shall describe the property; state the time, place, and manner of receiving bids; and the time fixed for sale, which shall be not less than 20 days after the first publication. The City may reject any and all bids. 
    Any interested party, at any time within ten days after receipt of bids for the sale of property, may file with the City Manager a written protest as to the sufficiency or the amount of any bid made or the validity of the proceedings for the sale. If such protest is denied, such person, within ten days thereafter, shall commence an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin or restrain the City from completing the sale. If no such action shall be commenced, all protests or objections to the sale shall be deemed to have been waived, and the City shall then convey the property to the successful bidder by quit claim deed. 
    In addition to all other remedies, the City, when it is the holder of a certificate of purchase, may bring a civil action for the foreclosure thereof, joining as defendants all persons having or claiming any interest in the property or the proceeds of foreclosure sale, and all governmental units having taxes or other claims against said property, and all unknown persons having or claiming interest in said property. Any number of certificates may be foreclosed in the same proceeding. In such proceedings, the City, as plaintiff, shall be entitled to all relief provided by law in actions for adjudication of rights with respect to real property. The proceeds of any such sale of property shall be credited to the appropriate special assessment fund or the surplus and deficiency fund, as hereinabove provided. The City shall deduct therefrom the necessary expenses in securing deeds and taking procedures for the sale or foreclosure. 
(S)  Bonds: For the purpose of paying all or such portion of the cost of any improvement constructed under the provisions of this chapter, special assessment bonds of the City may be issued of such date and in such denominations as may be prescribed by the City Council in fully registered form (i.e., registered as to payment of both principal and interest), bearing the name of the district improved and payable in a sufficient period of years after date to cover the period of payment provided, but subject to call as provided in subsection (T) of this section. All such bonds shall be issued on estimates approved by the City Council or sold as hereinafter provided, and the Finance Director shall preserve a record of the same in a suitable book kept for that purpose. All such bonds shall be subscribed by the Mayor, countersigned by the Finance Director with the corporate seal of the City thereto affixed, and attested by the City Clerk. 
    Such bonds shall be payable out of the monies collected on account of the assessments made for such improvements, out of the surplus and deficiency fund referred to in subsection (U) of this section, or out of any monies provided by credit enhancements obtained for the bonds. 
    All monies collected from such assessments for any improvement shall be applied for the payment of the bonds issued until payment in full is made of all the bonds, both principal and interest. 
    The bonds may be used in payment of the cost of the improvement as specified or the City Council may sell sufficient of said bonds to pay the cost in cash. Said bonds may be sold by public sale or private sale, to the best advantage of the City. All bids may be rejected at the discretion of the City Council. All such bonds shall be negotiable in form, shall bear interest as may be fixed by the City Council, and shall be payable either semi-annually or annually as may be provided by the City Council in the ordinance authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
(T)  Payment of Bonds: Whenever the Finance Director has funds derived from assessment payment in the treasury to the credit of the improvement district exceeding the interest on the unpaid principal of the bonds issued therefor and outstanding for such period as may be specified in the ordinance authorizing the bonds, the Finance Director shall call in, or direct the bond registrar to call in, a suitable number of such bonds for payment. Notice of redemption of bonds shall be given in the manner provided in the ordinance authorizing the issuance thereof. On the redemption date specified in such notice, interest on the bonds so called shall cease. The notice shall specify by number the bonds so called, and all such bonds shall be paid in their regular numerical order. 
(U)  Surplus and Deficiency: Where all outstanding bonds have been paid in a public improvement district and any money remains to the credit of said district, it shall be transferred to a special surplus and deficiency fund, and whenever there is a deficiency in any improvement district to meet payment of outstanding bonds, it shall be paid out of said fund. Whenever a public improvement district has paid and cancelled three-fourths of its bonds outstanding, and for any reason the remaining assessments are not paid in time to pay the remaining bonds of the district, and there is not sufficient money in said special surplus and deficiency fund, then the City shall pay said bonds when due and reimburse itself by collecting the unpaid assessments due said district. 
(V)  General Fund Advances, City Participation: In consideration of general benefits conferred on the City at large from the construction or installation of improvements in special or local improvement districts, the City Council may levy annual taxes on all taxable property within the City at a rate not exceeding two mills in any one year, to be disbursed as determined by the City Council for the purpose of advancing money to maintain current payments of interest and equal annual payments of the principal amount of bonds issued for any special or local improvement district thereinafter created. 
    The proceeds of such taxes shall be placed in a special fund and shall be disbursed only for the purposes specified herein, provided, however, that in lieu of such tax levies, the City Council may annually transfer to such special fund any available money of the City, but in no event shall the amount transferred in any one year exceed the amount that would result from a tax levied in such year as herein limited. 
    In addition to the above, the City Council may finance the City's share of the cost of any special improvement project, whether or not such cost is assessed against City-owned property, by the issuance of special improvement district bonds, and shall appropriate annually an amount sufficient for the payment of that portion of the share of the costs then due. The City's share of the cost of any special improvement project shall be determined by the City Council. Such bonds shall not be subject to any election requirements or debt limitation that might otherwise exist pursuant to the City Charter or other applicable law. 
(W)  Proceedings: In all proceedings authorized or required by this chapter, figures may be used instead of words and it shall not be necessary in improvement districts to designate each piece of real estate in the district separately. General description and quantities may be used, except in the assessment rolls, and the cost may be stated as being a probable amount per front foot, per square foot, per acre, or per lot of a given size and proportionate amounts for other lots or, when a different rule of assessment is provided, then as being subject to such rule. 
(X)  Improvements: The improvements authorized by this chapter may consist of street improvements, such as grading, paving, curbing, guttering, providing parking for, widening, lengthening, altering, signalizing, or otherwise improving the whole or any part of any street or alley, or streets or alleys, including bridges, overpasses, and underpasses in the City, or any one or more of said improvements, including the reconstruction, replacement, renewal, or extension of the same. In case of grading only, or grading and curbing only, the improvements may include the necessary crosswalks. 
    Such improvement may also consist of the construction of district sewers, or storm sewers in districts to be known as storm sewer districts, the same to be provided by ordinance in accordance with the provisions herein contained. Said sewers may consist of the necessary pipes, ditches, drainageways, culverts, bridges, manholes, inlets, and appurtenances and shall be so constructed as to connect with some existing public sewer or natural drainage. Said districts may be divided into subdistricts to be specially named or numbered in said ordinance. Such storm drains may be made, contracted for, or constructed larger than required by a local public improvement district, and the City may pay from any lawful fund that portion of the cost that may be in excess of the cost required by the district and, upon the extension at a later time of the mains or submains to an area not included within the district for which mains or submains were made and contracted for, the City may assess the amount paid by the City as a lien upon real property benefited by the oversized construction and extension of the mains and submains. 
(Y)  Legal Proceedings: No action or proceeding, at law or in equity, to review any acts or proceedings, question the validity or enjoin the performance of any act, or the issuance or collection of any bonds, or the levy or collection of any assessments authorized herein, or for any other relief against any acts or proceedings done or had pursuant hereto or under the provisions of the Charter of the City of Westminster, with reference hereto, whether based upon illegalities, irregularities, or jurisdictional defects, shall be maintained, unless commenced within 30 days after the performance of the act or the passage of the resolution or ordinance complained of or else be thereafter perpetually barred. 
    Local public improvement districts created prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be governed by the laws relating to such improvement districts on the date of their creation. 
(Z)  Waiver of Procedures: Any of the provisions of this chapter may be waived in writing by the owner of all property in the district that is to be assessed, and by the mayor, if the City is to bear any of the costs of the improvements. Such a waiver must state the requirements of this chapter that are being waived. No person shall be permitted to withdraw a written waiver once it has been submitted to the City Council for consideration. The authorization for such a waiver shall be contained within the ordinance establishing the district. 
(AA)  Acquisition of Improvements: Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, a local improvement district may be created for the acquisition of improvements already constructed, or for both acquisition and construction of improvements. With respect to improvements to be acquired, the provisions of this chapter concerning public bidding of construction contracts shall not apply. 
(2534 3664) 
11-6-7. - Procedures for the Establishment of Recovery and Participation Costs. 
(A)  Findings: 
(1)  The City Council hereby finds and determines that expansion of land use and development within the City results in impacts upon public facilities and improvements and necessitates the construction and expansion of new public facilities, improvements, and services, including arterial and collector streets and bridges; water and sewer facilities; schools; pedestrian areas and community and neighborhood parks; police and fire services; drainageways; parking facilities; and other city facilities, improvements, and services. 
(2)  The City Council further finds and determines that it is appropriate and fair to require new development, not current citizens, to bear such proportionate share of the cost of improvements, facilities, and services as the City determines are reasonably necessitated by and of reasonable benefit to new development. 
(3)  The City Council further finds and determines it is fair, reasonable, and equitable for the City to plan for and provide facilities, improvements, and services necessary for the efficient and logical development of land within the City and to recover at or prior to development the cost of such facilities, improvements, and services from the properties benefitted by such facility, improvement, or service. 
(4)  The City Council additionally finds that new public facilities, improvements, and services increase the value of and enhance the development potential of adjacent properties. 
(B)  Recovery of Costs of Public Improvements: 
(1)  The City shall have the authority to allocate and recover the costs of construction of public improvements or facilities to property owners based on the benefit of such improvement, facility, or service to said owners. Said recovery costs shall be paid to the City by the benefitted property owner and forwarded to the party constructing the improvement or facilities. Subject to the provisions of subsection (E)(1)(e), below, where the construction of the improvement or facility has been financed in whole or in part by a property owner or owners, and the financed amounts exceed the amount of benefits the owner or owners will realize from the improvement or facility so financed, the City shall assume or recover the amount of such excess costs and reimburse the financing owner or owners to the extent the amount financed exceeds the benefits received. 
(2)  As part of the preliminary development plan or official development plan for any land within the City, the City may determine the public facilities, improvements, and services that are reasonably necessitated by and that are of reasonable benefit to the land being developed. The City shall have the authority to establish and administer a program to recover from benefitted property owners the costs incurred by the City or other party in providing those public facilities, improvements, and services, which may include: 
(a)  The cost of right-of-way acquisition and construction of streets, including traffic signals, street lights, and traffic signs. 
(b)  The cost of sanitary sewer and water treatment and transmission facilities and service. 
(c)  Costs incurred for the acquisition, construction and servicing of drainageways. 
(d)  The cost of locating or relocating above-ground or underground utilities. 
(e)  Costs incurred for the acquisition, development, and furnishing of neighborhood and community parks, public open spaces, pedestrian walkways, bikeways, and other recreational facilities in excess of normal development requirements. 
(f)  Costs incurred for the acquisition, development, construction, and furnishing of such other City facilities or services that the City determines are reasonably necessary to serve, and of reasonable benefit to, new development. 
(3)  The City Council shall provide by ordinance for the recovery of appropriate costs for public improvements, facilities, or services constructed or to be constructed by the City. Said ordinance shall establish the nature and extent of the recoveries due to the City. Such ordinances may include provisions for simple interest payable to the City. 
(4)  In the case of improvements financed by the City with the proceeds of special assessment bonds, the City may forward any costs recovered under this section to the owners or developers previously assessed for the costs of the improvements. In the case of a property owner or developer who has elected to pay an assessment in installments and who is also owed costs recovered, this may be accomplished by an adjustment to the periodic payment owing, or in any other manner that the City Council deems just. 
(5)  The City may require a developer to provide and install public improvements, facilities, or services sufficient to serve surrounding lands that the City determines are necessary for sound service planning and future property development. The City shall collect from the owners of those properties benefitted by such facilities such amounts that the City determines to be reasonable and in proportion to the benefits to such properties. From such collection, the City shall reimburse the party who installed the public facility. 
(6)  In connection with the construction of any improvement or facility by a property owner or developer pursuant to this section, the City and such owner or developer may enter into a written agreement concerning the construction and the owner or developer's rights of cost recovery, if any, as follows: 
(a)  Agreements may include provision for simple interest. 
(b)  The City Manager shall be empowered to execute such agreements on behalf of the City. 
(c)  In each such agreement, the City shall require that the developer or his successors notify the City in the event that there is a change in the payee of recovery fees collected for disbursement by the City. This notice shall be provided no later than 30 days after the effective date of the change in payee. This notification shall include the new payee, the payee's address, a description of the event resulting in the change of the payee, and the effective date of the change in payee. The notice shall be signed by someone legally authorized to bind the transferor. The City shall send collected recovery fees to the payee of record, as set forth in this paragraph (c). If, due to lack of notice by the payee, the city is unable to ascertain the identity or location of the payee within 60 days after receipt of the recovery fees, such fees shall revert to the City, and the City may declare the agreement terminated and deposit the undisbursed recovery fees in the City's general fund for City use. 
(C)  Allowable Recovery Costs: Costs that are otherwise recoverable pursuant to this section shall be limited to the actual costs of materials, labor, equipment, acquisition of rights-of-way and easements, including condemnation costs, engineering services, and other costs directly related to the construction of the improvements. 
    Costs for the administration of contracts, license fees, attorney fees, overhead, and other administrative, indirect costs shall be considered as the cost of doing daily business and shall not be included in recovery costs. 
(D)  Method for Recovery of Costs: 
(1)  The City shall establish cost recovery for public improvements based upon the benefit to the development. Such methods may include comparative area or distance of a development benefited by a public improvement, comparative population or housing density of the development benefited by the public improvement, the trip generation rate, or other methodology for calculating approximate use of the public facilities, and such other methods as the City may establish from time to time that are based upon the reasonable benefit conferred on a development by a public facility. For public facilities, cost recovery obligations shall be based on the following: 
(a)  Water Mains. The owner or developer of property abutting a treated water main constructed and paid for by another party shall pay a proportionate share of the cost determined by dividing one-half the total cost of the main by the total length of the main and multiplying the resulting quotient by the number of lineal feet of property abutting the main. The City will be responsible for the fractional cost of that portion of any water main that exceeds 16 inches in diameter. 
(b)  Sanitary Sewers. The owner or developer of property within a sanitary sewer recovery basin who utilizes a sanitary sewer main constructed and paid for by another party shall pay a proportionate share determined by dividing the total cost of the main by the total acreage in the established service area and multiplying the resulting quotient by the number of acres in the property that is to develop. Sanitary sewer mains that do not exceed minimum size for a public main as established by the City shall not be eligible for recoveries or City participation. 
(c)  Pump Stations. The owner or developer of property served by a pump station within an established pump station recovery area shall pay a proportionate share of the cost of the station based upon the acreage of his property divided by the total acreage in the pump station service area. 
(d)  Street Improvements. Except as otherwise provided by Section 11-6-7(D)(1)(e), W.M.C., below, the owner or developer of property abutting a street constructed and paid for by another party shall pay a proportionate share of the cost of said street, determined as follows: 
(i)  For streets up to 48 feet in width, as measured from flowline to flowline, exclusive of acceleration and deceleration lanes, the owner or developer shall be required to pay 50 percent of the cost of the improvements, including street pavement, subbase, storm sewer and other appurtenances, right-of-way costs, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and acceleration and deceleration lanes adjacent to the development. 
(ii)  For streets that exceed 48 feet in width, as measured from flowline to flowline, exclusive of acceleration and deceleration lanes, the owner shall pay for the cost of constructing 24 feet of street improvements, plus the cost of curb, gutter, sidewalk, and any hiker/biker trails, plus the cost of any required acceleration and deceleration lanes adjacent to the development. On designated arterial streets, the City shall fund cost of construction of the remaining portion of the street. 
(iii)  All drainage and other conduit structures constructed as an integral part of the street shall be considered to be street improvements, and the cost of those facilities may be allocated using the same method as allocating the cost of street improvements. The calculation of recovery costs for other drainage facilities, including storm drainage facilities that are not an integral part of the street construction, shall be established on a case-by-case basis, using a method based upon reasonable benefit to the property. 
However, the following minimum standards on storm drainage facilities must be met in order for a project to receive consideration for recovery. All facilities must be in closed conduit; all facilities must be designed to be able to be used by other properties within the basin, and all facilities must be designed to handle developed flows. 
(e)  Bridges, Overpasses and Interchanges. The cost of any bridge, overpass, interchange, or similar street improvement involving grade-separated facilities may be assessed on an area or acreage basis, if council finds that the benefits of a particular improvement are enjoyed by a larger group of property owners than the abutting property owners. 
(2)  In the event the City determines that a development is reasonably benefitted more than under the minimum recovery methods above, the City may calculate an alternate method to determine reasonable benefit and recovery costs for a development, provided that there shall be recovered no more than 100 percent of the costs of public facilities, plus applicable interest. 
(3)  All agreements or ordinances created in connection with the construction of a public improvement for which costs have been allocated pursuant to this section shall be recorded with the appropriate County Clerk's office as a matter of public record. It is the responsibility of every developer to identify those recovery agreements that pertain to their developments. 
(E)  Documentation and Recording of Recovery Obligations: 
(1)  Developer-Constructed Improvements. 
(a)  Any agreement between the City and a developer for cost recoveries shall be set forth in the developer's subdivision improvements agreement in accordance with the provisions of Section 11-6-4, W.M.C., above. 
(b)  All such cost recovery agreements for developer-constructed improvements shall include a listing of those properties to be charged with cost recovery for the improvement(s), which list shall be provided by the developer-beneficiary within the time period prescribed by Section 11-6-4(A), W.M.C. The developer shall also provide within the same time period a cost estimate of the improvements. The City shall review and approve for recording all such agreements that include provisions for cost recovery for the benefit of private developers, provided, however, it shall be the responsibility of the developer to record such agreements, and any effect on the developer's ability to recover costs, pursuant to the developer's failure to appropriately record such agreement or include a sufficient legal description for the properties to be charged with cost recovery, shall be the sole responsibility of the developer. 
(c)  Prior to the City's acceptance of any public improvements constructed by a developer, the developer shall furnish the City with one set of reproducible, as-built drawings and a final statement of construction costs for those improvements subject to recovery in a format acceptable to the City. The City shall review the developer's final statement of construction costs and, upon the City's approval, said final statement of construction costs shall be recorded by the developer, which thereafter shall be the schedule of recovery costs that the City will follow in administering the cost recovery agreement pursuant to subsection (I) below. 
(d)  The developer-beneficiary of any cost recovery agreement approved by the City pursuant to this section shall pay a fee of $500.00 to the City for the preparation, recordation, and administration of the agreement. 
(e)  The City's duty and liability in connection with the administration of a cost recovery agreement pursuant to this section shall be limited as follows. In administering such agreements: 
(i)  The City shall exercise reasonable care to collect such amounts due the developer-beneficiary, but the City shall not be responsible or liable for any amounts not actually paid to the city by the responsible party. The developer-beneficiary shall have no cause of action against the City, other than to recover any amounts actually collected and on deposit with the City. 
(ii)  The City shall not be deemed to be acting as an agent or fiduciary of the developer-beneficiary or the responsible party. It shall be the exclusive responsibility of the developer-beneficiary to monitor and enforce the payment provisions of the agreement. 
(iii)  In the event of non-payment by a responsible party, the developer-beneficiary, in its capacity as principal third-party beneficiary of the agreement, shall have as its exclusive remedy the right to bring a cause of action against the defaulting responsible party. Such action shall be brought within one year from the date the developer-beneficiary knew, or should have known in the exercise of due diligence, of the default. 
(iv)  The limitations set forth above shall be deemed as incorporated into every cost recovery agreement to be administered by the City. 
(2)  Cost Recovery for City-Constructed Public Improvements. All cost recovery obligations for City-constructed improvements shall be established by ordinance. The ordinance shall include a list of properties to be charged with cost recovery for the City-constructed improvement. The ordinance establishing such cost recovery related to a City-constructed improvement shall be recorded in the real estate records of the counties in which the properties to be charged with cost recovery are located. If available, the ordinance shall include a final statement of construction costs for the improvements subject to recovery. Otherwise, the ordinance may include an estimate of construction costs for the improvements to be constructed, and a final statement of construction costs for the improvements shall be recorded as soon as practical following the completion of the improvements. After the final statement of construction costs for City-constructed public improvements has been recorded, the City shall thereafter recover such costs pursuant to the provisions of subsection (I) below. 
(F)  Interest: 
(1)  From time to time, the City Council shall, by resolution, establish the interest rate to be applied to recovery costs. The interest shall be simple interest applied to the principal only, based on one year increments, or fractions thereof. 
(2)  The maximum amount of allowable accrued interest for any recovery agreement is 50 percent of the original cost of the public facility. 
(G)  Inclusion of Recovery Costs in Official Development Plans: All official development plans shall contain a section entitled "recovery costs," which shall contain a list of the public facilities previously constructed on which the proposed development will be required to pay recovery costs and the areas of benefit, if applicable, and the city recording information for the ordinance and agreement that established the recovery costs. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing to the contrary, the development shall also be responsible for any recovery costs established subsequent to the approval of the official development plan. However, no recovery cost obligation shall be invalid against a development if it is undiscovered and/or inadvertently omitted from the official development plan. 
(H)  Recordation and Lien: 
(1)  The agreement or ordinance that sets forth the public facilities, the costs thereof, the areas of benefit, and the method of recovery of costs shall be filed and recorded with the County Clerk and recorder of the county in which the facilities are located and the County Clerk and recorder of any county in which property may be located that may be reasonably expected to be responsible for such costs, once they have been finally determined. 
(2)  From the date of recording of any cost recovery agreement for developer-constructed public improvements, or a cost recovery ordinance for City-constructed public improvements, each of the records shall create a first and prior lien upon the properties benefited in the amount of the costs of the public facilities determined by the City attributable to the property, as provided by Title I, Chapter 31, of this Code. At its discretion, the City may allow the lien to become junior to the lien of deed(s) of trust executed by the landowners to secure loans to finance the construction of public facilities on the property. 
(I)  Payment of Recovery Costs: All recovery costs shall be due and payable at the time of the recording of a final plat for the applicable property, or at such time as application is made for a building permit for the applicable property, whichever occurs first. The City may withhold building permits on property within the area of benefit until recovery costs are paid. In the event an owner desires to proceed with development of a portion of his property based on a phased development plan, the owner may proceed after paying that portion of the recovery costs and making provision for payment of the remainder satisfactory to the City. 
(J)  Termination of Recoveries: Upon receipt of an application by an owner previously entitled to receipt of cost recoveries or on its own motion, the City may terminate a recovery for a public facility, if the costs of the public facilities have been substantially recovered, if ten years have passed, if the project may be more effectively financed by another method, or for such other good cause as the City may determine. 
(K)  Alternative Method: This article is intended to establish an alternative method for the financing of public improvements for lands that will be reasonably benefited thereby and the provisions hereof shall not be construed to limit the power of the City to utilize any other lawful method for accomplishing this purpose. 
(2534 3664) 
11-6-8. - Dedication of property for public purposes. 
(A)  Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Multi-family dwelling unit shall mean a dwelling unit contained in a structure also containing other dwelling units in which each unit is attached to another at one or more party walls and at either the floor or the ceiling. For purposes of this chapter, a dwelling unit otherwise meeting this definition, but containing more than two bedrooms, shall be considered a single-family attached dwelling unit. A structure could contain both multi-family dwelling units and single-family attached dwelling units as defined herein. This category is generally in excess of eight dwelling units per acre. 
    Single-family attached dwelling unit shall mean a dwelling unit contained in its own structure from ground to roof, which structure shares one or more party walls with one or more similar units. A limited number of multi-family dwelling units may be incorporated into an otherwise single-family attached building. This category is generally over five dwelling units per acre, but not exceeding eight dwelling units per acre. 
    Single-family detached dwelling unit shall mean a single dwelling unit contained in a freestanding structure that has no party walls with other structures. This category generally does not exceed five. 
(B)  Public Land Dedication: 
(1)  No land development containing proposed or potential residential uses shall be approved by the City, unless the applicant for such development provides for the dedication of public lands to the City for park, open space, and other public purposes as determined by the City in accordance with this section. 
(2)  The applicant shall dedicate to the City an amount of developable land corresponding to the projected residential population of the development as follows: Twelve acres per every 1,000 persons. This minimum requirement reflects a portion of the projected demand of recreation and open space properties and facilities from the population of the proposed development. 
Projected population is calculated as follows: 
 Number of single-family detached units x 3.0 persons per unit, and 
 Number of single-family attached units x 2.5 persons per unit, and 
 Number of multi-family units x 2.0 persons per unit, and 
 Number of independent living senior housing units x 1.5 persons per unit, and 
 Institutional residential uses, such as group homes, congregate care, and similar uses: number of beds x 0.5 persons per bed, and 
 Assisted living and similar uses: number of beds x 0.25 persons per bed 
 Skilled nursing facilities and similar uses are exempt 
(3)  All land dedicated in accordance with this section shall possess suitable access and shall be of a location, size, shape, and topography suitable for development into active recreational areas without significant earthmoving, unless otherwise approved by the City. The City shall have the option to accept as part of the dedication requirement major floodplains, narrow strips to provide trail connection from one major recreational or park area to another, or other undevelopable areas suitable for open space. Undevelopable land so designated shall be credited at one-sixth the value of developable land. 
(4)  If the City determines a land dedication in accordance with this section would not serve the public interest, the City may require payment of a fee in lieu of the dedication, or may require dedication of a smaller amount of land than would otherwise be required and payment of a fee in lieu of the portion not dedicated. The amount of the fee shall be the fair market value of the land that would otherwise be required to be dedicated under this section. "Fair market value" shall be determined by the City as of the date that dedication would otherwise be required. The City may require an appraisal to be performed. The appraiser must be licensed by the State of Colorado. Cost for the appraisal shall be the responsibility of the developer. 
(5)  Land required to be dedicated under this section shall be shown on preliminary development plans and all other planning documents as "public land dedication" and shall be dedicated to the City after the approval of the preliminary development plan at such time as the City shall determine, but in no event later than the approval of the final plat encompassing the land to be dedicated. Following the City's approval of a preliminary development plan containing a public land dedication, the City may withhold approval of the property's official development plan, final plat, or any other approvals, including building permits, until such public land dedication is perfected. 
(6)  In considering whether to approve a phasing schedule incurred in a preliminary development plan or official development plan, the City shall consider whether the City will have adequate public land in the development for the land area actually developed. The City may require, as a condition of approval of such preliminary development plan or official development plan and any plats approved under such preliminary development plan or official development plan, that proposed public land be included as a part of an earlier phase than that proposed by the developer or subdivider. 
(7)  All lands required to be dedicated under this section shall be dedicated to the City without restriction and free and clear of any and all liens, restrictions, and covenants, regardless of whether the City or another entity will be the ultimate user under the proposed public use. Fees required under this section shall be paid to the City by certified check at the time of final plat approval. 
(8)  Land to be dedicated to the City under this section shall be preserved and protected during the development process. The developer shall not disturb the topsoil or vegetation on the land during the development process. If the topsoil or vegetation is damaged or disturbed, the City may require the developer to pay the City the cost of restoring such vegetation and topsoil. All construction debris and other foreign matter shall be removed from the site prior to dedication. 
(9)  The land dedication requirements under this section are in addition to and separate from the requirements for public school sites, dedication of street rights-of-way and easements or rights-of-way for utilities, drainage facilities and other public improvements. 
(10)  If, at the time of annexation of the land on which a development is proposed, the developer or a predecessor in interest dedicated lands to the City for public purposes, the land dedication requirements of this section shall be reduced by the number of acres actually dedicated at that time. 
(11)  Appeals pertaining to the calculation of land dedication for public land, park development fees, park development credits, or cash-in-lieu of dedication shall be made to the City Manager. 
(C)  Park Development Fees: 
(1)  City Policy. It is the policy of the City that all developers of any new residential development projects shall be required to provide, at the developer's expense, sufficient park improvements and recreational facilities to serve the projected population of the development. To accomplish this purpose, there is hereby enacted a park development fee, in addition to any land contribution requirement imposed by this Code or any other City ordinance or resolution. 
(2)  Park Development Fee. Every person, firm or corporation applying for and obtaining any building permit for the original construction of any dwelling unit shall be required to pay, prior to the occupancy of the first unit in any building or structure, and as a condition precedent to the issuance of any occupancy certificate, a park development fee, based upon the number of dwelling units to be constructed, as follows: 
Single-family detached ..... $1,547.00 per unit 
Single-family attached or mobile home ..... $1,256.00 per unit 
Multi-family, congregate care or independent living senior housing ..... $1,031.00 per unit 
Assisted living senior housing ..... $358.00 per bed 
The above fees shall be automatically adjusted annually by April 15, in accordance with the consumer price index (CPI) as established for the Denver metropolitan area. No occupancy certificate shall be issued, nor shall any occupancy of the premises be permitted, until such fees have been paid in full. Such fees shall be used only for the development of park and recreation facilities and services. 
(3)  Credits. 
(a)  Any person, firm, or corporation required to pay a park development fee hereunder may receive credit against such fee for public park improvement work done by said developer at the developer's expense simultaneously with the construction of the dwelling units in accordance with City standards and policies. 
(b)  The amount of such credit shall be determined by the City for various public park improvements, such as, but not limited to, land leveling or earth work incorporated into the park improvements; installation of automatic irrigation systems; finished grading, soil preparation and seeding or sod; plant materials; and park equipment. To qualify for such credit, all park development plans must indicate the following, including, but not limited to: a detailed cost estimate, site location and size, site design, grading, all improvements, including site amenities and landscaping, and shall be subject to the review and approval of the department of parks, recreation, and libraries, and shall be included in an official development plan approved by the City. Improvements must be designed and installed according to acceptable City standards and specifications. Improvements, such as overlot grading, roadways, sidewalks, bikeways and trails, utilities, and other similar improvements, as determined by the City that would be otherwise required with the development of the subdivision, or are adjacent to the public park or off-site, are generally not subject to credit toward the park development fee. 
(c)  The required park development fee and any credits thereto, and the timing of completion of park improvements, shall be specified on the relevant official development plan for the project. Completion of park improvements should occur in an early phase of an overall development. 
(d)  The City Council may authorize park development fee credits for any improvements not listed above that council finds will benefit an existing or proposed park or recreation site or facility, including off-site improvements. Such credit shall not exceed 94 percent of the total park development fees owed by the developer; not less than six percent of the total development fee shall be paid by the developer in cash. Any proposed credit for park development fees that is authorized under this subsection shall be subject to specific City Council approval, formalized in a written agreement, which shall be approved by council. 
(D)  Conveyance of Non-Tributary Groundwater: All subdividers shall present with any application for approval of a final plat a conveyance to the City of non-tributary groundwater (as defined in Section 37-90-137(4), C.R.S., underlying the proposed subdivision, by deed in a form approved by the City. Such deed and plat shall provide for easements for pipelines and well sites and access thereto, together with consent and rights of entry for the exploration, construction and operation of required wells. Such conveyance shall be noted on any final plat approved by the City. 
(E)  Environmental Audits: Unless waived by the City, a phase I environmental audit shall be submitted in conjunction with any land dedication to the City, including, but not limited to, easements and rights-of-way. 
(F)  Land Dedication for Public School Sites: 
(1)  Scope and Application. In order to meet the infrastructure demands placed upon the city and the school districts to adequately serve new residential development, the owner of unplatted residential lots; the owner of existing platted, but undeveloped, residential lots; and the owner of undeveloped attached or multi-family dwelling units for which building permits are issued after the enactment of this ordinance, shall provide public school sites or fees in lieu thereof to reasonably serve the proposed subdivision or residential development. 
(a)  The City Manager, in consultation with the specific school district, shall decide if the owner of unplatted residential property shall dedicate land or provide cash-in-lieu thereof. The City Manager, in consultation with the school district, shall determine the location of the land to be dedicated. On any preliminary development plan and any official development plan, land to be dedicated or cash-in-lieu of land dedication, shall be identified. For any residential properties with approved official development plans or final plats on the effective date of this ordinance, a cash-in-lieu of land dedication will be required, based upon the methodology herein. For any building permit for a new residential unit, the fee will be collected by the City at time of issuance of the utility permit for each unit or building consisting of multiple units. 
(b)  Exemptions from requirement of and dedication for public school sites. The following uses within the City shall be exempted from the requirement of dedication for public school sites: 
(i)  Construction of any nonresidential building or structure; 
(ii)  Alteration, replacement, or expansion of any legally existing building or structure with a comparable new building or structure that does not increase the number of residential dwelling units; 
(iii)  Construction of any building or structure for limited-term stay or for long-term assisted living, including, but not limited to, bed and breakfast establishments, boarding or rooming houses, family-care or group-care homes without students in public schools, halfway houses, hotels, motels, nursing homes, or hospices; and 
(iv)  Construction of any residential building or structure classified as housing for older persons, pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Act then in effect. 
(2)  Methodology for determining dedication. 
(a)  The methodology for determining dedication of land or cash-in-lieu thereof and its supplementary background materials shall be as follows: 
Student generation rate per dwelling unit (Elementary k-5) (Middle 6-8) (Senior High 9-12) Total Single-family detached: 0.29 0.14 0.19 0.62 Single-family attached: 0.15 0.08 0.1 0.33 Multi-family: 0.04 0.02 0.02 0.08 Group or family care with students: to be determined on an individual basis  
School facilities requirements (site size in acres and facility capacity) Acres Capacity Elementary school: 10 480 Middle school: 25 950 Senior high school: 49 1,912  
Land costs per acre (final platted but undeveloped) 
Single-family detached ..... $60,000.00 
Single-family attached ..... $60,000.00 
Multi-family ..... $60,000.00 
# of units x student generation rate = number of students 
# of students ÷ current facility capacity = proportion of facility capacity 
Proportion of facility capacity x site size in acres = acreage 
Acreage x land cost per acre = project cash-in-lieu amount 
Project cash-in-lieu amount ÷ number of units = cash-in-lieu per unit 
(b)  The cash-in-lieu per unit is a fixed amount based on the type of unit: 
Single-family detached ..... $876.00 
Single-family attached ..... $468.00 
Multi-family ..... $112.00 
(c)  The above fees and land values will be subject to annual adjustments to keep pace with the real estate market and land values. 
(3)  Conveyance of dedicated land/cash-in-lieu. 
(a)  Any person or entity proposing residential zoning or development shall dedicate or convey land for a public school site. In the event that land is not deemed feasible or in the best interests of the City or school district, as determined by the City or school district, the City may require a payment in lieu of land dedication or a combination of both dedication and payment. The manner of dedication or payment (land dedication or payment in lieu) shall be as stated in this ordinance and the incorporated methodology. This shall not preclude the City and school district, and any person or entity, from mutually agreeing to resolve the issue of dedication for public school sites in a manner other than as stated above. A credit or reduction of fee adjustment can be agreed upon for a developer or builder that is already involved in dedication and improving a school site at the time of subdivision. 
(b)  The City shall refer to the school districts all residential land development applications for review and comment concerning the number of students generated and the adequacy of public school sites and facilities. Land dedications for school sites shall be conveyed to the City any time after preliminary development plan approval, by general or special warranty deed, or by dedication on the final plat, as determined by the City. Fees paid as cash-in-lieu of land dedication for unplatted residential properties shall be paid to the City at time of final plat. 
(c)  The City shall collect cash-in-lieu for existing platted, but undeveloped, single-family lots and single-family attached or multi-family buildings at the time of issuance of the utility permit for each lot or building. The City will identify the collection of the cash-in-lieu by school district and lot address. 
(d)  An intergovernmental agreement with each school district will be required, addressing details of school site coordination and development referrals, the methodology of collecting and disbursing the funds, conveyance of land, accounting and reports, and other matters, prior to release of land dedications or cash-in-lieu to the appropriate school district. 
(4)  Criteria for Eligible and Ineligible Land. Prior to dedication conveyance of land, the City shall determine if any geological, environmental, or other studies are to be conducted by the owner. Such required studies must be reviewed and accepted by the City. Land dedicated for school sites shall meet the standards of both the school district and the City, but in no event shall the following land areas be considered to fulfill the requirements of the provision for public school sites: 
 Streams, gulches and lands within the 100-year floodplain (City Council may make exceptions to this requirement on a case-by-case basis); 
 Rights-of-way and/or easements of irrigation ditches or aqueducts; 
 Greenbelts, walkways, bike paths, or equestrian trails; 
 Lakes, detention ponds, boggy lands or other bodies of water; 
 Steep or rugged land areas and those areas that exceed a five percent slope (City Council may make exceptions to this requirement on a case-by-case basis); and 
 Land areas that are hazardous for geological or environmental reasons, or sensitive wildlife areas (City Council may make exceptions to this requirement on a case-by-case basis). 
(5)  Appeals. Appeals pertaining to the calculation of land dedication for school sites or cash-in lieu thereof shall be made to the planning commission of the City. 
(2534 2694 2876 2912 3086 3664 3770) 
11-6-9. - Vacation of Public Roadways and Easements. 
(A)  Vacation of Public Roadways: 
(1)  Public roadways and rights-of-way for public access shall be vacated by ordinance, and title to said vacated property shall vest in accordance with the requirements of applicable state statutes. As used in this section, the terms "roadway" and "rights-of-way for public access" include any platted, dedicated, or designated public street, alley, lane, avenue, road, sidewalk or other public way for travel, whether or not it has been used as such. 
(2)  Any applicant requesting a vacation of a public roadway or public access right-of-way shall: 
(a)  File a written vacation request on a form provided by the City Engineer and pay the required application fee; 
(b)  Include a written legal description and depiction of the property to be vacated, prepared by a land surveyor certified by the State of Colorado; 
(c)  Include all relevant documents pertaining to the original dedication; and 
(d)  Include a written statement explaining why the roadway or right-of-way for public access is no longer needed for the public purpose for which it was originally required. 
(3)  Prior to the scheduling of the proposed vacation ordinance, the City Engineer shall: 
(a)  Post the property with a public notice identifying the area affected by the requested vacation and listing a contact phone number for additional information; 
(b)  Notify all City departments and such public agencies and utilities as staff may reasonably determine to have a legal interest in the vacation request; 
(c)  Make a reasonable effort to obtain input from adjoining property owners and other members of the public as may be deemed necessary to formulate a recommendation to council; 
(d)  Make a preliminary finding that no present or future public access need exists for the area requested for vacation; 
(e)  Make a preliminary finding that the vacation request, if approved, will not leave any land adjoining said roadway without an established public road or a private-access easement connecting said land with another established public road; and 
(f)  Make a preliminary finding whether or not an easement should be reserved by the City for the present or future use of any utilities, including, but not limited to, sewer, gas, water, electric, telecommunications or similar pipelines and appurtenances, or ditches or canals. 
(4)  If the vacation ordinance is adopted, the applicant shall pay the respective county's recording fees and the City shall record the vacation ordinance in the office of the appropriate clerk and recorder. 
(B)  Vacation of Utility or Other Easements: 
(1)  City-owned easements may be vacated in accordance with the procedures established by the City Manager and the requirements of this Code. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the vacation of a City-owned easement. Vacation of City easements, except public access easements, may occur: 
(a)  Through the City's subdivision or platting process; or 
(b)  By approval of the City Manager or the City Council. The City Manager may approve easement vacation requests where the vacation is no more than two acres in size. All other vacation requests shall be subject to City Council approval by motion. 
(2)  Any landowner requesting vacation of a City-owned easement burdening the owner's property shall: 
(a)  File a written vacation request on a form provided by the City Engineer and pay the required application fee; 
(b)  Include a legal description of the easement to be vacated, prepared by a land surveyor certified by the State of Colorado, unless the vacation will occur through the subdivision or platting process; 
(c)  Include all relevant documents pertaining to the original dedication; and 
(d)  Include a written statement explaining why the easement is no longer needed for the purpose for which it was originally required. 
(3)  Prior to approving or recommending approval of any proposed easement vacation to the City Manager or City Council, as appropriate, the City Engineer shall: 
(a)  Notify all City departments and such public agencies and utilities that staff may reasonably determine to have a legal interest in the vacation request; 
(b)  Make a reasonable effort to obtain input from adjoining property owners and other members of the public as may be deemed necessary to determine if any present or future need exists for the easement requested for vacation; and 
(c)  Determine the present value of the easement. 
(4)  If an easement vacation is approved as part of the subdivision or platting process, such vacation shall be called out in a separate statement and the vacated area shall be delineated clearly on the final plat. Except where the vacation occurs through the subdivision or platting process, the City Manager is authorized to sign and deliver a quit claim deed to the owner of the property burdened by the easement after recording the same, upon payment by the owner of the recording fees. In either case, the City Manager is authorized to determine if the approval of the easement vacation will be conditioned upon the owner's payment of the present value of the easement to the City. 
(3421) 
CHAPTER 7. - SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

11-7-1. - Applicability. 
    Any official development plan or final plat for the development of any property within any zoning district other than planned unit development shall be in substantial compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter. For planned unit developments, these standards shall be used as guidelines and may, at the option of the City, be required. These standards are in addition to all other standards, guidelines, policies and City Code requirements otherwise applicable to land use and development within the City. In the case of a conflict between these standards and another standard, guideline, policy or requirement, the more restrictive standard, guideline, policy or requirement shall apply. 
(2534) 
11-7-2. - Lot and Block Standards. 
(A)  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Topography. 
(2)  Convenient and safe access and circulation, including access and circulation for emergency and service vehicles. 
(3)  Applicable regulations regarding lot sizes and dimensions. 
(4)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(5)  Availability, location, and capacity of utility service and utility system design and capacity. 
(B)  The width, depth, shape, and orientation of lots shall be designed for the type of use contemplated. As a minimum, all lots shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  No lots shall be platted in areas subject to flooding except in conformance with this Code. 
(2)  All lots shall front on a public street or highway or private street with easements guaranteeing public access. 
(3)  Depth and width of lots shall be adequate to provide the necessary private service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
(4)  Lots shall be designed to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. 
(5)  Corner lots shall generally be adequate in size to compensate for two street frontages and to satisfy vehicular sight triangle standards. 
(6)  Wherever possible, side lot lines shall be at right angles to the street line or at right angles to the tangent to the curve of the street line. 
(7)  Subdivision lots and streets shall be oriented in a manner to ensure location of structures and landscaping in the most energy efficient manner. 
(8)  Residential lots shall not front on or obtain direct access from an arterial street. When driveway access from an arterial street is necessary for several adjoining lots, such lots shall be served by a combined access drive, which shall be platted as a permanent access easement. 
(9)  When a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed freeway, expressway, or arterial street, a frontage road or a visual screen planting easement may be required as necessary to restrict access. 
(10)  No structure shall be constructed nor shall any building permit be issued for a structure on any platted land except where such structure is to be constructed upon a separately designated lot. Lot lines established by plat shall not be altered by conveyance of a part of such lots, nor shall only a part of any lot be joined with a part of another lot for conveyance or construction, unless and until written application and a revised plat has been submitted and approved, upon a finding that the general purpose and purport of this section shall not be weakened by such change. 
(2534 3774) 
11-7-3. - Fence and Vehicular Sight Triangle Standards. 
    Fences and vehicular sight triangles shall be in accordance with Section 11-9-5(D), W.M.C. 
(2534) 
11-7-4. - Off-Street Parking Standards. 
(A)  Duty to Provide and Maintain Off-Street Parking: 
(1)  The council hereby finds, determines and declares that it serves the interest of the public to: 
(a)  Lessen congestion upon the public streets of the City; 
(b)  Provide adequate off-street parking that balances parking demand with the need for multiple modes of travel; 
(c)  Recognize the parking efficiencies gained through mixed-use development and development proximate to rail and bus transit and their impact on parking demand; 
(d)  Encourage adequate parking for land uses in Westminster without creating excess vacant parking; and 
(e)  Promote bicycle use by providing safe and convenient bicycle parking through minimum requirements for bicycle parking facility type and amount. 
The regulations stated herein are in furtherance of these purposes by requiring the owners and operators of land, structures and uses to provide parking on their own premises and off the public streets for their employees, customers, tenants, clients, patients and other visitors. Nothing in these regulations shall be deemed to deprive such owners or operators of the right to maintain control over all such land devoted to off-street parking space or to make whatever charges to persons making use thereof as they may deem appropriate. 
(2)  For land, structures or uses actually used, occupied or operated on or before the respective effective dates of this section, there shall be provided such off-street parking space as was required for such land, structures or uses by any previous ordinance, or development plan approval, except that, if any previous ordinance or approval required more off-street parking for land, structures or uses than is required under this section, then there need be provided only such off-street parking as is required in this section. If such land, structures or uses are enlarged, extended, or changed, there shall be provided for the increment only at least the amount of off-street parking space that would be required hereunder if the increment were a separate land, structure or use established or placed into operation after the effective date of this section. 
(3)  For all uses established or placed into operation after the effective date of this section, there shall be provided at least the amount of off-street parking hereinafter set forth. 
(4)  Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided for any new building constructed, any new use established, any addition or enlargement of an existing building or use, for any change in the occupancy of any building, or change of use conducted. The number of bicycle parking spaces shall comply with the provisions in Subsection (E)(2) of this section. The design and maintenance of bicycle storage facilities shall conform to the standards in Subsection (E)(1) of this section. 
(5)  Handicapped parking facilities shall be provided for any new building constructed, any new use established, any addition or enlargement of an existing building or use, for any change in the occupancy of any building, or for change of the use conducted. The number of handicapped parking spaces shall comply with the provisions in Subsection (D)(2) of this section. The design and maintenance of handicapped parking spaces shall conform to the standards set forth in Subsection (D)(1) of this section. 
(6)  These off-street parking regulations shall apply to all development in Westminster, including those areas included in the Westminster Urban Renewal Plan, as well as other locations with adopted specific area plans. If different requirements for off-street parking are contained in any adopted specific area plan, those requirements will supersede those described in this section. If off-street parking requirements are not included in a specific area plan, the regulations in this section shall control. 
(7)  The zoning for the property on which the required parking facilities are to be provided must be the same as for the building served. 
(8)  Separate off-street parking space shall be provided for each use; or the parking space required of two or more uses located on the same zone lot may be combined and used jointly; provided, however, 
(a)  Where off-street parking space is combined and used jointly by two or more uses having different standards for determining the amount of off-street parking space required, the parking space shall be adequate in area to provide the sum total of off-street parking space requirement of all such uses. 
(b)  Where off-street parking space is combined and used jointly by two or more uses having the same standard for determining the amount of off-street parking space required, all of such uses, for the purpose of this section, shall be considered a single unit, and the gross floor area of all such uses in all structures on the same zone lot, or the number of employees of all such uses in all structures on the same zone lot as fixed by the applicable standard, shall be taken as a single total for the purposes of determining the amount of off-street parking space required. 
(c)  Where it can be demonstrated, by an applicable parking study, that combining the parking areas of two or more uses will reduce the need for parking spaces, the planning manager may authorize a shared parking agreement, thus reducing the total number of spaces required. In no event shall the said reduction be more than 20 percent of the total that will otherwise be required. 
(9)  Deferred parking. 
(a)  To avoid requiring more parking spaces than are actually needed to serve a development, the Planning Manager may defer the provision of a portion of the required parking, if a deferred parking area is created in the official development plan. Said deferred parking area shall be landscaped, but shall not be included in the total landscaped area for the purpose of calculating landscaping requirements. The deferred area shall be designed so that, if parking is constructed at a future time in the area, it will meet all of the provisions of the commercial design guidelines and landscape regulations. 
(b)  The developer shall enter into a written agreement with the City committing to the construction of paved parking in the deferred area at such time as the Planning Manager determines, at his/her discretion, that additional parking is required. The Planning Manager shall notify the property owner in writing that additional parking is required, after which the owner shall complete the improvements within six months of notification. 
(B)  Off-Street Vehicle Parking: 
(1)  Off-Street Parking Required: There shall be required, in connection with the development or construction of specified buildings or uses, the minimum off-street parking spaces listed in sub-subsection (2) below. The concept of shared parking for a number of different uses may be included in the parking requirements of any preliminary development plan or official development plan. If uncertainties arise as to the classification of a building or use, the City Manager or his designee shall assign a reasonable classification. 
(2)  Minimum Off-Street Vehicle Parking Spaces: 
(a)  Residential. 
(i)  Single-Family Detached: Four spaces per unit, with two spaces enclosed in a garage and two spaces in driveway, except that parking for neo-traditional developments may be reduced by the Planning Manager on a case-by-case basis, upon a finding that less parking is needed based upon the design of the development. 
(ii)  Single-Family Attached: Two spaces per efficiency, one-bedroom, two-bedroom, and three-bedroom unit; three spaces per four- or more bedroom unit; and one space per three units for guest parking. 
(iii)  Multiple Family: One space per efficiency and one bedroom unit; one and a half spaces per two or more bedroom units, plus one space per five units for guest parking. 
(iv)  Mobile Homes: Two spaces per unit, plus one space per unit for guest parking to be located within the mobile home park, and not more than 200 feet from unit it is serving. 
(v)  Senior Housing: 
a)  Independent living: One space per unit, plus one space per five units for guest parking. 
b)  Congregate care: Three-fourths of one space per one unit. 
c)  Assisted living: One space per three patient beds. 
d)  Skilled care: One space per three patient beds. 
(b)  Commercial. 
(i)  Retail: 
a)  Entertainment: 
1.  Dance/night club: One space per three patron seats, plus one space per 75 square feet of the gross floor area that does not contain patron seats. 
2.  Theaters: One space per three seats. 
b)  Hotels: 
1.  All types: One and two-tenths spaces per unit. 
c)  Stand-alone restaurant/bar: 
1.  One space per 100 square feet gross floor area. 
d)  Service and sales: 
1.  All types: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Shopping centers containing mixed uses (including but not limited to retail, general office, medical/dental office, and non-stand- alone restaurants) shall calculate parking at the rate of one space per 300 square feet. 
e)  Private recreation facilities: 
1.  Fitness centers: One space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Driving ranges: One space per tee box. 
3.  Miniature golf: Two and one-half spaces per hole. 
4.  Golf course: Five spaces per hole. 
5.  Bowling alleys: One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
6.  Arcades/pool hall: One space per 180 square feet of gross floor area. 
(c)  Office. 
(i)  General office. One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. The planning manager may require more parking for mixed use flex-space and/or multiple tenant office buildings, upon a finding that the types or mix of uses requires more parking. 
(ii)  Medical/dental office. One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(iii)  Office/warehouse. Shall be the sum total of one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area for office portion plus one space per 500 square feet of gross floor area for warehouse portion. NOTE: A minimum area equal to 60 percent of the gross floor area of office space shall be used to calculate the parking requirement. 
(d)  Wholesale Industrial. 
(i)  All types. One space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(e)  Institutional. 
(i)  General care. 
a)  Child care: One space per classroom, plus one space per five persons rated capacity with proper drop-off facility. 
b)  Group home: One space per patient bed. 
c)  Hospital: One and one-quarter space per patient bed. 
(ii)  Educational. 
a)  Pre-school: One space per classroom plus one space per five persons rated capacity with proper drop-off facility. 
b)  Elementary/junior high school: One and three-quarter space per class room. 
c)  High schools: One and one-half spaces per classroom plus one quarter of one space per student. 
d)  College/universities: One and one-half spaces per classroom, plus one quarter of one space per student. 
(iii)  Places of public assembly. 
a)  Churches: One space per three persons rated seating capacity, plus two spaces per classroom. 
b)  Funeral homes: One space per three persons rated seating capacity. 
c)  Lodges: One space per three persons rated seating capacity. 
d)  Community center/auditorium: One space per three persons rated seating capacity. 
(C)  Construction and Maintenance Standards: 
(1)  Each off-street parking space being at an angle of 90 degrees to the drive aisle shall not be less than nine feet wide, 19 feet long, and any cover shall be at least seven feet high. Angled parking spaces shall be per the typical parking layout standards. (See Figure 1 below.) Each space shall be surfaced with asphalt or other permanent material; shall be properly graded and drained; and shall be provided with surfaced vehicular access to an improved public right-of-way. 
Parking Lot Standards (Figure 1) 
A-Parking angle (degrees) A B C D E F G B-Stall center (FT) 45' 46.2' 52.6' 13' 12.7' 19.8' 9' C-Minimum overall double row 
With aisle between (FT.) 50' 47.0' 52.8' 12' 11.7' 20.4' 9' D-Aisle width (FT.) 60' 55.5' 60.0' 18' 10.4' 21.0' 9' E-Curb length (FT.) 70' 57.9' 61.0' 19' 9.6' 21.0' 9' F-Stall to curb (FT.) 80' 62.7' 64.6' 24' 9.1' 20.3' 9' G-Stall width (FT) 90' 62.0' 24' 9' 19.0' 9'  

Figure 1
(2)  Each off-street parking space shall conform with the City standard specifications for design and construction. 
(3)  All required off-street parking spaces and access drives shall be improved with asphalt pavement or an equivalent surface installed in conformance with the "Westminster Standard Specifications for the Construction of Public Works Projects." This requirement shall not apply to City open space properties and parks. 
(4)  All off-street parking areas shall be maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash and debris, and major surfacing defects. 
(5)  No parking area shall be used for the storage, sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies. 
(6)  All off-street parking spaces (excluding single and/or duplex units) shall be outlined by white or yellow stripes not less than four inches wide, painted on the surface area or an alternative judged equally effective by the City Manager or his designee. All non-parking spaces, such as loading zones, emergency lanes or spaces in front of doorways/entrances, shall be clearly delineated. 
(7)  All parking areas shall be provided with ingress and egress to an improved public right-of-way so located as to promote safety and minimize traffic congestion; shall be provided with necessary internal circulation drives and aisles; and layout of parking spaces consistent with the "Westminster Standard Specifications for the Construction of Public Works Projects." Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the layout of the required parking area (excluding single and duplex units) shall be approved by the City Manager or his designee. 
(8)  All access drives and required parking spaces (excluding single and duplex units) facing and abutting a building, wall, fence, property line or walkway shall be provided with installed curb and gutter. Such devices shall be constructed and installed in conformance with the "Westminster Standard Specifications for the Construction of Public Works Projects." 
(9)  Parking areas (excluding single and duplex units) shall be screened, so as to prevent disturbance to adjacent residential development due to the maneuvering of vehicles entering and leaving the parking area. Screening design and materials shall be in conformance with the "Westminster Standard Specifications for the Construction of Public Works Projects" prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(10)  Parking areas (excluding single and duplex units) shall be provided with night lighting for security and safety and adequate visibility for maneuvering to emphasize entrances and exits and hazards. Lighting structures and their location shall conform to the "Westminster Standard Specifications for the Construction of Public Works Projects" and shall be designed so as not to unreasonably disturb occupants of adjacent residential structures. 
(11)  All parking areas shall be designed in conformance with the City of Westminster Landscape Regulations and Commercial Standards. 
(12)  Parking spaces may be designed with a two-foot overhang over landscaped areas and walks, provided that the minimum widths of the affected landscape or walk is increased by two feet. 
(13)  For parking spaces located within a parking structure, the Planning Manager may reduce the dimensions of the parking spaces from the Code requirement, provided that an acceptable parking study has been submitted to the City. In no event may a parking space be less than eight feet wide. 
(D)  Handicapped Parking Spaces: Handicapped parking spaces shall be in an amount required by current federal regulations. 
(E)  Bicycle Parking: 
(1)  Bicycle Parking Standards. 
(a)  Bicycle parking facilities shall include provisions for storage and locking of bicycles, either in lockers or secure racks or equivalent installation in which the bicycle frame and at least one wheel may be locked by the user. 
(b)  The ground surface surrounding and underneath the bicycle storage facility shall be surfaced in a manner that prevents mud or dust. 
(c)  Bicycle spaces shall consist of racks or lockers anchored so that they cannot be easily removed. Racks shall be designed that at least one wheel and the frame of a bicycle can be locked securely to it with a heavy chain, cable, or padlock. Lockers shall be so designed to minimize the possibility of an unauthorized person removing a bicycle. 
(d)  Fixed objects that are intended to serve as bicycle racks, but not obviously intended for such purposes, shall be labeled as available for bicycles. 
(e)  Bicycle lockers should be harmonious with their environment, both in color and design as approved by the City. Parking device designs should be incorporated wherever possible into building design or street furniture. There should be sufficient space between devices so that the use of one does not interfere with the other bicycles or devices. The parking device selected should allow maximum flexibility in grouping and placement. 
(f)  The City shall have the authority to review and approve bicycle parking devices for design with respect to safety and convenience. 
(g)  Parking for bicycles shall be provided on the same lot, tract or parcel as the use served. 
(h)  Bicycle parking areas shall be lighted and located as near to the building or facility entrance as possible, without interfering with pedestrian traffic. 
(2)  Amount of Off-Street Bicycle Parking Spaces Required. The minimum number of bicycle parking spaces shall be required as follows for all zones, except PUD; however, during the development review process, City staff may determine that a greater number of spaces than those listed below are necessary. For PUD zones, the following list shall be used as a guideline: 
(a)  Multiple family dwellings: One quarter bicycle parking space for each dwelling unit. 
(b)  Nonresidential uses: One bicycle parking space per each 20 required automobile parking spaces, with no less than two spaces per premise, with the following exceptions: 
(i)  Private or commercial indoor recreation facility: One bicycle parking space for each 12 person capacity. 
(ii)  Community facilities including public parks, libraries, recreation or activity centers: One bicycle parking space per 12 person capacity. 
(iii)  Drive-in theatres, auto service stations, automobile repair and service: None. 
(iv)  Mortuaries: None. 
(2534 2678 3084 3531 3774) 
11-7-5. - Provisions for the Requirement of Landscaping. 
(A)  All properties within the City are required to provide landscaping according to the City landscape regulations and the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(B)  Specific regulations pertaining to the landscaping of property, as well as the long-term maintenance of landscaping is required according to the City landscape regulations and the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(C)  Enforcement pertaining to landscaping shall be as provided by Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(D)  The property owner, owners or owners association is responsible for the installation and maintenance of landscaping on their property, property held in joint or multiple ownership and adjacent public right-of-way, unless determined otherwise by the City. 
(E)  The property owner, owners, or owners association shall be responsible for the maintenance of landscaping required by and shown on any official development plan(s) and site plan(s) accompanying official development plan waivers. 
(F)  The owner is required to check with the City to determine the proximity of the development to the City's reclaimed water system. Projects within 300 feet of the system may be required to tie into the system. 
(2534 3133) 
11-7-6. - Common Area Standards. 
(A)  In residential building groups, the City Council may require that open space and recreational areas for common use be dedicated to the City, or to a recreational district approved by the City Council, or that it be retained in private ownership. 
(B)  For private streets and parking areas, as well as open space and recreational land to be retained in private ownership, the applicant shall show a definite, financially-feasible means of maintaining these facilities and lands for the future. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to maintain any private street or parking in common area under his ownership and control in compliance with all of the following standards: 
(1)  Said areas shall not be used for sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of vehicles. 
(2)  Said areas shall be maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash, and debris. 
(3)  Said areas shall be provided with entrances and exits to public rights-of-way so as to minimize congestion. 
(4)  The traveled portions of such area shall be kept free of snow and ice and other dangerous material. 
(5)  All trees, hedges, shrubbery, plants, flowers, and other growing things adjacent to public or private sidewalks shall be maintained so that no part of them shall extend over any part of a street in a manner or height that is hazardous or blocks use of sidewalks. 
(6)  Paved portions of such areas shall be maintained in good condition, free of all holes or other defects. 
(7)  Such privately owned areas shall not be used in any manner that will constitute a violation of any section of the Municipal Code of the City. In the event that the provisions of the preceding sections hereof are violated, the City Manager may serve, either personally or by mail, written notice upon the owner, occupant, or any person having the care and control of said privately held area, to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Said notice shall be substantially the form set out in Section 8-4-4, W.M.C. If the person upon whom said notice is served fails, neglects, or refuses to correct the violation within five days of receipt of said notice, the City Manager may cause the necessary work to be performed and the actual cost of such work, plus five percent for inspection and other additional costs in connection therewith, shall be certified by the Finance Director to the County Treasurer of the county of jurisdiction, and such sum shall become a first and prior lien upon the property on which such work was performed, as provided by Title I, Chapter 31 of this Code. 
(D)  In residential building groups abutting business or industrial districts, fences, walls, or screen plantings shall be provided to shield the residences from illumination, noise, dust, or other harmful external effects of the business or industrial district. 
(E)  All open spaces and buildings must be reasonably accessible for emergency vehicles. 
(F)  In residential buildings, walls containing window exposures or entrances shall be oriented to ensure adequate light and air exposure, shall be located to minimize exposure to through traffic ways, and to preserve privacy between adjacent buildings. 
(2534) 
11-7-7. - Reserved. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 3659.) 
11-7-8. - Mobile Home Parks. 
(A)  Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Access road shall mean that area privately owned and maintained and set aside within a mobile home park for an interior road system, providing principal means of ingress to individual mobile home spaces and egress to street. 
    Independent mobile home shall mean a mobile home that has a toilet and a bathtub or shower. 
    Inspector shall mean the building inspector of the City of Westminster or his authorized representative. 
    Mobile home shall mean any vehicle used, or so constructed as to permit it's being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and duly licensable as such and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons within the same family. 
    Mobile home park shall mean a parcel of land not less than 15 acres under single ownership that has been planned and approved for the placement of mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, for transient and nontransient use, sometimes termed a trailer camp. 
    Mobile home space shall mean a plot of ground within a mobile home park designated for the accommodation of one mobile home. 
    Patio shall mean a paved area adjacent to the mobile home parking space and accessible from the main entrance to the parked mobile home. 
    Permanent addition shall mean any structural extension from any portion of a mobile home, not including temporary canvas awning and skirting. 
    Permit shall mean a written permit issued by the City Building Inspector to construct or alter the mobile home park under these rules and regulations. 
    Street or highway shall mean a public thoroughfare that affords principal means of access to abutting property. 
(B)  Permits: No person shall alter, install or remove any structural improvement in any mobile home park without first securing a building permit from the Inspector authorizing such alterations, installation or removal. 
(C)  Application: An application for a permit authorizing any structural alteration, installation or removal in a mobile home park shall set forth the following information, including a plat thereof. 
(1)  The location, area and dimensions of the tract of land to be occupied by the park. 
(2)  The number, location and size of all mobile home spaces. 
(3)  The location and width of roadways and walkways. 
(4)  The location of service buildings, recreation facilities and any other proposed structures. 
(5)  Topography of the proposed park at two-foot contour intervals. 
(6)  Fencing, landscaping and screen planting. 
(7)  Lighting of roadways, driveways and pedestrian walks. 
(8)  The location, size and type of water and sewer and gas lines; and traps, vents and risers for water and sewer and gas. 
(9)  The location, plans and specifications for any permanent structure to use as an owner's or caretaker's residence. 
(10)  Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park. 
(D)  Inspection of Mobile Parks: The inspector shall make periodic inspections of all mobile home parks located within the City and shall enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Authority. The inspector shall have the authority to make inspections of mobile home parks at reasonable times for the purpose of determining whether this chapter is being complied with and shall have authority to inspect the register of occupants required herein. 
(2)  Access. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse access to a mobile home park to the inspector for the purpose of inspection. 
(E)  Location, Space and General Layout: The mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained site and shall be so located that its drainage will not endanger any water supply. All such mobile home parks shall be in areas free from swamps or other potential breeding places for insects or rodents. 
(1)  Area. The area of the mobile home park shall be no less than 15 acres and large enough to accommodate: 
(a)  The designated number of mobile home spaces; 
(b)  Necessary streets and roadways; 
(c)  Parking areas for motor vehicles; and 
(d)  Service areas. 
(2)  Mobile Home Space. Each mobile home shall be at least 35 feet wide and shall abut on a driveway or other clear area with unobstructed access to a public street. Such spaces shall be clearly defined, and mobile homes shall be parked in such spaces so that no mobile home will be less than five feet from the side and rear boundaries of the mobile home space, and no mobile home shall be less than ten feet from the exterior boundary of the mobile home park. 
No mobile home shall be parked less than 25 feet from any front property line abutting a street or highway or walkway. Areas between mobile home spaces and public right-of-way not used for roadway purposes shall be grassed and/or landscaped and kept free from weeds, rubbish or trash. No mobile home shall be allowed to remain in a mobile home park, except on a mobile home space as set forth herein is available. 
(3)  Access Roads. Access roads must be graded for drainage, surfaced with concrete or asphaltic concrete, and maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash, debris and show, all to be done in accordance with City requirements. 
Each access road shall be continuous and shall connect with other circulation roads. Minimum width for access roads shall be 36 feet. Curves on all access roads shall have a minimum inside radius of not less than 20 feet. All such roads shall be kept clear of all obstructions to allow movement of vehicles at any time. 
(4)  Off-Street Parking. Areas not less than ten feet by 25 feet shall be provided for the parking of motor vehicles, in addition to each required mobile home space to accommodate at least the number of vehicles equal to the number of mobile home spaces provided. Such parking spaces may be located within the mobile home space to be served, but in no case shall be more than 200 feet from the mobile home space to be served. Such parking areas shall be surfaced as required for access roads. 
(5)  Service Facilities. Every mobile home space shall be provided with a covered vault or building constructed according to City Building Code with a minimum of 192 cubic feet of volume for the storage of personal belongings. This requirement may be met by a building providing a like amount of space for each mobile home space. 
(6)  Not more than ten mobile home spaces shall be provided for each gross acre within the mobile home park. 
(7)  Recreation Facilities. Space shall be provided for recreational facilities in an amount not less than 700 square feet for each mobile home space. 
(F)  Locations and Construction of Service Buildings: Service buildings shall: 
(1)  Be located 15 feet or more from any mobile home space. 
(2)  Be of fire resistant construction in conformity with all codes and ordinances of the City. 
(G)  Water Supply: The water supply for the mobile home park shall be a system that is owned and operated by a local government authority or a public utility company franchised in the City. The water system shall be connected by pipes to all service buildings and all mobile home spaces. Individual water service connections that are provided for direct use by mobile homes shall be so constructed that they will not be damaged by the parking of such mobile homes. Such connections for mobile home spaces shall be provided with individual valves below frost depth, not less than 18 inches and with valve boxes to grade. 
(H)  Sewage Disposal: 
(1)  All plumbing in the mobile home park shall comply with the plumbing laws and health regulations of the City of Westminster, of the Counties of Adams or Jefferson, and of the State of Colorado. 
(2)  Sewage disposal shall be provided by a local government authority or a franchised public utility company. 
(3)  All Facilities Connected. A system for sanitary sewage shall be provided in all mobile home parks and all wastes and sewer lines discharging from buildings and mobile homes shall be connected thereto. 
(4)  Connection. Each mobile home space shall be provided with at least a three-inch sewer connection, trapped below frost line, with the inlet of the line to be not less than one inch above the surface of the ground. The sewer connection shall be provided with suitable fittings, so that a watertight connection and proper vent can be made between the mobile home drain and the sewer connection. Such mobile home connections shall be so constructed that they can be closed airtight when not linked to a mobile home, and shall be trapped in such a manner as to maintain them in an odor free condition. 
(I)  Refuse Disposal: 
(1)  System Required. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the park shall be so managed as to avoid health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident hazards or air pollution. 
(2)  Containers. Refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, rodent-proof containers, which shall be located within the mobile home park. Such containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to prevent any refuse from overflowing. Garbage shall be deposited in separate watertight containers with tight-fitting lids. All receptacles shall be designated as to type of use. 
Holders shall be provided for all refuse and garbage containers. Such container holders shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning around them. No dish or waste water of any kind shall be thrown or discharged upon the ground of any mobile home park. 
(3)  Incinerators. Incinerators for use by individual mobile homes and located on the individual mobile home sites are prohibited. At least one incinerator for the purpose of burning combustible trash shall be provided by the mobile home park operator, unless such refuse is collected regularly and no burning is allowed. Such incinerators must be constructed of a size to provide a minimum of one-half cubic foot per mobile home, up to and including ten mobile homes and one cubic foot per mobile home space in excess of ten spaces. The incinerators shall be constructed of a fire-resistant material, grated not less than 12 inches above the ground, provided with a clean-out space beneath the grate, equipped with an access door and with a vent stack extending at least 12 feet above the ground, capped with a spark arrester of three-fourths inch mesh, or less. Incinerators shall be fired only when attended by some person specifically authorized by the owner or operator of the mobile home park. 
(J)  Electricity: 
(1)  Installation to Each Space. An electrical outlet supplying 240 volts 100 amperes of service shall be provided for each mobile home space. The installation shall comply with all state and local electrical codes and ordinances. Such electrical outlets shall be weatherproof. No power line shall be permitted to lie on the ground or to be suspended less than 18 feet above the ground. 
(2)  Area Lights. Street and yard lights shall be provided in such number and intensity as to insure safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. A light shall be located at each outside entrance of the service buildings, which shall be kept lighted during the hours of darkness. 
(K)  Fuel: Natural gas or electricity shall be made available for cooking and heating purposes in all mobile homes within the court. All gas and electrical installations shall be made in accordance with applicable City and state codes. 
(L)  Fire Protection: 
(1)  Littering Prohibited. Mobile home areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials. 
(2)  Fire Extinguishers. Hand fire extinguishers of a type approved by the chief of the Westminster Fire Department shall be maintained in effective working order and located in convenient places in the ratio of one to each eight units or mobile home spaces. 
(M)  Alterations and Additions; Restrictions of Animal and Pets; Signs: 
(1)  Conformity. No alterations or additions shall be made to or within any mobile home park, unless in conformity to this chapter. No permanent additions of any kind, not including temporary canvas awning and skirting, shall be built onto, or become a part of, any mobile home. 
(2)  Wheels Not to be Removed. The wheels of the mobile home shall not be removed, except temporarily when necessary for repairs. Jacks or stabilizers may be placed under the frame of the mobile home to prevent movement on the springs while the mobile home is parked and occupied. 
(3)  Owner to Control Pets. No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other pet animal shall permit it to run at large, or to commit any nuisance within the limits of any mobile home park. 
(4)  Signs. Each mobile home park shall provide a sign at each entrance thereto, to include the name of the park and the street address in letters of a minimum of six inches in height. Each mobile home space shall be numbered uniformly with reflectorized numbers of a minimum height of four inches. 
(N)  Management: 
(1)  The owner or operator of any mobile home park shall arrange for the management and supervision of such mobile home park, so as to enforce or cause compliance with the provisions of these rules and regulations. 
(2)  The owner, operator, or attendant of every mobile home park shall assume full responsibility for maintaining in good repair and condition all facilities of the mobile home park as required herein. 
(3)  In every mobile home park there shall be a designated office building in which shall be located the office of the person in charge of said park. A copy of all required City and state licenses and permits and of this chapter shall be posted therein, and the park register shall at all times be kept in said office. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the attendant or person in charge, together with the owner or operator to: 
(a)  Keep at all times a register of all guests (which shall be open at all times to inspection by state, county and federal officers and officers of the City) showing for all tenants: 
(i)  Dates of entrance and departure. 
(ii)  License numbers of all mobile homes and towing vehicles or automobiles. 
(iii)  States issuing such licenses. 
(b)  Maintain the park in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times. 
(c)  See that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any violations of law that may come to his attention. 
(d)  Report to local health authorities all cases known to the owner to be infected with any communicable disease. 
(e)  Pay promptly to the city all license fees required by the City ordinances or any other laws. 
(f)  Prohibit the use of any mobile home by a greater number of occupants than that which it is designed to accommodate. 
(O)  General: 
(1)  No mobile home shall be parked or permitted to stand upon any public street or alley in the city for longer than a 24-hour period. If so parked, it shall be parallel with the curb and shall not extend outward into the street a distance in excess of ten feet six inches measured at right angles with the curb. 
(2)  No mobile home shall be maintained upon any private or public property in the City when the same is used for living purposes, unless the property is registered as a mobile home park and is located within an eligible zone district, nor shall any mobile home be stored in any required front or side yard as defined by the zoning ordinance of the City. 
(2534) 
CHAPTER 8. - FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS 

11-8-1. - Authorization and Applicability. 
    Pursuant to Title 29 of Article XX of the Constitution of the State of Colorado and Section 31-23-301, C.R.S., the City has the authority to adopt flood control regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. These regulations shall apply to all special flood hazard areas and areas removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) within the City. 
(2534 3714) 
11-8-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    One-hundred-year flood shall mean a flood having a recurrence interval that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (one-percent-annual-chance flood). The terms "100-year flood" and "one percent chance flood" are synonymous with the term "100-year flood." The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every 100 years. 
    One-hundred-year floodplain shall mean the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a 100-year flood. 
    Five-hundred-year flood shall mean a flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (0.2-percent-chance-annual-flood). The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every 500 years. 
    Five-hundred-year floodplain shall mean the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a 500-year flood. 
    Addition shall mean any activity that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the square footage of an existing structure. 
    Area of shallow flooding shall mean a designated zone AO or AH on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one-percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) shall mean the elevation shown on a FEMA flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    Basement shall mean any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Channel shall mean the physical confine of stream or waterway consisting of a bed and stream banks, existing in a variety of geometries. 
    Channelization shall mean the artificial creation, enlargement or realignment of a stream channel. 
    Code of federal regulations (CFR) shall mean the codification of the general and permanent rules published in the federal register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government. It is divided into 50 titles that represent broad areas subject to federal regulation. 
    Community shall mean any political subdivision in the State of Colorado that has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations through zoning, including, but not limited to, cities, towns, unincorporated areas in the counties, [Native American] tribes and drainage and flood control districts. 
    Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) shall mean FEMA's comment on a proposed project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map, which would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain. 
    Critical facility shall mean a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. The classification and detailed description of critical facilities is specified in Rule 6 of the Department of Natural Resources, Colorado Water Conservation Board's "Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado," dated November 17, 2010, or as such rule is amended. 
    DFIRM database shall mean the database (usually spreadsheets containing data and analyses) that accompany the DFIRM. The "FEMA Mapping Specifications and Guidelines" outline requirements for the development and maintenance of DFIRM databases. 
    Digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM) shall mean the FEMA digital floodplain map. These digital maps serve as "regulatory floodplain maps" for insurance and floodplain management purposes. 
    Elevated building shall mean a non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor above the highest adjacent grade level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall mean a manufactured or mobile home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before January 27, 2014. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall mean the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured or mobile homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal register shall mean the official daily publication for rules, proposed rules, and notices of federal agencies and organizations, as well as executive orders and other presidential documents. 
    FEMA shall mean the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the agency responsible for administering the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) shall mean an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) shall mean the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains the flood insurance rate map as well as flood profiles for studied flooding sources that can be used to determine base flood elevations for some areas. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area shall mean any land area susceptible to being inundated as the result of a flood, including the area of land over which floodwater would flow from the spillway of a reservoir. 
    Floodplain Ordinance Administrator or Floodplain Administrator shall mean the City's official designated to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain development permit shall mean the permit required before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area (SFHA). For those areas where FEMA has not defined a SFHA, the City shall require permits for all proposed construction or other development including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may determine whether such construction or other development is proposed within flood-prone areas. Permits are required to ensure that proposed development projects meet the requirements of the NFIP and this floodplain management ordinance. 
    Floodplain management regulations shall mean the City's zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, stormwater quality ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term also describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing shall mean any combination of structural and/or non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Flood control structure shall mean a physical structure designed and built expressly or partially for the purpose of reducing, redirecting, or guiding flood flows along a particular waterway. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodway or regulatory floodway shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. The Colorado statewide standard for the designated height to be used for all newly studied reaches shall be one-half foot (six inches). Letters of map revision to existing floodway delineations may continue to use the floodway criteria in place at the time of the existing floodway delineation. 
    Freeboard shall mean the vertical distance in feet above a predicted water surface elevation intended to provide a margin of safety to compensate for unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood such as debris blockage of bridge openings and the increased runoff due to urbanization of the watershed. 
    Highest adjacent grade shall mean the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure shall mean any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(a)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
(b)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Letter of map revision (LOMR) shall mean FEMA's official revision of an effective flood insurance rate map (FIRM), or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
    Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) shall mean FEMA's modification of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway but inside the flood storage area. 
    Levee shall mean a man-made embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. For a levee structure to be reflected on the FEMA FIRMs as providing flood protection, the levee structure must meet the requirements set forth in 44 CFR 65.10. 
    Levee system shall mean a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest adjacent grade (LAG) shall mean the lowest elevation of the ground surface touching a structure. 
    Lowest floor shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). Any floor used for living purposes which includes working, storage, sleeping, cooking and eating, or recreation or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could be converted to such a use such as a basement or crawl space. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home or business. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Mean sea level shall mean the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on the City's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    National flood insurance program (NFIP) shall mean FEMA's program of flood insurance coverage and floodplain management administered in conjunction with the Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. The NFIP has applicable Federal regulations promulgated in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The U.S. Congress established the NFIP in 1968 with the passage of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision shall mean a manufactured or a mobile home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after January 27, 2014. 
    No-rise certification shall mean a record of the results of an engineering analysis conducted to determine whether a project will increase flood heights in a floodway. A No-Rise Certification must be supported by technical data and signed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer. The supporting technical data should be based on the standard step-backwater computer model used to develop the 100-year floodway shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM). 
    Physical map revision (PMR) shall mean FEMA's action whereby one or more map panels are physically revised and republished. A PMR is used to change flood risk zones, floodplain and/or floodway delineations, flood elevations, and/or planimetric features. 
    Special flood hazard area or flood hazard area shall mean the land in the floodplain within a City subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, i.e., the 100-year floodplain. 
    Structure shall mean a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure just prior to when the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement shall mean any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement official and that are the minimum necessary to insure safe living conditions, or 
(2)  Any alteration of an historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. 
    Variance shall mean a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this ordinance when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations). 
    Violation shall mean the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Subsections 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation (WSEL) shall mean the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(3714) 
11-8-3. - Findings of Fact. 
(A)  The special flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation, which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which would adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(B)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains that increase flood heights and velocities and, by the occupancy of special flood hazard areas by uses or structures vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately floodproofed or elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(2534 3714) 
11-8-4. - Statement of Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions to specific areas by provisions designed: 
(A)  To protect human life and health; 
(B)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(C)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(D)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(E)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in flood hazard areas; 
(F)  To help maintain a stable tax base, by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
(G)  To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood hazard area; 
(H)  To ensure that those who occupy the flood hazards areas assume responsibility for their actions; and 
(I)  Encourage and facilitate urban water resources management techniques for the reduction of pollution and the enhancement of the urban environment. 
(2534 3714) 
11-8-5. - Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance includes methods and provisions for: 
(A)  Restricting or prohibiting uses that are dangerous to health, safety and property in times of flooding or that cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities. 
(B)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(C)  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers that help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
(D)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development that may increase flood damage; and, 
(E)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert flood waters or that may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(2534 3714) 
11-8-6. - Official Flood Insurance Study. 
    The flood insurance study for Jefferson County, Colorado, as provided to the City by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, along with its accompanying FIRMs (effective February 5, 2014) and any revisions thereto are adopted as the applicable FIS and FIRMs for the City. The Floodplain Administrator shall keep a copy of the flood insurance study (FIS), DFIRMs and FIRMs on file and available for public inspection. 
(3714) 
11-8-7. - Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard Area. 
    The special flood hazard areas (SFHA) within the City are those identified in the official FIS. These special flood hazard areas identified by the FIS and attendant mapping are the minimum areas of the City subject to the applicability of this ordinance and may be supplemented by studies designated and approved by the City. 
(2534 3714) 
11-8-8. - Basis for Determining Boundaries of the 100-year Floodplain and Floodway. 
(A)  The boundaries of the 100-year floodplain and the floodway shall be determined from information presented in the flood insurance study (FIS). In the absence of other information (i.e., site specific studies as provided by the property owner), boundaries shall be determined by scaling distances on the maps provided in the FIS. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries, the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. In all cases, the 100-year flood elevation as provided in the FIS shall be the governing factor in locating the boundary on any property. 
(B)  If the FIS does not provide 100-year flood elevations, then the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any 100-year flood elevation and floodway data available from any federal, state, local or other source as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or other developments in floodplain areas are administered in accordance with this chapter. 
(2534 3714) 
11-8-9. - Compliance. 
    No structure shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this chapter. These regulations meet the minimum requirements as set forth by the Colorado Water Conservation Board and the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(2534 3714) 
11-8-10. - Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. 
    This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(2534) 
11-8-11. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be: 
(A)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(B)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(C)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(2534) 
11-8-12. - Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of the one-hundred- (100-) year floodplains or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City, any officer or employee thereof, or Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(2534) 
11-8-13. - Floodplain regulations and floodplain development permits. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all lands located within the 100-year floodplain: 
(A)  General Standards: 
(1)  All proposed developments within the special flood hazard area shall be designed and constructed in accordance with this ordinance and shall not adversely affect any upstream, downstream or adjacent properties. 
(2)  No development, use, fill, construction or alteration on or over any portion of a designated floodplain shall be permitted that would cause or result in any of the following: 
(a)  The storage or processing of materials that in times of flooding are buoyant, flammable, explosive or otherwise potentially injurious to human, animal or plant life. 
(b)  The disposal of garbage or other solid waste materials. 
(c)  Substantial solid debris being carried downstream by flood waters. 
(d)  Any obstruction that would impair the flow capacity of a designated floodplain so as to cause foreseeable damage to others, wherever located. 
(3)  All new construction, lateral additions and substantial improvements (including the placement of prefabricated buildings and manufactured homes) shall be: 
(a)  Designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(b)  Designed and constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(c)  Designed and constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(d)  Designed and constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
(e)  Designed and constructed in conformance with all sections of this chapter. 
(B)  Residential Structures: 
(1)  In floodplain areas in which the 100-year flood elevations are not known, all new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated two feet above the gutter flowline of the nearest street. 
(2)  In floodplain areas in which the base flood elevation (BFE) is known, all new construction and substantial improvements of residential construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot above the BFE as indicated in the flood insurance study (FIS). 
(3)  Require within any AO Zone that all new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated three feet above the highest adjacent grade, if no depth number is specified, or at least one foot higher than the depth number specified (in feet) in the FIS. 
(4)  Within zones AH or zone AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are required to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(5)  No new residential lot shall be platted if located entirely within the 100-year floodplain. Any use of or construction upon a residential lot that is partially located in the 100-year floodplain must comply with all requirements of this chapter. 
(C)  Non-Residential Structures: 
(1)  In floodplain areas in which the 100-year flood elevations are not known, all new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated two feet above the gutter flow line of the nearest street. 
(2)  In floodplain areas in which the BFE is known, all new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot above the BFE as indicated in the FIS. 
(3)  Require within any AO zone that all new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated three feet above the highest adjacent grade, if no depth number is specified, or at least one foot higher than the depth number specified (in feet) on the FIS or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing standards specified in (5) below. 
(4)  Within zones AH or zone AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are required to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(5)  As an alternative for non-residential structures only, the structure, including utility and sanitary facilities, can be completely floodproofed to the levels mentioned above. The walls and basement floor shall be completely waterproofed and they shall be built to withstand lateral and uplift water pressure, and 
(a)  Be floodproofed so that, below the BFE, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
(b)  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
(c)  Be certified by a registered professional engineer that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this paragraph. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(6)  When floodproofing is used for nonresidential structures, a registered professional engineer shall certify that the flood proofing methods are adequate to withstand the flood pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors caused by the 100-year flood. A record of this certification shall be maintained on file with the building permit by the building official. The elevation to which the structure is flood proofed (based on mean sea level) shall be noted on the certification. 
(D)  Manufactured Homes: 
(1)  All new individual manufactured homes or other new manufactured structures, new manufactured home parks, expansions of manufactured home parks and manufactured home parks where the repair, reconstruction or improvements of the streets, utilities and pads equal or exceed 50 percent of their value before the repair, reconstruction or improvements was started, shall have stands or lots that are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be two feet above the 100-year flood elevation, as indicated in the appropriate official flood study, and adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided. When manufactured homes are put on pilings, the pilings shall be designed and certified by a Registered Professional Engineer and shall be installed in conformance with that design. 
(2)  All new manufactured homes and substantially improved manufactured homes located in the 100-year floodplain shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and capable of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads. The anchoring shall be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. Specific requirements may be: 
(a)  Over-the-top ties provided at each of the four corners with one mid-point tie on each side of the manufactured home shorter than 50 feet. Manufactured homes longer than 50 feet shall have two ties at intermediate points on each side. 
(b)  Frame ties provided at each corner with four additional ties on each side of manufactured homes shorter than 50 feet. Longer manufactured homes shall have five ties on each side. 
(c)  All components of the anchoring system shall have a minimum strength of 4,800 pounds. 
(d)  Any additions to manufactured homes shall be anchored in the same way. 
(E)  Recreational Vehicles: It is a requirement that all recreational vehicles: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; and 
(3)  Meet the permit requirements and elevation and anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(F)  New Development Proposals: All new development proposals, including subdivision proposals, shall be designed to minimize flooding potential. If all or part of a proposed development is located within a 100-year floodplain, then the corresponding proposal shall conform to the following guidelines: 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage facilities provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and 
(4)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all subdivision proposals and any other proposed developments. 
(G)  Construction Materials and Methods: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(3)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(H)  Utilities: 
(1)  All new replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(2)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and 
(3)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(I)  Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit: A floodplain development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any 100-year floodplain area as established in the FIS. Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City and may include, but are not limited to: Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor, including basement, of all structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been flood proofed; 
(3)  Certification by a registered professional engineer that the flood proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood proofing criteria in Subsection 11-8-13(C), W.M.C., above; and 
(4)  Description and analysis prepared by a registered professional engineer of the extent to which any watercourse, floodplain or floodway will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(J)  Review of Floodplain Development Permits: The City will: 
(1)  Review all floodplain development permit applications to determine that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review all floodplain development permit applications to determine that all necessary permits (e.g., 404 permit, storm sewer outfall permit, FEMA permits, etc.) have been obtained by the applicant from federal, state or local governmental agencies from which approval is required prior to the City's approval of the floodplain development permit. 
(3)  Review all floodplain development permit applications to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the provisions as set forth in Section 11-8-14, W.M.C., have been met. 
(4)  Review all building permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(5)  Require every applicant to submit certification from a registered land surveyor identifying the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement. 
(K)  Floodplain Development Permit for Property Removed from the floodplain by fill: The City will not issue a floodplain development permit for the construction of a new structure or an addition to an existing structure on a property that has been removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA LOMR-F, unless the elevation of the lowest floor is placed one foot above the BFE that existed prior to the placement of the approved fill. 
(2534 3714) 
11-8-14. - Floodway Regulations. 
(a)  The State of Colorado has adopted standards for the floodway that are more stringent than the FEMA minimum standards. Because floodways are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles and significant amounts of eroded materials, only the following uses are permitted in the regulatory floodway: 
(1)  General farming, pasture, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, wildlife sanctuary, game farm and other similar agricultural, wildlife and related uses. 
(2)  Lawns, gardens, play areas, bikeways, pedestrian pathways and other similar uses. 
(3)  Portions of golf courses, driving ranges, archery ranges, fair grounds, parks, hiking or horseback riding trails, open space and other similar private and public recreational uses not involving structures. 
(4)  Buried or underground utility lines. 
(B)  The uses permitted in subsection (A) above may not involve any encroachment such as fill, new construction, substantial improvements or any other development within or above the floodway, unless certification is provided by a registered professional engineer demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in the BFE or have any negative impacts on upstream, downstream or adjacent properties. 
(C)  Notwithstanding the above provisions, under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, the City may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in BFE, provided that the City first applies for a CLOMR and receives a floodway revision through FEMA. 
(2534 3714) 
11-8-15. - Standards for Watercourse Alteration. 
    For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a special flood hazard area, the following standards apply: 
(A)  Applicants proposing channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition, and channel migration and properly mitigate potential problems through the project as well as upstream and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability may be required by the City to assist in determining the most appropriate design. 
(B)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall identify and evaluate the residual 100-year floodplain. 
(C)  Any channelization or other stream alteration activity proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local floodplain rules, regulations and ordinances. 
(D)  Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and stamped by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer or Certified Professional Hydrologist. 
(E)  All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all applicable federal, state and local floodplain requirements and regulations. 
(F)  Within the regulatory floodway, stream alteration activities shall not be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a floodway analysis and report, stamped by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer, that there is no rise in the existing BFE resulting from the project (otherwise known as a no-rise certification), unless the City first applies for and receives a CLOMR and floodway revision. 
(G)  Applicants must demonstrate that future maintenance of the channelization or flow diversion project will occur for any altered or relocated portions of watercourses so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(3714) 
11-8-16. - Non-Conforming Structures. 
    A structure that was lawful before becoming subject to this chapter, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued, subject to the following conditions: 
(A)  Such structure shall not be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity. 
(B)  If any nonconforming structure is destroyed by any means, including floods, to the extent that the cost of restoration would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the structure was damaged, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  If the nonconforming structure is in the floodway, the structure may be rebuilt; however, it shall not be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in any way that would create an obstruction to water flow greater than that which existed before damage to the structure occurred. Upon reconstruction, nonresidential and residential structures shall be elevated two feet above the 100-year flood elevation, as indicated in the appropriate flood insurance study. As an alternative nonresidential facilities can be completely flood proofed two feet above the 100-year flood elevation, as indicated in the appropriate flood insurance study. The walls and basement floor shall be completely flood proofed and they shall be built to withstand lateral and uplift water pressure. 
(2)  If the structure is located in the flood storage area, it may be reconstructed, provided nonresidential and residential structures are elevated two feet above the 100-year flood elevation, as indicated in the appropriate flood insurance study. 
(3)  As an alternative for nonresidential structures only, the structure, including utility and sanitary facilities, can be completely flood proofed two feet above the 100-year flood elevation, as indicated in the appropriate flood insurance study. The walls and basement floor shall be completely flood proofed and they shall be built to withstand lateral and uplift water pressure. 
(4)  If any manufactured home or home park is destroyed by any means such that the cost of restoration would exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to damage, then such manufactured home or manufactured home park shall not be rebuilt if it is located in the floodway and, if it is located in the flood storage area, it shall be rebuilt in conformance with this ordinance. 
(2534 3417) 
11-8-17. - Floodplain Ordinance Administrator. 
    This ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Director of Community Development or his designee. 
(2534 3714) 
11-8-18. - Variances. 
(A)  Appeal Board: 
(1)  The Director of Community Development shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance. 
(2)  The City Council shall hear and decide appeals, when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Director of Community Development in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. 
(3)  Those aggrieved by the decision of the City Council, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decisions to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  In passing upon such applications, the Director of Community Development and the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and: 
(a)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(b)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(c)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners; 
(d)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(e)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(f)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(g)  The compatibility of the proposed use with the existing and anticipated development; 
(h)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(i)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(j)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(k)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(5)  Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection 11-8-18(A)(4), W.M.C., and the purposes of this ordinance, the Director of Community Development or the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance. 
(6)  The City shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variances to the federal emergency management agency. 
(B)  Conditions for Variances: 
(1)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base level, providing items (a)-(k) in subsection 11-8-18(A)(4), W.M.C., have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justifications required for issuing the variance increases. 
(2)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(3)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway, if any increase in the 100-year flood elevation would result. 
(4)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(5)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
(a)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(b)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
(c)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, increased velocities, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, as identified in Subsection 11-8-18(A)(4), W.M.C., or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(6)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk from the granting of the variance. 
(2534 3714) 
11-8-19. - Records. 
    The City shall obtain, maintain, and have available for public inspection: 
(A)  All of the flood insurance studies. 
(B)  Certificates of flood proofing and a statement whether a structure has been flood proofed and to what elevation (with building permits, as applicable). 
(C)  For structures in the floodplain: 
(1)  Information on the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, for all new or substantially improved structures; and 
(2)  A statement whether a new or substantially improved structure contains a basement. 
(2534) 
11-8-20. - Standards for Critical Facilities. 
    The City will use the following criteria in order to identify and confirm which specific structures within the City are critical facilities: 
(A)  Classification of Critical Facitilies: Critical facilities are classified under the following categories: (1) Essential services; (2) Hazardous materials; (3) At-risk populations; and (4) Vital to restoring normal services. 
(1)  Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities, and transportation lifelines. 
(a)  These facilities consist of: 
(i)  Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle and equipment storage, and, emergency operation centers); 
(ii)  Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent care centers having emergency treatment functions, and non-ambulatory surgical structures, but not including clinics, doctor's offices, and non-urgent care medical structures that do not provide these functions); 
(iii)  Designated emergency shelters; 
(iv)  Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio, and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines, cables, and conduits); 
(v)  Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution (hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines, transmission lines, distribution lines, and service lines); and 
(vi)  Air transportation lifelines (municipal and larger airports, helicopter pads and structures serving emergency functions, and associated infrastructure such as aviation control towers, air traffic control centers, and emergency equipment aircraft hangars). 
(b)  Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), non-potable water treatment and distribution systems, and hydroelectric power generating plants and related appurtenances, which have plans in place to avoid system failures during extreme floods events and adequate restoration plans following flood emergencies. 
(c)  Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with the provisions of this chapter, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the city on an as-needed basis upon request. 
(2)  Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. 
(a)  These facilities may include: 
(i)  Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical manufacturing); 
(ii)  Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials; 
(iii)  Refineries; 
(iv)  Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and 
(v)  Above ground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers. 
(b)  Facilities shall be determined to be critical facilities if they produce or store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is required by the occupational safety and health administration (OSHA) to keep a material safety data sheet (MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the work place, and the chemical(s) is stored in quantities equal to or greater than the threshold planning quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that facility shall be considered to be a critical facility. The TPQ for these chemicals is: either 500 pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is lower) for the 356 chemicals listed under 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010), also known as extremely hazardous substances (EHS); or 10,000 pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the Colorado Department of Health and Environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found in 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010). The environmental protection agency (EPA) regulation "Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification," 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010) and OSHA regulation "Occupational Safety and Health Standards," 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010) are incorporated herein by reference and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation this ordinance, but exclude later amendments to or editions of the regulations 
(c)  Specific exemptions to this category include: 
(i)  Finished consumer products within retail centers and households containing hazardous materials intended for household use, and agricultural products intended for agricultural use. 
(ii)  Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local authority having jurisdiction by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified professional (as determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a major threat to the public. 
(iii)  Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage, and distribution centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products. 
(d)  The exemptions, listed in paragraph (c) above, shall not apply to buildings or other structures that also function as critical facilities under another category outlined in this section. 
(3)  At-risk populations facilities include medical care, congregate care, and schools. 
(a)  These facilities consist of: 
(i)  Elder care (nursing homes); 
(ii)  Congregate care serving 12 or more individuals (day care and assisted living); 
(iii)  Public and private schools (pre-schools, K-12 schools), before-school and after-school care serving 12 or more children); 
(4)  Facilities vital to restoring normal services including government operations. 
(a)  These facilities consist of: 
(i)  Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails, building permitting and inspection services, community administration and management, maintenance and equipment centers); 
(ii)  Essential structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories, offices, and classrooms only). 
(b)  These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the City that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with this ordinance, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the city on an as-needed basis upon request. 
(B)  Protection for Critical Facilities. All new and substantially improved critical facilities and new additions to critical facilities located within the special flood hazard area shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be critical facilities. For the purposes of this, protection shall include either (1) location outside the special flood hazard area or (2) elevation or floodproofing of the structure to at least two feet above the base flood elevation. 
(C)  Ingress and Egress for New Critical Facilities. New critical facilities shall, when practicable as determined by the city, have continuous non-inundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a 100-year flood event. 
(3714) 
CHAPTER 9. - BUILDING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3908, § 1, adopted November 27, 2017 , repealed the former chapter 9, §§ 11-9-1-11-9-13, and enacted a new chapter 9 as set out herein. The former chapter 9 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from 2965 3327 3541 3634 3725. 

11-9-1. - Adoption of Building Codes. 
(A)  Intent and Findings: The intent of this chapter is to adopt by reference and with modifications the International Building Code, 2015 Edition; the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition; the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the State of Colorado State Electrical Board; the International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition; the International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition; the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition; the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition; the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2015 Edition; and the International Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition. 
    Hereinafter, all such codes may be referred to as "Building Codes." The City Council finds that the adoption of such Codes is essential in the preservation of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Westminster. 
(B)  Adoption of Building Codes: The following documents, one copy each of which is on file in the Office of the City Clerk, being marked and designated as stated, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this codification with, however, the amendments indicated in the following sections of this chapter. 
(1)  International Building Code. The "International Building Code, 2015 Edition," published by the International Code Council, Inc., and in particular Chapters 2 through 35 inclusive and Appendix Chapter I are hereby adopted as the Building Code of and for the City. The International Building Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures unless regulated under the provisions of the International Residential Code. 
(2)  International Residential Code. The "International Residential Code, 2015 Edition," published by the International Code Council, Inc., and in particular Chapters 2 through 44 inclusive and Appendix Chapters A, H, and K inclusive are hereby adopted as the Residential Building Code of and for the City. The International Residential Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories in height with a separate means of egress. 
(3)  National Electrical Code. The "National Electrical Code," sponsored by the National Fire Protection Association, Quincy, Massachusetts, as adopted by the State of Colorado State Electrical Board and as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of and for the City. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code. The "International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition," published by the International Code Council, Inc., in particular Chapters 2 through 15 inclusive and Appendix Chapters C and E inclusive is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of and for the City. The International Plumbing Code shall apply to the erection, installation, alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems and regulate nonflammable medical gas, inhalation anesthetic, vacuum piping, nonmedical oxygen systems and sanitary and condensate vacuum collection systems. 
(5)  International Mechanical Code. The "International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition," published by the International Code Council, Inc., and in particular Chapters 2 through 15 inclusive is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of and for the City. The International Mechanical Code shall regulate the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of mechanical systems that are permanently installed and utilized to provide control of environmental conditions and related processes within buildings. 
(6)  International Fuel Gas Code. The "International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition," published by the International Code Council, Inc., and in particular Chapters 2 through 8 inclusive and Appendix A is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of and for the City. The International Fuel Gas Code shall apply to the installation of fuel-gas piping systems, fuel gas appliances, gaseous hydrogen systems and related accessories. This code covers piping systems for natural gas with an operating pressure of 125 psig or less and for LP-gas systems with an operating pressure of 20 psig or less. 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code. The "International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition," published by the International Code Council, Inc., and in particular Commercial (CE) Chapters 2 through 6 inclusive and Residential Chapters (RE) 2 through 6 inclusive are hereby adopted as the Energy Code of and for the City. The International Energy Conservation Code shall regulate the design and construction of buildings for the use and conservation of energy over the life of each building. 
(8)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. The "International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2015 Edition," published by the International Code Council, Inc., and in particular Chapters 2, 3, and 11 inclusive, is hereby adopted as the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code of and for the City. The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair and maintenance of Aquatic recreation facilities, pools and spas that are designed and manufactured to be connected to a circulation system and that are intended for swimming, bathing or wading. 
(9)  International Existing Building Code. The "International Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition," published by the International Code Council, Inc., and in particular Chapters 2 through 16 inclusive is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of and for the City. The International Existing Building Code shall apply to the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition to and relocation of existing buildings. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 1, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-9-2. - Administrative Provisions. 
(A)  Purpose and Scope: 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the Building Codes is to provide minimum requirements to safeguard the public safety, health and general welfare through affordability, structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, light and ventilation, energy conservation and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. 
(2)  The provisions of the Building Codes shall apply to the construction, installation, alteration, moving, enlargement, replacement, abatement, demolition, repair, use, occupancy, location or maintenance of any building or structure or part thereof; electrical system; plumbing system; heating, ventilating, cooling, and refrigeration system, incinerator or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliance; swimming pool, spa, or hot tub; elevator, escalator, or moving walk; or fire protection system; or the design and construction of buildings for effective use of energy within the City, except structures and equipment specifically exempted or not specifically regulated by this chapter or the Building Codes. 
(3)  Whenever in the Building Codes reference is made to an appendix, the provisions of such appendix shall not apply unless specifically adopted. 
(4)  The codes and standards referenced in the Building Codes shall be considered part of the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of the Building Codes and the referenced codes and standards, the provisions of the Building Codes shall apply. 
    Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing and manufactures installations shall apply. 
(B)  Applicability: 
(1)  Where, in any specific case, different sections of the Building Codes specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. 
(2)  Other laws. The provisions of the Building Codes shall not be deemed to nullify any provision of local, state or federal law. 
(3)  The Building Codes adopted by reference in this chapter do not include "administrative" provisions. Whenever an administrative provision is referred to in a Building Code, the respective provision in the Westminster Municipal Code shall apply. 
(4)  Partial invalidity. In the event any part or provision of the Building Codes is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal ay of the other parts or provisions. 
(5)  Provisions in referenced code and standards. Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of the Building Codes, the provisions of the Building Codes, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard. 
(6)  Conflicts with other adopted codes. Where a conflict arises between any adopted Codes and/or Fire Code, the more stringent application of the respective codes shall apply. 
    Exception. When any provision from the respective codes is agreed upon by the Chief Building Official and the Fire Code Official as being applicable and acceptable. 
(C)  Existing Structures: 
(1)  Existing structures. Shall be administered per the International Existing Building Code. 
(2)  Maintenance. All equipment, systems, materials and appurtenances, both new and existing, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards required by the Building Codes shall be maintained in compliance with the code edition under which they were constructed or installed. 
(3)  Moved buildings. Buildings or structures moved into or within the City shall comply with the provisions of this Code for new installations. 
(D)  Duties and Powers of Building Official: 
(1)  General. The building official is authorized to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and the Building Codes. For such purposes, he and those persons to whom enforcement authority is delegated shall be deemed a peace officer. The Building Official shall have the power to render interpretations of the Building Codes and to adopt policies and procedures, as he may deem necessary in order to clarify the application of the provisions of the Building Codes. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of this Code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in the Building Codes. The Building Official may delegate certain duties for the administration and authority to enforce the Building Codes to qualified officers, inspectors, and other qualified employees authorized by the City Council. 
(2)  Right of entry. Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of the Building Codes, or whenever the Building Official or his authorized representative has probable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition that is contrary to or in violation of the Building Codes which makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the Building Official or authorized representative may enter the building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this Code, provided that if such building is occupied, he shall first present his credentials to the occupant and request entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner, the owner's authorized agent, or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If the owner or occupant cannot be located after a reasonable effort, a notice of intent to inspect shall be posted on the premises. The notice shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that, in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made upon issuance of a search warrant by the Municipal Judge of the City. 
(a)  After entry is refused or 24 hours after the building has been posted, the Building Official may appear before the Municipal Judge and, upon showing of probable cause, shall obtain a search warrant entitling him to enter upon the premises. Upon presentation of the search warrant and proper credentials, or possession of same in the case of unoccupied premises, the Building Official may enter upon the premises using such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry. 
(b)  For purposes of this Subsection (D), "probable cause" exists where the facts and circumstances within the Building Official's knowledge are sufficient to warrant a person of reasonable caution in the belief that there exists a condition or violation of the Building Codes which makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous to life or property. The Building Official shall not be required to demonstrate specific knowledge of the conditions of the particular premises in issue to obtain a search warrant. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of the premises to resist reasonable force used by the Building Official acting pursuant to this Subsection (D). 
(3)  Stop orders. Whenever any work is being done in violation of the provisions of the Building Code or other ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this Code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the Building Official may order the work stopped by issuing a notice in writing and serving it upon any persons engaged in doing such work or causing such work to be done. Upon receipt of the notice, such persons shall stop work until authorized by the Building Official to proceed with the work. It is unlawful to continue any work after receipt of a notice to stop work except such work as directed to remove a violation or unsafe condition. Each day that work is continued after receipt of a notice shall constitute a separate violation of this Code. 
(4)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from an energy, fuel, or power supply to any building or system that is regulated by the Building Codes until approved by the Building Official. 
(5)  Authority to disconnect utilities in emergencies. In the case of an emergency, where it is necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property, or when a utility connection has been made without required approval, the Building Official or his authorized representative shall have the authority to cause the disconnection of fuel-gas utility service or energy supplies to a building, structure, premises, or equipment regulated by the Building Code. The Building Official shall, whenever possible, notify the serving utility, the owner, and the occupant of the building, structure, or premises of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. 
(a)  It is unlawful to make connections from any energy, fuel, or power supply which has been disconnected or to supply energy or fuel to any equipment regulated by the Building Codes which has been disconnected, ordered to be disconnected, or the use of which has been ordered to be disconnected by the Building Official. Each day that such unlawful connection or supply continues shall be considered a separate violation of this Code. 
(6)  Alternate materials and methods of construction. 
(a)  General. The provisions of the Building Codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material, method of construction or design not specifically prescribed by the Building Codes, provided any alternate material, method or design has been approved and its use authorized by the Building Official. The Building Official may approve an alternate material, method or design, provided he finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of the Building Codes and that the material, method, or work offered, is, for the purpose intended, not less than the equivalent of that prescribed in the Building Codes for suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety, energy efficiency and sanitation. The Building Official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding the use of an alternate material or method. Any decision denying the use of an alternate material or method of construction shall be documented by the Building Official and shall include the reasons therefor. 
(b)  Tests. Where there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of the Building Codes regarding the use of an alternate material or method of construction, or evidence that a proposed material or method of construction does not conform to the requirements of the Building Codes, the Building Official may require that tests be made at the expense of the proponent of the questioned material or method of construction. 
(i)  Test methods shall be as specified by the Building Official or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods of the proposed alternate material or method of construction, the Building Official shall determine which test procedures are appropriate. 
(ii)  All tests shall be made by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the Building Official. 
(7)  Modifications. Where there are practical difficulties involved in complying with the provisions of the Building Codes, the Building Official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided he shall first find that a special individual reason makes the strict letter of the Building Codes impractical; that the modification is consistent with the intent and purpose of this Code; and that such modification does not lessen health, life, fire safety, accessibility, energy efficiency or structural requirements. The details of action granting a modification shall be documented by the Building Official and shall include the reasons therefor. 
(E)  Unsafe Buildings, Structures and Equipment: 
(1)  Unsafe buildings, structures, and equipment. Any building, structure, or equipment regulated by the Building Codes which are structurally unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate egress, or not provided with adequate light and ventilation or which constitutes a fire or health hazard or is otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or which involve illegal or improper occupancy is deemed unsafe. 
(a)  Any building or structure which has any of all of the conditions or defects herein described shall be deemed to be a unsafe building, provided that such condition or defects exist to the extent that life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered. 
(i)  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(ii)  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(iii)  Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(iv)  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(v)  Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(vi)  Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one half of that specified in the Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the Building Code for such buildings. 
(vii)  Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction. 
(viii)  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of (i) dilapidation, deterioration or decay; (ii) faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building, (iv) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse. 
(ix)  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(x)  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one third of the base. 
(xi)  Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings. 
(xii)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become (i) an attractive nuisance to children; (ii) a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to (iii) enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts. 
(xiii)  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in the Building Code or Housing Code, or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings. 
(xiv)  Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any non-supporting part, member or portion less than 50 percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent of the (i) strength, (ii) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or (iii) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location. 
(xv)  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(xvi)  Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, the accumulation of trash, inadequate maintenance or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard. 
(xvii)  Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(xviii)  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
(xix)  A vacant structure that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe. 
(b)  In addition to the above unsafe conditions, any use of buildings, structures, or equipment constituting a hazard to safety, health, or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage, or abandonment is an unsafe use. Parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary, and other appendages or structural members which are supported by, attached to, or part of a building and which are in deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads which are specified in the Building Code are deemed unsafe building appendages. 
(2)  Abatement of unsafe buildings. All buildings or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the Building Official to be unsafe as defined in this section are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in section 11-9-2(E)(3) of this Code. 
(a)  Any building declared an unsafe building shall be made to comply with one of the following: 
(i)  The building shall be repaired in accordance with the current Building Code or other current code applicable to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair. If requested, the owner shall, at the owner's expense, provide to the Building Official a remedial plan for the corrective work and information necessary to determine whether the remedial work can be completed within the time stated in the order; or 
(ii)  The building shall be demolished; or 
(iii)  If the building does not constitute an immediate danger to the life, limb, property or safety of the public it may be vacated, secured and maintained against entry until such time as the building is demolished or repaired in accordance with the current Building Code or other current code applicable to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair. 
(b)  If the building is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public and its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated and the Building Official may take all actions necessary to summarily abate the dangerous or unsafe condition pursuant to Section 8-4-5 of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(3)  Notice and orders. When the Building Official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined that such building is unsafe, the Building Official shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the building. 
(a)  Notice and order. The Building Official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the building. The notice and order shall contain: 
(i)  The street address and legal description of the property that the unsafe building is located. 
(ii)  A statement that the Building Official has found the building to be unsafe with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to deem the building unsafe under the provisions of this section. 
(iii)  A statement of action required to be taken and the time period allowed for such action. 
(iv)  Statements advising that if the required action is not commenced within the time specified, the Building Official will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed and may proceed to cause the work to be done and charged the costs thereof against the property or its owner. 
(v)  A statement advising that any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal the notice and order or any action of the Building Official to the Building and Fire Code Appeals Committee, provide that the appeal is made in writing as provide in this Code within 30 days from the date of service of such notice and order and that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter. 
(b)  Service. The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the record owner and posted on the building affected by such notice. The Building Official may serve additional such notice and order on any parties that may have interest in the property. The failure of the Building Official to serve any person required to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings herein or relieve any person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of this Code. 
(c)  Method of service. Service of the notice and order shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is delivered to the owner personally or sent by first-class mail to the owner of the subject property at the address shown in the county assessor records for the county in which the property is located. Notice shall be deemed served on the date of receipt by the owner, if personally served, or upon the fifth day after mailing of the notice and order. 
(d)  Recordation of notice and order. If compliance is not had with the notice and order within the specified time, and no appeal has been properly filed, the Building Official may file in the office of the county recorder a certificate describing the property and certifying that the building is unsafe and the owner has been so notified. 
(e)  Notice to vacate. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as required in this section, be posted at or upon each exit of the building. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit. No person shall remove or deface any such posting until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed. 
(4)  Appeal and procedure for conduct of hearing appeals. Appeals shall be made to the Building and Fire Code Appeals Committee. Appeals and hearings shall be as set forth in Chapter 10 of Title II of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(a)  Effects of failure to appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this Code shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any portion thereof. 
(b)  Scope of hearing on appeal. Only those matters or issues raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal. 
(c)  Staying of orders of appeal. Except for vacation orders, enforcement of any notice and order of the building official issued under this Code shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. 
(5)  Enforcement of orders. After any order of the Building Official or the Building and Fire Code Appeals Committee made pursuant to this Code shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with such order is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(a)  Failure to obey order. If, after any order of the Building Official or the Building and Fire Code Appeals Committee made pursuant to this Code has become final, the person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the Building Official may (i) cause such person to be prosecuted per section Chapter 4 of Title VIII, or (ii) institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance. 
(b)  Failure to commence work. Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced with in the specified time as required in the notice and order the Building Official may cause the building to be vacated. 
(c)  Extension of time. Upon receipt of an application from the person required to conform to the order and by agreement of such person to comply with the order if allowed additional time, the Building Official may grant an extension of time, not to exceed 120 days, within which to complete said repair, rehabilitation, or demolition, if the Building Official determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The Building Official's authority to extend time is limited to the physical repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the premises and will not in any way affect the time to appeal the notice and order. 
(d)  Interference with repair or demolition. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the City or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated, or demolished under the provisions of this Code, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this Code. 
(6)  Performance of work. When any work of repair or demolition is to be done pursuant to this Code, the Building Official shall issue his order therefor and the City may decide to delay the work, perform the work with City personnel, or contract with a private entity to do the work. Plans and specification therefor may be prepared by the City or outside consultants under contract with the City. 
(a)  Costs. The costs of such work may be collected pursuant to the provisions of Section 8-4-5 of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(F)  Compliance with Building Codes: 
(1)  Violation. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure; electrical system; plumbing system; heating, ventilating, cooling, or refrigeration system; incinerator or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliance; swimming pool, spa, or hot tub; elevator, escalator, or moving walk; or fire protection system, or equipment regulated by the Building Codes in the City, or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of any of the provisions of the Building Codes. 
(2)  Nuisance. It is a public nuisance to use a building, structure, or equipment in violation of the Building Codes. This condition may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4 of Title VIII of this Code. 
(3)  Penalties. Any person in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for each violation as set forth in Section 1 of Chapter 8 of Title I of this Code. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a criminal offense. 
(4)  Notice of violation. Prior to causing a summons to be issued for a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the Building Official may, at his discretion, issue a written notice to the person found in violation, describing the violation and ordering the person to correct or remedy the violation within a stated period of time. 
(G)  Building and Fire Code Appeals Committee: 
(1)  Appeals. Appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the Building Official or Fire Chief regarding the application or interpretation of the Building and Fire Codes, and amendments thereto, shall be made to the Building and Fire Code Appeals Committee pursuant to Chapter 10 of Title II of this Code. No such appeal shall be heard by the Building and Fire Code Appeals Committee unless the appeal is filed within 30 calendar days after the date of the action of the Building Official or Fire Chief. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 1, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-9-3. - Permits and Fees. 
(A)  Permits Required: 
(1)  General. No person shall construct, install, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, replace, convert, demolish, equip, or change the occupancy of any building or structure; electrical system; plumbing system; heating, ventilating, cooling, or refrigeration system; gas system, incinerator or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliance; swimming pool, spa or hot tub; fire protection system, or other work regulated by this Code, or portion thereof, in the City, or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a building permit for all such work from the Building Official, except as follows: 
(a)  A public utility, duly franchised or authorized as such in the City, shall not be required to obtain a permit prior to performing emergency maintenance or repairs on its equipment, building, or structure, when necessary to sustain service or protect life or property; provided, however, that the public utility shall obtain a permit for the work as soon as it is practical to do so. 
(b)  Public utilities, duly franchised or authorized as such in the City, shall not be required to obtain a permit for the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, or distribution equipment that is under the ownership and control of the public utility. 
(2)  Exempt work. Exemption from the permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of the City. A building permit shall not be required for the following: 
Building: 
(a)  One-story detached accessory buildings or structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, gazebos, pergolas, and similar uses, provided that the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet. 
(b)  Retaining walls that are not over three feet in height measured when measured from the grade level on the low side to the top of wall, unless supporting a surcharge of earth; a structure; or impounding Class I, II, or IIIA flammable liquids. 
(c)  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed two to one (2:1). 
(d)  Sidewalks, driveways, or similar at grade concrete flatwork to include non-structural concrete slab on grades. 
(e)  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
(f)  Prefabricated swimming pools or portable wading pools; constructed of flexible plastic, rubber, or similar materials that are less than 24 inches deep. 
(g)  Swings and other playground equipment. 
(h)  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of any structure regulated by the International Residential Code or accessory thereto, that do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. 
(i)  Platforms, patios, or decks associated with Group R occupancies not more than 30 inches above grade at any point and not over any basement or story below or do not serve the exit door or are not part of an accessible route. 
(j)  Oil derricks. 
(k)  Non-fixed and moveable fixtures, cases, racks, counters, and partitions not over five feet nine inches in height. 
(l)  Temporary motion picture, television, and theater sets and scenery, except that, the Fire Code provisions shall apply. 
(m)  Agricultural buildings as defined in Appendix Chapter C of the International Building Code. 
(n)  Fences not over 30 inches high. 
(o)  Elevators, escalators, or moving walks. 
(p)  The replacement of windows and doors that do not require the enlarging or structural modification of the exterior wall. Windows that are required to provide emergency escape and rescue openings are required to comply with the International Existing Building Code. 
(q)  Residential gutter installation or replacement. 
Mechanical, electrical, and gas: 
(a)  Portable heating, ventilating, and cooling appliances or equipment; unit refrigeration systems, cooking, or clothes drying equipment; and the replacement of any component part or assembly of an appliance or equipment so long as the appliance or equipment continues to comply with other applicable requirements of this Code. 
Electrical: 
(a)  Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting. 
(b)  Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not the outlets therefor. 
(c)  Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required capacity in the same location. 
(d)  Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy. 
(e)  Repair of broken or defective electrical receptacles, switches, or lamps. 
(f)  Connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
Gas: 
(a)  Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances. 
(b)  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
(c)  Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
Mechanical: 
(a)  Portable heating appliances. 
(b)  Portable ventilation appliances. 
(c)  Portable cooling units. 
(d)  Steam, hot- or chilled-water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code. 
(e)  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
(f)  Portable evaporative coolers. 
(g)  Self-contained refrigeration systems containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(h)  Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
Plumbing: 
(a)  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code. 
(b)  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixture drains, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such maintenance or repair does not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes, or fixtures. 
(3)  Repairs. Application or notice to the Building Official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment at approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting away of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electrical wiring or mechanical or work affecting public health or general safety. 
(4)  Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day. 
(B)  Contractor Registration/License Required: 
(1)  Contractor registration required. Only persons, firms, or corporations holding a current City contractor's registration, issued pursuant to Chapter 5 of Title V of the City's Municipal Code may obtain a building permit, except as follows: 
(a)  Any person who intends to build and occupy a single family detached home, or a building or structure accessory thereto, may apply for a building permit without a City contractor's registration certificate provided, however, that only one such permit for a detached single family home may be issued in any calendar year. The person must intend on occupying the home for a minimum of 12 months after construction is complete. 
(b)  Homeowners shall not be required to obtain a City contractor's registration certificate for the purposes of remodeling, enlarging, altering, repairing, or in any other way improving any building regulated by the International Residential Code, or accessory thereto. Homeowners are defined as the property owners that currently reside at, or plan to reside at, the property for a minimum of 12 months after the work is complete. 
(2)  License required. The State of Colorado laws applicable to licensing of electricians and plumbers shall apply within the City. 
(C)  Application for Permit: 
(1)  Application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall file an application therefor electronically or in writing on a form furnished by the Building Official for that purpose. Each application shall: 
(a)  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 
(b)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by street address, legal description, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work. 
(c)  Fully describe the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. For non-residential uses, state the name of the user and describe the nature of the use or business. 
(d)  Include plans, diagrams, computations, specifications, and other data as required in subsection (C)(2) of this section. 
(e)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(f)  Give such other data and information as may be required by the Building Official. 
(2)  Plans and specifications: 
(a)  Plans, engineering calculations, diagrams, and other data shall be submitted in accordance with the City's submittal requirements with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by an architect or engineer licensed by the State of Colorado when required by section 11-9-3(C)(3). Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared. The Building Official may waive the submission of plans, calculations, construction inspection requirements and other data if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of plans is not necessary to obtain compliance with this Code. 
(b)  Means of egress. The construction documents shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of this Code. In other than occupancies in Groups R-2, R-3, and I-1, the construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces. 
(c)  Site plan or plot plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site and distances from lot lines. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The Building Official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan where the application for permit is for alteration or repair or where otherwise warranted. 
(3)  Design professional. 
(a)  All proposed erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or remodeling shall be prepared by and bear the seal of an architect or engineer licensed by the State of Colorado unless exempted in this section. When such plans are not prepared by an architect or engineer, the Building Official may require the applicant submitting such plans or other data to demonstrate that the State law does not require that the plans be prepared by a licensed architect or engineer. The Building Official may require plans, computations and specifications to be prepared and designed by an architect or engineer licensed by the state to practice as such even if not required by state law or exempted below. 
(b)  An architect's or engineer's design and stamp shall be required on plans, engineering calculations, diagrams, and other data on the following types of projects: 
(i)  Smoke control systems. 
(ii)  Foundation designs for all buildings or structures excluding accessory structures to buildings regulated by the International Residential Code. 
(iii)  Retaining walls over three feet in height when measured from the grade level on the low side to the top of the wall. 
(iv)  Buildings or structures that exceed the prescriptive limitations of section R301 of the IRC. 
(c)  The architect or engineer in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. 
(d)  Exemptions. Any applicant may prepare plans, calculations, and specifications for construction, alterations, remodeling, additions to, or repair of any of the following: 
(i)  One, two, three, and four unit family dwellings, including accessory buildings commonly associated with such dwellings as long as the construction does not exceed the prescriptive limitations of the code. 
(ii)  Garages; industrial buildings; offices; farm buildings and buildings for the marketing, storage, or processing of farm products; and warehouses, which do not exceed one story in height, exclusive of a one-story basement, and which under the provisions of this Code are not designed for occupancy by more than ten people. 
(iii)  Additions, alterations, or repairs to the foregoing buildings which do not cause the completed buildings to exceed the applicable limitations set forth in this subsection. 
(iv)  Nonstructural alterations of any nature to any building if such alterations do not affect the life safety of the occupants of the building. 
(4)  Structural observation. When special inspection and/or structural observation is required by Chapter 17 of the International Building Code, the architect or engineer of record shall prepare an inspection program which shall be submitted to the Building Official for approval prior to issuance of the building permit. The inspection program shall designate the portions of the work that require special inspection and the name or names of the individuals and firms who are to perform the special inspections, and indicate the duties of the special inspectors. The special inspector shall be employed by the owner, the engineer or architect of record, or an agent of the owner, but not the contractor or any other person responsible for the work. 
(5)  Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn to scale upon substantial paper. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the Building Official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature, and extent of the work proposed, and shall show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the Building Codes and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations, as determined by the Building Official. 
(a)  For buildings and structures utilizing braced wall design, and where required by the building official, braced wall lines shall be identified on the construction documents. Pertinent information including, but not limited to, bracing methods, location and length of braced wall panels and foundation requirements of braced wall panels at top and bottom shall be provided. 
(6)  Expiration of permit applications or plan review. Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of application shall expire by limitation unless such application has been pursued in good faith, and the plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building Official. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the applicant for periods not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the applicant, showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee. 
(D)  Permit Issuance: 
(1)  Issuance. 
(a)  The application, plans, specifications, computations, and other data submitted by the applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the Building Official. Such plans may be reviewed by other City departments to substantiate compliance with any applicable laws under their control. If the Building Official finds that the work described in an application for a permit and the plans, specifications, and other data filed therewith conform to the requirements of the Building Codes and other pertinent laws, and that all applicable fees have been paid, a building permit shall be issued to the applicant. 
(b)  When the Building Official issues a permit for which plans are required, the plans shall be approved in writing or by stamp that states "Reviewed for Code Compliance". The approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified, or altered without authorization from the Building Official, and all work regulated by this Code shall be done in accordance with the approved plans. A set of approved construction drawings shall be kept at the construction site and shall be available for review. 
(c)  The Building Official may issue a permit for the construction of part of a building and structure before all of the plans and specifications for the entire building or structure have been submitted or approved provided that adequate information verifying compliance with all pertinent requirements of the Building Codes and other pertinent laws, and that all applicable fees have been paid, a building permit may be issued to the applicant for that portion of the building or structure. A permit issued based on partial plan approval will be restricted to the portion of the work that has been reviewed and approved and the holder of such permit shall proceed at his own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire building or structure will be granted. 
(2)  Retention of plans. One set of approved plans, specifications, and computations shall be retained by the Building Official for a period of not less than 90 days from the date of completion of the work covered therein, and one set of approved plans shall be returned to the applicant and shall be kept on the job site at all times during which work is in progress. 
(3)  Validity of permit. The issuance of a permit or approval of plans, specifications, and computations shall not be construed to be a permit for or an approval of any violation of any of the provisions of the Building Codes or other ordinances of the City. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the Building Codes or other ordinances of the City shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based upon plans, specifications, and other data shall not prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the plans, specifications, and other data, or from ordering the work being carried on to be stopped when in violation of the Building Codes or other ordinances of the City. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure in violation of the building code or of any other ordinance of the City. 
(4)  Expiration of permit. 
(a)  Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of the Building Codes shall expire if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date the permit was issued, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days at any time after the work is commenced. Before such work can be resumed, a new permit shall be obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes are to be made in the original plans and specifications for such work and, provided further, that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after the work authorized by such permit has been suspended or abandoned for more than one year, the permittee shall pay a new, full permit fee. 
(b)  When a permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this Subsection for good and satisfactory reasons, a permitted holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time in which he may commence work under that permit. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permitted for a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the permitted showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permitted have prevented action from being taken. 
(5)  Suspension or revocation. The Building Official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of the Building Codes or any other ordinance or regulation of the City whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate, or incomplete information supplied by the applicant. 
(E)  Fees and Taxes: 
(1)  General. A permit shall not be valid until the prescribed fees have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. 
(a)  Building use tax shall be paid in accordance with the City's Municipal Code. 
(b)  Park development fees shall be paid in accordance with the City's Municipal Code. 
(c)  Water and sanitary sewer tap fees shall be paid in accordance with the City's Municipal Code. 
(d)  School Land Dedication fees shall be paid in accordance with the City's Municipal Code. 
(2)  Permit fees. A fee for each building permit shall be paid to the City as specified in the "Building Permit Fee Schedule" as adopted by Resolution of the City Council; except that, the City, the Counties of Adams and Jefferson, the State of Colorado, the United States Government, and all agencies and departments thereof, shall be exempt from payment of building permit fees for the construction or repair of buildings or structures owned wholly by such agencies and departments and devoted to governmental use. 
Exception: The Building Official shall indefinitely waive the permit fees and use tax for the conversion of existing non-conforming solid fuel burning devices to gas, electric, EPA certified phase II, Colorado Phase III, or devices meeting the emission standard for solid fuel burning devices established under the State statutes and/or regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, as demonstrated by a test by an EPA accredited laboratory. This exemption shall be in effect for those devices purchased or installed on or after September 1, 1993. 
(3)  Valuation. The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of permit application. The valuation to be used in computing the permit and plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work, including labor and materials, for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, conveyance systems, fire protection systems, and other permanent work or equipment. Use tax, permit fees, and the valuation of work covered by other permits shall be excluded from the valuation. The minimum valuation for new commercial, commercial remodel, commercial addition, new residential, and residential addition permits is calculated on the project's gross floor area multiplied by a cost per square foot as established by the building official. The final determination of value or valuation shall be made by the Building Official. 
(4)  Plan review fees. When plans or other data are required to be submitted by the building codes, a plan review fee shall be paid. Payment shall be at the time the plans and specifications are submitted for review if required by the Building Division. Said plan review fee shall be 65 percent of the building permit fee as shown in the "Building Permit Fee Schedule" as adopted by Resolution of the City Council. The plan review fees specified in this Subsection are separate fees from the permit fees and are in addition thereto. Where plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the rate established in the "Building Permit Fee Schedule". 
(5)  Work commenced without a permit. When work for which a permit is required by the Building Codes is commenced without first obtaining the required permit, the fee for any subsequently issued permit shall be double the prescribed permit fee as set forth in subsection (E)(2) of this section, but not less than $250.00 for the first such offense, triple the prescribed permit fee as set forth in subsection (E)(2) of this section, but not less than $500.00 for any subsequent offenses, and the possible revocation of the contractor's license for the third such offense. These provisions shall not apply to emergency work when it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Building Official that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit prior to the commencement of such work. In all such cases, a permit shall be submitted within the next working business day, and any unreasonable delay in obtaining such permit shall result in the assessment of fees as outlined above. Payment of such increased permit fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of the building codes in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
(6)  Reinspection fees. Permit fees provide for customary inspections only. A reinspection fee may be assessed when the portion of work for which an inspection is scheduled is not complete or when corrections listed during a previous inspection have not been made. Reinspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which an inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. This Subsection is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time work fails to comply with the requirements of the building codes but as a means of controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the work is ready for inspection or reinspection. In instances where a reinspection fee has been assessed, a reinspection fee as set forth in the "Building Permit Fee Schedule" as adopted by Resolution of the City Council shall be paid by the holder of the permit to the City of Westminster before any additional inspections or reinspections may be made. 
(7)  Fee refunds. The Building Official may authorize fee refunds as follows: 
(a)  The Building Official may authorize the refund of any fee which was erroneously paid or collected. 
(b)  The Building Official may authorize the refund of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code. 
(c)  The Building Official may authorize the refund of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plans are reviewed. 
(d)  The Building Official shall not authorize the refund of any fee paid except upon receipt of a written request, by the original permitted, filed not later than 180 days after the date such fee was paid. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 1, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-9-4. - Inspections. 
(A)  Inspection Procedures: 
(1)  General. 
(a)  All construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official, and all such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection until approved by the Building Official. In addition, certain types of construction shall have continuous inspection as specified in the Building Codes. It shall be the duty of the permitted to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection. Neither the Building Official nor the City shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material to allow inspection. 
(b)  Approval as a result of inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the building code or other ordinances of the City. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the Building Codes shall not be valid. 
(c)  A survey of the lot may be required by the Building Official, at the permittee's expense, to verify that the structure is located in accordance with the approved plans. 
(d)  Before issuing a permit, the Building Official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. 
(2)  Inspection requests. It shall be the responsibility of the person doing the work authorized by a permit to notify the Building Official that the work is ready for inspection. The Building Official may require that every request for inspection be filed at least one day prior to the day the inspection is desired. The request shall be by telephone or other means approved by the Building Official. It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspection required by this Code to provide access to and means for inspection of the work. 
(3)  Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection. The Building Official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspection and shall indicate the portion of the work that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or authorized agent wherein the same fails to comply with the building code. Any provisions that do not comply shall be corrected and such work shall not be covered or canceled until authorized by the Building Official. 
(B)  Required Inspections: 
(1)  General. The Building Official, upon notification, shall make an inspection required by this Subsection. The following are required inspections: 
(a)  Footing inspection. Shall be made after excavations are completed, all forms are in place, any required reinforcing steel is in place, and the footing is ready for the placement of concrete but before any concrete is placed. 
(b)  Caisson/drilled pier inspection. Shall be made after caisson drilling has been completed and prior to any concrete being placed. 
(c)  Foundation inspection. For concrete foundations, all forms, required void material, and required reinforcement shall be in place prior to the placement of any concrete. Where the foundation is to be constructed of approved, treated wood, additional inspections may be required by the Building Official. 
(d)  Underslab or underground inspection. Shall be made after all underslab or underground building service equipment, electrical conduit, plumbing piping, and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any such equipment, conduit, or piping is buried or any concrete is placed. Required pressure tests of underground piping or ductwork shall be performed at this time, as specified in the Building Codes. 
(e)  Rough inspection. Shall be made after all rough-in work is completed and ready for inspection; all circuits are made up, electrical boxes, and plaster rings are installed, electrical panels are set, neutrals and grounds are made up, and all grounding is completed; all air or water tests required by the Building Codes have been performed; all ductwork, venting, and piping are completely roughed in; the roofing, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are complete; and when the job is ready for drywall but prior to the installation of any insulation. 
(f)  Wallboard inspection. Gypsum wallboard which is part of a required fire assembly or designed to resist shear forces shall be inspected after all gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place and properly fastened but before any gypsum board joints or fasteners are taped or finished. 
(g)  Final inspection. Shall be made after all work, including final grading, is completed, and the building or space is ready for occupancy. 
(2)  Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified in Subsection (B) of this section, the Building Official may make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the Building Codes and other laws which are enforced by the City. 
(3)  Special inspections. Special inspections shall be conducted as required by the building code and Building Division procedures. 
(4)  Inspection agencies. The Building Official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. 
(C)  Certificates of Occupancy: 
(1)  Use and occupancy. No building or structure, except Group U occupancies, shall be used or occupied and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure, or portion thereof, shall be made until the Building Official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of the building codes or other ordinances of the City. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the Building Codes or other ordinances of the City shall be invalid. 
(2)  Change in use. Changes in the character or use of a building shall not be made without the approval of the Building Official. 
(3)  Certificate issued. After all required final inspections have been made, finding no violations of the provisions of the Building Codes or any other laws or ordinances of the City, all fees have been collected, and all improvements required by the City have been made in accordance with City specifications, including the installation of sidewalks, curbs, gutters, street paving, and any required landscaping, the Building Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy. However, the Building Official may issue the certificate of occupancy prior to the completion of the required improvements provided the City has entered into an agreement with the owner of the property regarding delayed completion. Only those improvements specified in such agreement with the City shall be considered for delayed completion, and the certificate of occupancy shall not be issued if required improvements, other than those included in the agreement with the City, have not been completed. The certificate of occupancy shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The building permit number. 
(b)  The address and legal description of the building. 
(c)  The name and address of the owner or owner's authorized agent. 
(d)  If not the entire building, a description of the portion of the building for which the certificate was issued, including the occupancy group classification. 
(e)  A statement that, at the time of issuance, the building or portion thereof was inspected for compliance with the requirements of the Building Codes for the occupancy and the use for which the building is classified. 
(f)  The edition of the code under which the permit was issued. 
(g)  The type of construction. 
(h)  Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit or certificate of occupancy. 
(i)  The date of issuance of the certificate. 
(j)  The signature of the Building Official or his representative. 
(4)  Temporary certificate. If the Building Official finds that no substantial hazard will result from the occupancy of a building or portion thereof before completion, he may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for the use of a portion or portions of a building or structure prior to the completion of the entire building or structure. The Building Official shall set a time period for which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid. A fee shall be charged for the issuance or reissuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy as set forth in the fee schedule. The fee for the temporary certificate of occupancy shall be based upon the permit fee paid for the building or portion thereof. 
(5)  Revocation. The Building Official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy issued under the provisions of the Building Codes whenever the certificate is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or when it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of the Building Codes or any ordinance or regulation of the City. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 1, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-9-5. - International Building Code Amendments. 
(A)  Section 306.2 of the International Building Code is amended to read as follows: Beverages: over 16 percent alcohol content where the maximum allowable quantities of Table 307.1(1) are not exceeded. 
(B)  Table 307.1(1) of the International Building Code is amended by the addition of a footnote as follows: 
Table 307.1(1) 
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITIES PER CONTROL AREA OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS POSING A PHYSICAL HAZARD a,j,m,n,p 
MATERIAL Combustible liquid c,I,r Flammable liquid c,r  
r. The quantities of beverages exceeding 16 percent alcohol stored in wooden barrels and casks shall not be limited when the storage is in accordance with the provisions of Group S-1 occupancies (see Section 311.2) and Chapter 38 of the International Fire Code as amended by the City. 
(C)  Section 311.2 of the International Building Code is amended to include the following: 
Beverages over 16 percent alcohol in wooden barrels and casks 
Beverages over 16 percent alcohol in metal, glass or ceramic containers 
Beverages over 16 percent alcohol in plastic containers not in accordance with Footnote c. of Table 307.1(1) and exceeding the maximum allowable quantities identified in Table 307.1(1) 
(D)  Section 406.3.4.1 of the International Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
406.3.4.1 Dwelling Unit Separation. Separations shall comply with the following: 
The private garage shall be separated from the dwelling unit and its attic area by means of minimum 5/8-inch type "X" gypsum board applied to the garage side. Where the separation is horizontal the structure supporting the separation shall also be protected by not less than 5/8-inch type "X" gypsum board or equivalent. Door openings between the garage and the dwelling unit shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching solid wood door not less than 1 3/8 inch thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel door not less than 1 3/8 inches thick, or doors in compliance with Section 716.5.3. 
(E)  Section 427 of the International Building Code is added to read as follows: 
Section [F] 427 
Alcoholic Beverage Production Facilities 
[F] 427.1 Alcoholic Beverage Production Facilities. Buildings, structures, exterior areas and other locations where the production, storage and/or shipment of beverages exceeding one half of one percent alcohol shall be in accordance with Chapter 38 of the International Fire Code as amended by the City of Westminster. 
(F)  Section 1511.3.1.1 of the International Building Code is amended by the addition to read as follows: 
1511.3.1 Roof recover. Exceptions. 
(1)  (Remains the same) 
(2)  Where the existing roof covering is slate, clay, cement, asbestos-cement tile, or asphalt shingles. 
(3)  (Remains the same) 
(G)  Section 1607.3 of the International Building Code is amended by the addition of the following: 
1607.3.1 In commercial or industrial buildings, for each floor or portion thereof designed for live loads exceeding 50 psf, such design live loads shall be conspicuously posted in that part of each story in which they apply, using durable signs. 
1607.3.2 Restrictions on loading. It shall be unlawful to place, or cause or permit to be placed, on any floor or roof of a building, structure or portion thereof, a load greater than is permitted by this code. 
(H)  Section 1608.2 of the International Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
1608.2 Ground snow loads. The ground snow load to be used within the City of Westminster in determining the design snow loads for roofs is 30 pounds per square foot. 
(I)  Section 1609.3 of the International Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
1609.3 Basic wind speed. Wind speeds to be per the table below and the zones as published by the City of Westminster. Exposure B shall be used unless specified as exposure C by the Building Official. 
2015 IBC WIND SPEED DESIGN CRITERIA - V ult CITY MAP WIND ZONES 1 2 3 RISK CATEGORY I (MRI) 120 125 135 RISK CATEGORY II (MRI 700 yrs) 130 140 150 RISK CATEGORY III (MRI 1700 yrs) 140 150 160  
(J)  Sections 1612.3 and 1612.4 of the International Building Code are amended to read as follows: 
Establishment of flood hazard areas. The flood hazard areas of the City of Westminster are as established in Article 11, Chapter 8 of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
Design and construction. The design and construction of buildings and structures located in flood hazard areas, including flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with City of Westminster standards and ASCE 24, whichever is the most restrictive. 
(K)  Section 2111.1 of the International Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
2111.1 Definition. A masonry fireplace is a fireplace constructed of concrete or masonry, hereafter referred to as masonry. Masonry fireplaces shall be constructed in accordance with this section and subject to the restrictions of Title 8, Chapter 6 of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(L)  Section 2304.12.2.3 of the International Building Code is amended as follows: 
Section 2304.12.2.3 Supporting member for permanent appurtenances. 
Exception: is deleted in its entirety. 
(M)  Section 2902.2.1 of the International Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
2902.2.1 Family or assisted-use toilet facilities serving as separate facilities. Where a building or tenant space requires a separate toilet facility for each sex and each toilet facility is required to have only one water closet, two family or assisted-use toilet facilities shall serve as the required separate facilities. Family or assisted-use toilet facilities shall not be required to be identified for exclusive use by either sex as required by Section 2902.4. 
(N)  Section 2902.7 of the International Building Code is added to read as follows: 
2902.7 Baby diaper-changing accommodations. Group A occupancies, Group M occupancies in excess of 5,000 square feet, and Group B office buildings in excess of 5,000 square feet shall install and maintain baby diaper changing stations, at each floor level containing restrooms, if the facility is open to the public. There shall be at least one safe, sanitary, and convenient baby diaper changing station that is accessible to women entering a restroom provided for use by women and one that is accessible to men entering a restroom provided for use by men, or at least one safe, sanitary, and convenient baby diaper changing station that is accessible to both men and women. 
Exceptions. 
(1)  If there is centrally located facility with a baby diaper changing station located within 300 feet of the entrance to a restaurant or retail establishment. 
(2)  This section does not apply to a nightclub, bar or similar occupancy that does not permit anyone who is under 18 years of age to enter the premises. 
(3)  This section also does not apply to a restroom located in a health facility if the restroom is intended for the use of one patient or resident at a time. 
(4)  A new establishment or use shall not be subject to the provisions of this section if compliance would create a hardship defined as: 
(a)  No reasonable physical alternative exits for providing baby diaper-changing accommodations, or 
(b)  The cost of providing such accommodations exceeds ten percent of the cost of constructing or substantially modifying the building or space occupied by the establishment or use. 
Each station shall include signage at or near the entrance to the restroom indicating the availability of the baby diaper changing station. If there is a central directory identifying, for the benefit of the public, the location of offices, restrooms, and other facilities in the building, that central directory shall indicate the location of the baby diaper changing stations. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 1, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-9-6. - International Residential Code Amendments. 
(A)  Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Code is amended to read: 
TABLE R301.2(1) CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA GROUND SNOW LOAD WIND DESIGN SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM WINTER DESIGN TEMP ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED FLOOD HAZARD AIR FREEZING INDEX MEAN ANNUAL TEMP ACCUM SNOW LEVEL Speed (mph) Topographic effects Special wind region Wind borne debris zone Weathering Frost line depth Termite 30 130-155 B Yes No B Severe 36" Slight to Moderate 1°F No N/A 532 51.0 12"  
(B)  Section R301.2.4 of the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
R301.2.4 Floodplain construction. The design and construction of buildings and structures located in whole or in part in flood hazard areas, including flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with City of Westminster standards and R322, whichever is the most restrictive. 
(C)  Table R302.1(1) of the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
Footnote b. Delete in its entirety 
(D)  Table R302.1(2) of the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
Footnote a. Delete in its entirety 
Footnote c. Delete in its entirety 
(E)  Section R302.6 of the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
R302.6 Dwelling/Garage fire separation. The garage shall be separated from the residence and its attic space by not less than 5/8-inch type "X" gypsum board applied to the garage side. Where the separation is horizontal the structure supporting the separation shall also be protected by not less than 5/8-inch type "X" gypsum board or equivalent. Garages located less than 3 feet from a dwelling unit on the same lot shall be protected with not less than 5/8 inch type "X" gypsum board on the interior side of exterior walls. Table R302.6 is deleted in its entirety. Openings in these walls shall be regulated by Section R302.5. 
(F)  Section R309.5 of the International Residential Code is deleted as follows: 
R309.5 Fire Sprinklers. 
Section is deleted in its entirety. 
(G)  Section R310.6 of the International Residential Code is deleted as follows: 
R310.6 Alterations or repairs of existing basements. 
Section is deleted in its entirety 
(H)  Section R317.1.3 of the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
R317.1.3 Geographical areas. Approved naturally durable or pressure-preservative-treated wood shall be used for those portions of wood members that form the structural supports of buildings, balconies, porches or similar permanent building appurtenances when those members are exposed to the weather without adequate protection from a roof, eave, overhang or other covering that would prevent moisture or water accumulation on the surface or at joints between members. Such members shall include: (remainder of section unchanged) 
(I)  Section R318.1 of the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
R318.1 Subterranean termite control methods. In areas subject to moderate to heavy or very heavy damage as indicated by Table R301.2(1) methods of protection shall be one of the following methods or a combination of these methods: [Remainder of Section R318.1 is unchanged.] 
(J)  Section R324.7 of the of the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
R324.7 Access and pathways. Roof access, pathways and spacing requirements shall be provided in accordance with Section 11-10-5(A)611.1, W.M.C. 
(K)  Section R404.1.1, item 2 of the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
R404.1.1 Design required. Item 2. Walls supporting more than 36 inches of unbalanced backfill that do not have permanent lateral support at the top or bottom. 
(L)  Section R908.3.1.1 the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
R908.3.1.1, Item 2. Where the existing roof covering is slate, clay, cement, asbestos-cement tile, or asphalt shingles. 
(M)  Sections R1001.1 and R1004.1 the International Residential Code are amended to read as follows: 
R1001.1 General. Masonry fireplaces shall be constructed in accordance with this section and the applicable provisions of Chapters 3 and 4 of this Code and subject to the restrictions of Title 8, Chapter 6 of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
R1004.1 General. Factory-built fireplaces shall be listed and labeled and shall be installed in accordance with the conditions of the listing. Factory-built fireplaces shall be tested in accordance with UL127 and be subject to the restrictions of Title 8, Chapter 6 of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(N)  Section R1004.4 of the International Residential Code is amended as follows: 
R1004.4 Unvented gas log heaters. Deleted in its entirety. 
(O)  Section N1101.1 of the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
N1101.1 Scope. Chapter 11 of the of the International Residential Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the residential provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code as adopted in 11-9-1(B)7 of this code. 
(P)  The International Residential Code is amended to add Section M1416 to read as follows: 
M1416 Unvented room heaters. 
M1416.1 General. Unvented room heater, fireplaces, gas logs or other similar unvented devices are prohibited. 
(Q)  Section M1502.4.5.2 of the International Residential Code is amended as follows: 
M1502.4.5.2 Manufacturer's instructions. Section is deleted in its entirety. 
(R)  Section M1801.1 of the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
M1801.1 Venting required. Fuel-burning appliances shall be vented to the outside in accordance with their listing and label and manufacturer's installation guidelines or instructions. Venting systems shall consist of approved chimneys or vents, or venting assemblies that are integral parts of labeled appliances. Gas-fired appliance shall be vented in accordance with Chapter 24. 
(S)  Section G2406.2 of the International Residential Code is amended as follows: 
G2406.2 Prohibited locations. Items 3 and 4 are deleted in their entirety. 
(T)  Section G2417.4.1 of the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
G2417.4.1 Test pressure. The minimum test pressure to be used on threaded pipe shall be 20 psi gauge pressure. For welded pipe the minimum test pressure shall be 60 psi gauge pressure. 
(U)  Section G2425.8 of the International Residential Code is amended as follows: 
G2425.8 Equipment not required to be vented. Item #7 is deleted. 
(V)  Section G2445 of the International Residential Code is amended as follows: 
G2445 Unvented room heaters. Section is deleted in its entirety. 
(W)  Section P2603.6.1 of the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
P2603.6.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of 42 inches below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 42 inches below grade. 
(X)  Table P2903.2 of the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
TABLE P2903.2 
MAXIMUM FLOW RATES AND CONSUMPTION FOR PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 
PLUMBING FIXTURE OR FIXTURE FITTING PLUMBING FIXTURE OR FIXTURE FITTING Lavatory faucet 1.5 gpm at 60 psi Shower head 2.0 gpm at 60 psi Sink faucet 2.2 gpm at 60 psi Water closet 1.28 gallons per flushing cycle  
(Y)  Table P3201.7 of the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
TABLE P3201.7 SIZE OF TRAPS AND TRAP ARMS FOR PLUMBING FIXTURES is amended to reflect the trap size minimum for a shower is 2 inches. 
(Z)  The General Statement of Chapter 34 of the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
CHAPTER 34 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
Add the following to the section: Whenever there is a conflict between this Code and the 2014 NEC, the provisions of the NEC will govern. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 1, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-9-7. - National Electrical Code Amendments. 
(A)  Article 230.70(A)(1) of the National Electrical Code is amended to read as follows: 
230.70 (A)(1) Location. The service disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location on the outside of the building unless approved by the Building Official. No service disconnecting means shall be installed inside a residential dwelling unit. 
Exception: The service disconnecting means may be installed inside the garage of a residential dwelling unit when it is located back-to-back to the meter. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 1, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-9-8. - International Plumbing Code Amendments. 
(A)  Section 403.2.1 of the International Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows: 
403.2.1 Family or assisted-use toilet facilities serving as separate facilities. Where a building or tenant space requires a separate toilet facility for each sex and each toilet facility is required to have only one water closet, two family or assisted-use toilet facilities shall serve as the required separate facilities. Family or assisted-use toilet facilities shall not be required to be identified for exclusive use by either sex as required by Section 403.4. 
(B)  Section 403.6 of the International Plumbing Code is added to read as follows: 
403.6 Baby diaper-changing accommodations. Group A occupancies, Group M occupancies in excess of 5,000 square feet, and Group B office buildings in excess of 5,000 square feet shall install and maintain baby diaper changing stations, at each floor level containing restrooms, if the facility is open to the public. There shall be at least one safe, sanitary, and convenient baby diaper changing station that is accessible to women entering a restroom provided for use by women and one that is accessible to men entering a restroom provided for use by men, or at least one safe, sanitary, and convenient baby diaper changing station that is accessible to both men and women. 
Exceptions. 
(1)  If there is centrally located facility with a baby diaper changing station located within 300 feet of the entrance to a restaurant or retail establishment. 
(2)  This section does not apply to a nightclub, bar or similar occupancy that does not permit anyone who is under 18 years of age to enter the premises. 
(3)  This section also does not apply to a restroom located in a health facility if the restroom is intended for the use of one patient or resident at a time. 
(4)  A new establishment or use shall not be subject to the provisions of this section if compliance would create a hardship defined as: 
a)  No reasonable physical alternative exits for providing baby diaper-changing accommodations, or 
b)  The coast of providing such accommodations exceeds 10 percent of the cost of constructing or substantially modifying the building or space occupied by the establishment or use. 
Each station shall include signage at or near the entrance to the restroom indicating the availability of the baby diaper changing station. If there is a central directory identifying, for the benefit of the public, the location of offices, restrooms, and other facilities in the building, that central directory shall indicate the location of the baby diaper changing stations. 
(C)  Section 601.6 of The International Plumbing Code is amended to add the following: 
601.6 Water conservation. Water recycling systems shall be mandatory for all automatic full-service commercial car wash facilities constructed in the City after December 23, 1982. Water recycling systems shall not be mandatory for manual self-service commercial car wash facilities. 
(D)  Table 604.4 of the International Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows: 
TABLE 604.4 
MAXIMUM FLOW RATES AND CONSUMPTION FOR PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 
PLUMBING FIXTURE OR FIXTURE FITTING PLUMBING FIXTURE OR FIXTURE FITTING Lavatory, private 1.5 gpm at 60 psi Lavatory, public (metering) 0.25 gallons per metering cycle Lavatory, public (other than metering) 0.5 gpm at 60 psi Shower head 2.0 gpm at 60 psi Sink faucet 2.2 gpm at 60 psi Urinal 0.5 gallons per flushing cycle Water closet 1.28 gallons per flushing cycle  
(E)  The International Plumbing Code is amended to add Section 704.5 to read as follows: 
704.5 Grease waste identification. All underground or under floor grease waste lines shall be permanently identified by an approved means. 
(F)  Section 1003.2 and section 1003.3.4.1 of the International Plumbing Code are amended to read as follows: 
1003.2 Approval. The size, type and location of each grease interceptor shall be designed and installed in accordance with City of Westminster specifications, the manufactures installation instructions, the requirements of this section and the anticipated conditions of use. Wastes that do not require treatment or separation shall not be discharged into any interceptor. 
1003.3.4.1 Grease trap capacity. When, in the judgment of the Building Official, it would be impractical or unnecessary to install a grease interceptor due to the anticipated use of an establishment, the installation of a grease trap may be approved. Grease traps shall be sized in accordance with City specifications and have the grease retention capacity indicated in Table 1003.3.4.1 for the flow-through rates indicated. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 1, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-9-9. - International Mechanical Code Amendments. 
(A)  Section 504.8.4.2 of the International Mechanical Code is amended as follows: 
504.8.4.2 Manufacturer's instructions. Section is deleted in its entirety. 
(B)  506.3.11 of the International Mechanical Code is amended as follows: 
506.3.11 Grease duct enclosures. Exception is deleted in its entirety. 
(C)  Section 903.1 and Section 903.3 of the International Mechanical Code are amended as follows: 
903.1 General. Factory-built fireplaces shall be listed and labeled and shall be installed in accordance with the conditions of the listing. Factory-built fireplaces shall be tested in accordance with UL127 and be subject to the restrictions of Title 8, Chapter 6 of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
903.3 Unvented gas log heaters. Section is deleted in its entirety. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 1, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-9-10. - International Fuel Gas Code Amendments. 
(A)  Section 303.3 of the International Fuel Gas Code is amended as follows: 
303.3 Prohibited locations. Items 3 and 4 are deleted in their entirety. 
(B)  Section 406.4.1 and 406.4.2 of the International Fuel Gas Code are amended to read as follows: 
406.4.1 Test pressure. The minimum test pressure to be used on threaded pipe shall be 20 psi gauge pressure. For welded pipe the minimum test pressure shall be 60 psi gauge pressure. 
406.4.2 Test duration. The test duration shall be not less than 10 minutes. 
(C)  Section 501.8 of the International Fuel Gas Code is amended as follows: 
501.8 Equipment not required to be vented. Items 8 and 10 are deleted in their entirety. 
(D)  Section 621 of the International Fuel Gas Code is amended as follows: 
621.1 General. Unvented room heater, fireplaces, gas logs or other similar devices are prohibited. [The remainder of Section 621 is deleted.] 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 1, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-9-11. - International Energy Conservation Code Amendments. 
(A)  Table C402.4 of the International Energy Conservation Code is amended as follows: 
Table C402.4 
BUILDING ENVELOPE FENESTRATION MAXIMUM U-FACTOR AND SHGC REQUIREMENTS 
CLIMATE ZONE 5 Vertical fenestration U-factor Fixed fenestration 0.38 Operable fenestration 0.45 Entrance doors 0.77 SHGC Orientation N SEW PF 0.38 0.51 0.2 = PF 0.46 0.56 PF 0.61 0.61 Skylights U-factor 0.50 SHGC 0.40  
(B)  Section C405.2.1.1 of the International Energy Conservation Code is amended as follows: 
C405.2.1.1 Occupant sensor control function. Occupant sensor controls in spaces other than warehouses specified in Section C405.2.1 shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Automatically turn off lights within 20 minutes of all occupants leaving the space. 
(2)  Be manual on or controlled to automatically turn the lighting on to not more than 50 percent power. 
Exception: Full automatic-on controls shall be permitted to control lighting in public corridors, stairways, restrooms, primary building entrance areas and lobbies, and areas where manual-on operation would endanger the safety or security of the room or building occupants. 
(3)  Shall incorporate a manual control to allow occupants to turn lights off. 
(C)  Table C405.5.1 (2) of the International Energy Conservation Code is amended as follows: 
TABLE C405.5.1 (2) 
INDIVIDUAL LIGHTING POWER ALLOWANCES FOR BUILDING EXTERIORS 
LIGHTING ZONES Zone 1 Zone 2 Zone 3 Zone 4 Base Site Allowance (Base allowance is usable in tradable or nontradable surfaces.) 350 W 400W 500W 900W Tradable Surfaces (Lighting power densities for uncovered parking areas, building grounds, building entrances and exits, canopies and overhangs and outdoor sales areas are tradable.) Uncovered Parking Areas Parking areas and drives 0.04 W/ft 2 0.06 W/ft 2 0.10 W/ft 2 0.13 W/ft 2 Building Grounds Walkways and Ramps 10 feet wide or greater, plaza areas, special feature areas 0.5 W/linear foot 0.5 W/linear foot 0.6 W/linear foot 0.7 W/linear foot Dining Areas 0.65 W/ft 2 0.65 W/ft 2 0.75 W/ft 2 0.95 W/ft 2 Stairways 0.6 W/ft 2 0.7 W/ft 2 0.7 W/ft 2 0.7 W/ft 2 Pedestrian tunnels 0.12 W/ft 2 0.12 W/ft 2 0.14 W/ft 2 0.21 W/ft 2 Landscaping 0.03 W/ft 2 0.04 W/ft 2 0.04 W/ft 2 0.04 W/ft 2 Building Entrances and Exits Pedestrian and vehicular entrances and exits 14 W/linear foot of opening 14 W/linear foot of opening 21 W/linear foot of opening 21 W/linear foot of opening Entry canopies 0.2 W/ft 2 0.25 W/ft 2 0.4 W/ft 2 0.4 W/ft 2 Loading docks 0.35 W/ft 2 0.35 W/ft 2 0.35 W/ft 2 0.35 W/ft 2 Sales Canopies Freestanding and attached 0.4 W/ft 2 0.4 W/ft 2 0.6 W/ft 2 0.7 W/ft 2 Outdoor Sales Open sales 0.2 W/ft 2 0.2 W/ft 2 0.35 W/ft 2 0.5 W/ft 2 Street frontage for vehicle sales lots in addition to "open sales" allowance No allowance 7 W/linear foot 7 W/linear foot 21 W/linear foot Nontradable Surfaces (Lighting power density calculations for the following applications can be used only for the specific application and cannot be traded between surfaces or with other exterior lighting. The following allowances are in addition to any allowance otherwise permitted in the "Tradable Surfaces" section of this table.) Building facades No allowances 0.075 W/ft 2 of gross abovegrade wall area 0.1113 W/ft 2 of gross abovegrade wall area 0.15 W/ft 2 of gross abovegrade wall area Automated teller machines and night depositories 135 W per location plus 45 W per additional ATM per location Uncovered entrances and gatehouse inspection stations at guarded facilities 0.5 W/ft 2 of covered and uncovered area Uncovered loading areas for law enforcement, fire, ambulance and other emergency service vehicles 0.35 W/ft 2 Drive-up windows/doors 200 W per drive through Parking near 24-hour retail entrances 400 W per main entry  
(D)  Section C408 of the International Energy Conservation Code is amended as follows: 
C408.1 General. This section covers the commissioning of the building mechanical systems in Section C403, service water heating systems in Section C404, and electrical power and lighting systems in Section C405. 
C408.2.4 Preliminary commissioning report. A preliminary report of commissioning test procedures and results shall be completed and certified by the registered design professional or approved agency and provided to the building owner or owner's authorized agent. The report shall be organized with mechanical and service hot water findings in separate sections to allow independent review. The report shall be identified as "Preliminary Commissioning Report," shall include the completed Commissioning Compliance Checklist Table C408.2.4.1 and shall identify: (add items #4 and #5 as follows) 
(4)  Results of functional performance tests. 
(5)  Functional performance test procedures used during the commissioning process including measurable criteria for test acceptance. 
C408.2.4.1 Acceptance of report. Buildings, or portions thereof, shall not be considered acceptable for a final inspection pursuant to Section 11-9-4 (B)(1)(g) of this code until the code official has received the Preliminary Commissioning Report from the building owner or owner's authorized agent. 
(E)  Section C501.4 of the International Energy Conservation Code is amended with the addition of the following: 
C501.4 Compliance. The International Existing Buildings Code (IEBC) is added to the list of codes identified in the section. 
(F)  Section C503.1 of the International Energy Conservation Code is amended with the deletion of the following: 
C503.1 General. 
Exception #7 is deleted in its entirety. 
(G)  Section R202 of the International Energy Conservation Code is amended with the addition of the following: 
SECTION 202 
GENERAL DEFINITIONS 
Dwelling Unit Enclosure Area: 
The sum of all the boundary surfaces that define the dwelling unit, including top, bottom, and all sides. This does not include interior partition walls within the dwelling unit. Wall height should be measured from the finished floor of the dwelling unit to the underside of the floor above (rather than stopping at the finished ceiling). 
(H)  Section R401.2, #3 of the International Energy Conservation Code is amended to read as follows: 
R401.2 Compliance. 3. An energy rating index (ERI) approach in Section R406 and the provisions of Section R401 through R404 labels "Mandatory." 
(I)  Table R403.6.1 of the International Energy Conservation Code is amended as follows: 
TABLE R403.6.1 
WHOLE-HOUSE MECHANICAL VENTILATION SYSTEM FAN EFFICACY 
FAN LOCATION AIR FLOW RATE MINIMUM (CFM) MINIMUM EFFICIENCY (CFM/WATT) AIR FLOW RATE MAXIMUM HRV or ERV Any 1.2 cfm/watt Any Range Hoods Any 2.8 cfm/watt Any In-Line Fans Any 2.8 cfm/watt Any Bathroom, utility room 10 1.4 cfm/watt < 90 Bathroom, utility room 90 2.8 cfm/watt Any  
(J)  Section C405.2.1.1 of the International Energy Conservation Code is amended as follows: 
R404.1 Lighting equipment (Mandatory). Not less than 90 percent of the permanently installed lighting fixtures shall contain only high-efficacy lamps 
Exception: Low-voltage lighting. 
(K)  Section R404.2 of the International Energy Conservation Code is amended with the addition of the following: 
R404.2 Electrical energy consumption (mandatory). Each dwelling unit located in a Group R-2 building shall have a separate electrical meter. 
(L)  Section R405.4.2 of the International Energy Conservation Code is amended with the addition of the following exception: 
R405.4.2 Compliance report. Compliance software tools shall generate a report that documents that the proposed design complies with Section R405.3. A compliance repot on the proposed design shall be submitted with the application for the building permit. Upon completion of the building, a compliance report based on the as-built condition of the building shall be submitted to the code official before a certificate of occupancy is issued. Batch sampling of buildings to determine energy code compliance shall only be allowed for stacked multifamily units. 
(Remainder of section to remain) 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 1, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-9-12. - International Swimming Pool and Spa Code Amendments. 
(A)  Section 305.4 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is amended to read as follows: 
305.4 Structure wall as a barrier. The wall of a dwelling or structure can serve as part of the barrier. 
(B)  Section 306 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is amended as follows: 
306.1 General. Decks shall be designed and installed in accordance with the International Residential Code or the International Building Code [The remainder of section 306.1 is deleted] 
Section 306.2 through 306.9 are deleted in their entirety 
(C)  Section 319.3 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is added as follows: 
319.3 Chemical storage and handling. Chemical storage, use and handling shall be done in compliance with the Building and Fire codes. 
(D)  Section 322 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is deleted in its entirety. 
322 LADDERS AND RECESSED TREADS. Section is deleted in its entirety. 
(E)  Section 323 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is deleted in its entirety. 
323 SAFETY. Section is deleted in its entirety. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 1, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-9-13. - International Existing Buildings Code amendments. 
(A)  Section 706.3 the International Existing Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
706.3 Recovering versus replacement, Item 2. Where the existing roof covering is wood shake, slate, clay, cement, asbestos-cement tile, or asphalt shingles. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 1, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-9-14. - Mobile Homes. 
(A)  Permits Required: 
(1)  General. Building permits for work on mobile homes or accessory buildings shall be obtained in accordance with the provisions of the Building Codes unless the work is specifically exempt pursuant to the provisions of the Building Codes. 
(2)  Initial installation. No person shall install or set up a mobile home on any mobile home space without first obtaining a separate permit for each installation from the Building Official. Such permit issuance and fees therefore shall be in accordance with the Building Codes. No utility service shall be provided to any building service equipment without a building permit. 
(3)  Accessory buildings and structures. Building permits shall be required for the installation of all accessory buildings and structures and their building service equipment, unless the work is specifically exempt pursuant to the provisions of the Building Codes. Such permit issuance and fees therefor shall be pursuant to the Building Codes. 
(4)  Additions, alterations, and repairs to mobile homes. No person shall alter, remodel, repair, or enlarge a mobile home or accessory building subsequent to its initial installation without first obtaining a separate building permit for each such alteration, addition, enlargement, or repair from the Building Official. Such permit issuance and fees therefor shall be pursuant to the Building Codes. 
(B)  Installation Requirements: 
(1)  General. The installation of a mobile home upon a mobile home space shall comply with the manufacture's installation instructions as well as the provisions of this Subsection, the Building Codes, and other provisions of the City codes. If the manufacture's installation instructions are not available the installation of such mobile home shall comply with the following standards: 
Non-permanent installation: Provisions of the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, NCSBCS/ANSI A225.1 - 1994 amended. 
Permanent foundation installations: Permanent foundation, Guide for Manufactured Housing, HUD - September 1996, amended; and Engineered foundation systems as designed by an architect or engineer licensed by the State of Colorado. 
(2)  Location on property. Mobile homes and accessory buildings shall be located on the mobile home space as follows: 
(a)  No mobile home shall be parked less than 7 feet 6 inches from the front boundary of the mobile home space, measured from the flowline of the curb and gutter of the road providing access to the space. No mobile home shall be parked less than 3 feet from the side or rear boundaries of the mobile home space. 
(b)  Accessory buildings to mobile homes shall be located on the mobile home space so that no part of the accessory building is closer than 3 feet to the side or rear boundaries of the mobile home space nor closer than 7 feet 6 inches to the front boundary of the mobile home space. Accessory buildings may be adjacent to mobile homes or other accessory buildings within the same mobile home space. 
(c)  Carport and patio cover structures shall not be erected closer than 3 feet to the side or rear boundaries of the mobile home space nor closer than 7 feet 6 inches to the front boundary of the space. Patio and carport structures may be adjacent to mobile homes or accessory buildings within the same mobile home space. 
(3)  Pier construction. Piers shall be designed and constructed to distribute loads evenly. Such piers shall be considered to resist vertical forces acting in a downward direction only and shall not be considered as providing any resistance to horizontal or uplift loads. The construction and spacing of piers shall be as specified in the manufacturer's installation instructions or in accordance with section 11-9-12(B)(1). Alternate materials and methods of construction may be used for piers when designed by an architect or engineer, licensed as such in the State of Colorado and approved by the Building Official. 
(4)  Anchorage. Ground anchors shall be of the auger type and shall be designed and installed to transfer the anchoring loads to the ground. The installation and spacing of all ground anchoring equipment shall be specified in the manufacture's installation instructions or in accordance with section 11-9-14 (B)(1). Alternate materials and methods of construction may be used for the anchoring systems when designed by an architect or engineer licensed as such in the State of Colorado and approved by the Building Official. 
(5)  Building service equipment. The installation, alteration, repair, replacement, addition to, or maintenance of all building service equipment within the mobile home park shall comply with the applicable plumbing, mechanical, and electrical provisions of the Building Codes. Utility service shall not be provided to any building service equipment which is regulated by the Building Codes, and for which a mobile home set up permit is required by the Building Codes, until the building service equipment has been inspected and approved by the Building Official. 
(6)  Stairs and landings. Landings and stairways with hand railings and guard railings shall be provided at each exterior door from a mobile home. Landings, stairways, guardrails and handrails shall comply with the provisions of the Building Code and shall be in place prior to requesting the set-up inspection. 
(7)  Skirting. The area beneath each mobile home unit shall be enclosed with full perimeter skirting of material that is compatible with the exterior cladding of the mobile home unit. At least one access opening not less than 18" in any dimension and not less than 3 square feet in area shall be provided and located so that any water supply and sewer drain connections located under the unit are accessible. The skirting shall not be installed prior to the approval of the set-up inspection but shall be installed as soon as it is practical to do so after such inspection. 
(8)  Smoke alarms. Smoke alarms shall be located in each mobile home unit. An alarm shall be installed in each sleeping room and at a point centrally located in the hallway or area giving access to each separate sleeping area. Smoke alarms added to satisfy the requirements of this subsection may be of the battery-operated type and shall be installed in accordance with their listing. 
Exception: New mobile homes may have smoke alarms located per the State of Colorado, Division of Housing approval. 
(9)  Carbon monoxide alarms. Carbon monoxide alarms shall comply with Section 315 of the International Residential Code. 
Exception: New mobile homes may have carbon monoxide alarms located per the State of Colorado, Division of Housing approval. 
(C)  Additions, Alterations, and Repairs to Mobile Homes: 
(1)  Permanent additions. No permanent additions of any type shall be built onto or become part of any mobile home unless designed and constructed to conform to the applicable provisions of the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, NCSBCS/ANSI A225.1 - 1994. A certificate of compliance issued by the manufacturer and verified by the State of Colorado shall be provided to the Building Official for any such addition. 
(2)  Carport and patio cover structures. Temporary carport and patio cover structures may be attached to and structurally supported by a mobile home when justified by engineering calculations or when approved by the Building Official. All such structures shall be of light-weight metal, fiberglass, plastic, or other material similar in type and color to the exterior cladding of the mobile home unit and shall be entirely open on two or more sides. All such structures shall be designed and approved in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Building Codes and other provisions of the City code. 
(3)  Structural additions. Accessory buildings or structures shall not be structurally supported by or attached to any mobile home unless engineered calculations are submitted to the Building Official to substantiate any proposed structural connection and approved by the Building Official; except that the Building Official may waive the submission of engineering calculations if he finds that engineering calculations are not necessary to show conformance to the requirements of the Building Codes. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 1, 11-27-2017 ) 
CHAPTER 10. - FIRE CODES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3908, § 2, adopted November 27, 2017 , repealed the former chapter 10, §§ 11-10-1-11-10-8, and enacted a new chapter 9 as set out herein. The former chapter 10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from 2965 3327 3541 3566 3725. 

11-10-1. - Intent. 
    The intent of this chapter is to adopt by reference and with modifications the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition. Hereinafter, this Code may be referred to as the "Fire Code." The City Council of the City of Westminster finds that the adoption of the Fire Code is essential for fire prevention and the preservation of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Westminster. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 2, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-10-2. - Adoption of Fire Code. 
    That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the Office of the City Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, 4051 W. Flossmoor Rd., Country Club Hills, IL 60478 and, in particular Chapters 1 through 80, inclusive and Appendix B - Fire Flow Requirements For Buildings, Appendix C - Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution, Appendix D - Fire Apparatus Access Roads, Appendix E - Hazard Categories, Appendix F - Hazard Ranking, Appendix G - Cryogenic Fluids - Weight and Volume Equivalents, Appendix H - Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) and Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS) Instructions, and Appendix I - Fire Protection Systems-Noncompliant Conditions is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of and for the City. These sections of the Fire Code, as modified in this chapter, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part of the Code, as if fully set forth. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 2, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-10-3. - Chapter 1 Administration Amendments. 
(A)  Department of Fire Prevention: Section 103 of the International Fire Code is amended as follows: 
102.13 Conflicts with Other Adopted Codes. Where a conflict arises between this Code and the International Building Code and/or the International Residential Code, the more stringent application of the respective codes shall apply. 
Exception: When any provision from the respective codes is agreed upon by the Chief Building Official and the Fire Code Official as being applicable and acceptable. 
103.4 Liability. Subsection is deleted in its entirety. 
103.4.1 Legal Defense. Subsection is deleted in its entirety. 
(B)  Enforcement Authority: The Fire Chief and his designees are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this ordinance as specified in Section 104.1 of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition. 
(C)  Required Operational Permits: Subsection 105.6 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
105.6 Required Operational Permits. An operational permit shall be obtained from the Fire Prevention Bureau prior to engaging in the following activities, functions, operations, or practices, as defined in accordance with the Fire Code, unless otherwise specified in this Code: 
(1)  105.6.2 Amusement buildings 
(2)  105.6.5 Carnivals and fairs 
(3)  105.6.11 Cryogenic fluids 
(4)  105.6.15 Explosives, explosive materials, and fireworks 
(5)  105.6.17 Flammable and combustible liquids: 
(a)  To remove Class I or II liquids from an underground storage tank used for fueling motor vehicles by any means other than the approved, stationary on-site pumps normally used for dispensing purposes. 
(b)  To install, alter, remove, abandon, place temporarily out of service (for more than ninety (90) days) or otherwise dispose of an underground, protected above-ground or above-ground flammable or combustible liquid tank. 
(c)  To change the type of contents stored in a flammable or combustible liquid tank to a material that poses a greater hazard than that for which the tank was designed and constructed. 
(6)  105.6.20 Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging 
(7)  105.6.20.1 Fumigation and/or associated operations for removing biological, chemical, or other naturally occurring agents, chemicals, organisms, or substances. 
(8)  105.6.21 Hazardous Materials 
(9)  105.6.27 Liquid- or gas-fueled vehicles or equipment in buildings for display, demonstrating, or operation. This shall not apply to parking garages, private garages, repair garages, or other buildings normally utilized for the operation, repair, restoration, and storage of motor vehicles. 
(10)  105.6.28 LP-gas 
(11)  105.6.29 Magnesium 
(12)  105.6.32 Open burning 
(13)  105.6.37 Private fire hydrants 
(14)  105.6.38 Pyrotechnic special effects material 
(15)  105.6.45 Temporary membrane structures and tents 
(16)  105.6.49 Block parties and event street closures 
(D)  Required Construction Permits: Subsection 105.7 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
105.7 Required Construction Permits. Upon approval of required construction documents, as required by Subsection 105.4, a fire protection permit shall be obtained from the Fire Prevention Bureau prior to initiating any alterations, construction, installation, modification, or remodel of any fire protection system or other fire- or life-safety system, as defined by the Fire Code. The following fire protection systems shall require submittal of plans, specifications, design and installation criteria, as required by the Fire Code Official, prior to issuance of a fire protection permit, those not listed are excluded from the requirements of this section: 
(1)  105.7.1 Automatic fire-extinguishing systems 
(2)  105.7.3 Compressed gases 
(3)  105.7.4 Cryogenic Fluids 
(4)  105.7.6 Fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment 
(5)  105.7.7 Fire pumps and related equipment 
(6)  105.7.8 Flammable and combustible liquids 
(7)  105.7.10 Hazardous materials 
(8)  105.7.9 Gates and Barricades across fire apparatus access roads (notification only, no fee) 
(9)  105.7.12 LP-gas 
(10)  105.7.13 Private fire hydrants 
(11)  105.7.16 Spraying and dipping 
(12)  105.7.17 Standpipe systems 
(13)  105.7.18 Temporary membrane structures, and tents 
(E)  Fees: Section 105 of the International Fire Code is amended to add Sections 105.8 and 105.9 to read as follows: 
105.8 Operational Permit Fees. The fee for operational permits required by Subsection 105.6 of this Code shall be as set forth in the Fee Schedule adopted by Resolution by the City Council. Fees shall be collected by the Fire Prevention Bureau. The Fire Code Official is authorized to waive the fee in accordance with approved standard operating guidelines for administering permits for activities described in Subsection 105.8. 
105.9 Construction Permit Fees. Permit fees and taxes are required for fire protection and life safety systems required by Subsection 105.7 of this Code for initiating any alterations, construction, installation, modification, or remodel of any fire protection system or other fire- or life-safety system, as defined by the Fire Code. These fees shall be assessed by and paid to the City of Westminster in accordance with the provisions of the Fee Schedule adopted by Resolution by the City Council. 
(F)  Building and Fire Code Appeals Committee: Section 108 of the International Fire Code is amended as follows: 
108.1 Building and Fire Code Appeals Committee. Appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the Building Official or Fire Code Official relative to the application and interpretation of the Building and Fire Codes, and amendments thereto, shall be made to the Building and Fire Code Appeals Committee pursuant to Title II, Chapter 10, of this Code. No such appeal shall be heard by the Building and Fire Code Appeals Committee, unless the appeal is filed within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the action of the Building Official or Fire Chief. 
108.2 Limitations on authority. Subsection is deleted in its entirety. 
108.3 Qualifications. Subsection is deleted in its entirety. 
(G)  Violations: Section 109 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
109.1 Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish or utilize a building, occupancy, premises or system regulated by this Code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. 
109.3 Notice of Violation. When the Fire Code Official finds a building, premises, vehicle, storage facility or outdoor area that is in violation of this Code, the Fire Code Official is authorized to prepare a written notice of violation describing the conditions deemed unsafe and, when compliance is not immediate, specifying a time for re-inspection. 
109.3.1 Service. A notice of violation issued pursuant to this Code shall be served upon the owner, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for the condition or violation, either by personal service, mail, e-mail, or by delivering the same to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the premises. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by first-class mail to the owner of the subject property at the address shown in the county assessor records for the county in which the property is located. Notice shall be deemed served on the date of receipt by the owner, if personally served, or upon the fifth (5 th ) day after mailing of the notice. 
109.3.2 Compliance with Orders and Notices. A notice of violation issued or served as provided by this Code shall be complied with by the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the condition or violation to which the notice of violation pertains. 
109.3.3 Prosecution of Violations. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the Fire Code Official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant hereto. 
109.3.4 Unauthorized Tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the Fire Code Official shall not be mutilated, destroyed, tampered with or removed without authorization from the Fire Code Official. 
109.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Code, or who fails to comply therewith, or who builds any structure in violation of a detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved pursuant to this Code and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with a final order issued pursuant to this Code within the time fixed therein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine or imprisonment pursuant to the limits set forth in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C., or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time and, when not otherwise specified, each day that a prohibited condition is maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of a criminal penalty shall not prevent the abatement of prohibited conditions. 
109.4.1 Abatement of Violation. In addition to the imposition of the penalties herein described, the Fire Code Official is authorized to institute appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises; or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on or about any premises. 
(H)  Stop Work Order: Section 111 of the International Fire Code is amended as follows: 
111.4 Failure to Comply. Subsection is deleted in its entirety. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 2, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-10-4. - Chapter 5 Fire Service Features Amendments. 
(A)  Fire Apparatus Access Roads: Section 503.1 of the International Fire Code is amended to add Section 503.1.4 to read as follows: 
503.1.4 Block Parties and Street Obstructions. The Fire Department is authorized to issue operational permits for street closures intended for block parties, City of Westminster sponsored events, neighborhood events, or for similar purposes, where such events will not impede delivery of emergency services and does not create an additional risk to public safety. Applicable fees may be waived for City of Westminster events and events sponsored by non-profit entities and organizations. 
(B)  Markings: Section 503.3 of the International Fire Code is amended to add Section 503.3.1 to read as follows: 
503.3.1. The marking of fire lanes on private property devoted to public use shall be approved by the Fire Code Official, in accordance with the Fire Code and the Uniform Traffic Control Manual. 
(C)  Obstruction of Fire Apparatus Access Roads: Section 503.4 of the International Fire Code is amended to add Section 503.4.2 to read as follows: 
503.4.2. The Fire Code Official or any of his subordinates, or the Police Department, with knowledge of the existence of any vehicle parked in the fire lane, or in such manner as to interfere with the use of any fire hydrant, or in any manner in violation of this section, may have such vehicle towed away and the charges of such towing shall be assessed to the owner of such vehicle. The aforesaid violation shall be sufficient grounds to cause a citation to be issued. In the event of a fire, the Fire Department shall have the authority to cause the vehicle blocking a fire hydrant or fire lane to be removed, with any subsequent damage to the vehicle being paid by the owner of said vehicle. The towing of any vehicle pursuant to this section shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title X of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(D)  Premises Identification: Section 505.1 of the International Fire Code is amended to add Section 505.1.1 and 505.1.2 to read as follows: 
505.1.1. Buildings having exterior rear or side access doors shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position approved by the Fire Code Official. 
505.1.2. Buildings with multiple tenants with interior access doors shall have approved unit or space identification numbers, address numbers or other approved means of identifying individual tenant spaces or units. 
(E)  Key Boxes: Section 506 of the International Fire code is amended to add section 506.1.2 (7) to read as follows: 506.1.2 (7) Where approved by the fire code official, a separate key box may not be required at the elevator bank(s) when a properly sized and mounted key box for the building is located in a location approved by the fire code official. 
(F)  Privately Owned Hydrant Systems: Section 507 of the International Fire Code is amended to add Section 507.5.3.1 and 507.5.7 to read as follows: 
507.5.3.1. Privately owned hydrants shall be maintained at the expense of the private property owner, subject to the direction and requirements of the Fire Code Official. Such private hydrants shall be flushed and tested periodically according to the Fire Code. In the event such testing reveals that the flow from private hydrants is inadequate according to applicable standards, modifications necessary to meet these standards shall be ordered by the Fire Code Official and made at the expense of the property owner. All private hydrants shall be painted the same color as hydrants on public rights-of-way or elsewhere throughout the City with a different color cap, that being white, to designate a private fire hydrant. 
Appropriate markings or signs restricting parking in front of or adjacent to fire hydrants shall be designated by the Fire Code Official and implemented at the expense of the owner of the property. No point of connection to any private fire hydrant shall be left uncapped without permission of the Fire Code Official. 
507.5.7 Existing Private Fire Hydrants. Existing hydrants that do not conform to City specifications or that do not face in the direction most consistent with emergency use by the Fire Department, as established by the Fire Code Official, shall be changed to meet the City's requirements by the property owner and at the property owner's expense, within fifteen (15) days of service of notice of the required changes upon the property owner or its resident agent. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 2, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-10-5. - Chapter 6 Building Services and Systems Amendments. 
(A)  Section 605.11 of the International Fire Code is amended to add sections 605.11.3 and 605.11.4 as follows: 
605.11.1.2.1 Size of solar photovoltaic array. Each photovoltaic array shall be limited to 150 feet (45 720 mm) by 150 feet (45 720 mm). Multiple arrays shall be separated by a 2-foot-wide (609 mm) clear access pathway. 
605.11.1.2.2 Hip roof layouts. Panels and modules installed on Group R-3 buildings with hip roof layouts shall be located in a manner that provides a 2-foot-wide (609 mm) clear access pathway from the eave to the ridge on each roof slope where panels and modules are located. The access pathway shall be at a location on the building capable of supporting the fire fighters accessing the roof. 
Exception: These requirements shall not apply to roofs with slopes of two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (2:12) or less. 
605.11.1.2.3 Single-ridge roofs. Panels and modules installed on Group R-3 buildings with a single ridge shall be located in a manner that provides two, 2-foot-wide (609 mm) access pathways from the eave to the ridge on each roof slope where panels and modules are located. 
Exception: This requirement shall not apply to roofs with slopes of two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (2:12) or less. 
605.11.1.2.5 Allowance for smoke ventilation operations. Panels and modules installed on Group R-3 buildings shall be located not less than 2 feet (609 mm) from the ridge in order to allow for fire department smoke ventilation operations. 
Exception: Panels and modules shall be permitted to be located up to the roof ridge where an alternative ventilation method approved by the fire chief has been provided or where the fire chief has determined vertical ventilation techniques will not be employed. 
605.11.3 Direct Current (DC) Wiring: 
(a)  Direct current (DC) conduit, wiring, and raceways shall be located below the solar array or a minimum of twenty-four inches (24") below the roof sheathing. 
605.11.4 Labeling: 
(a)  For residential applications, a label stating, "CAUTION, SOLAR PHOTO VOLTAIC SYSTEM ON PREMISES" shall be placed at or within the main electrical service disconnect. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 2, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-10-6. - Chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems Amendments. 
(A)  Automatic Sprinkler Systems: Section 903 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
903.1.2 Anti-freeze systems. Only listed anti-freeze solutions are allowed. 
903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area. Group R-2 and Group R-4 occupancies required to be protected with an automatic fire sprinkler system shall provide fire sprinkler coverage for all exterior balconies. 
Exception: Existing Group R-2 and Group R-4 buildings and occupancies constructed prior to January 1,2012, unless the building is undergoing renovation which is of sufficient extent that sprinkler system modifications are being completed that would provide fire sprinkler coverage on exterior balconies. 
903.3.1.3.1 Safety factor allowance. All sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13D shall have a safety factor for all hydraulic calculations in systems. This shall consist of one of the following: 
(1)  A five (5) percent hydraulic safety factor from the static pressure allowance. 
(2)  System design of no greater than 80 psi static pressure. 
(3)  As otherwise allowed by the fire code official. 
903.3.1.3.2 Requirement for Notification. All sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13D shall have a horn/strobe notification device placed on the exterior of the structure in a location visible to passersby. 
903.3.2.1 Residential automatic sprinkler heads in light hazard occupancies. Residential automatic sprinkler heads are prohibited in light hazard occupancies. 
903.3.2.2 Residential and Quick-response Automatic Sprinkler Heads. All installations of residential and quick-response automatic sprinkler heads shall be in strict accordance with their listings. Where listings authorize installation where prohibited in 903.3.2 and 903.3.2.1, the Fire Code Official may waive the requirements mandated by 903.3.2 and 903.3.2.1. 
(B)  Standpipe Systems: Section 905 of the International Fire Code is amended to add the following: 
905.3.1 Height shall be amended by adding the following exceptions: 
Exception 6: Class I standpipes are allowed to be manual systems. 
Exception 7: Fire hose is not required for Class III standpipes. Standpipe hose outlets shall be two and one-half -inch (2-1/2") outlets with a two and one-half-inch (2-1/2") cap. 
905.3.9 Bridges and Roadway Overpasses. Where required to extend water supply to streets, highways, and rail systems, a dry standpipe shall be installed in accordance with Fire Department requirements. 
(C)  Fire Alarm and Detection Systems: Section 907 of the International Fire Code is amended to add Section 907.6.7 to read as follows: 
907.6.7 Extent of coverage. The Fire Code Official shall approve the extent of zone coverage for fire alarm systems in all buildings and structures. 
(D)  Fire Department Connections: Section 912 of the International Fire Code is amended to add section 912.2.3 to read as follows: 
912.2.3 Fire Hydrant Accessibility. The Fire Department connection (FDC) shall have a fire hydrant within one hundred feet (100') in a location approved by the Fire Department. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 2, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-10-7. - Chapter 38 Alcohol Beverage Production Facilities. 
(A)  Chapter 38 of the International Fire Code is hereby added to read as follows: 
Section 3801 
GENERAL. 
3801.1 Scope. Buildings and portions thereof where ethanol mixtures in excess of one half of one percent are produced, stored, handled or dispensed in the production of beverages shall be regulated in accordance with this chapter. 
The intent of this chapter is to establish minimum requirements consistent with nationally recognized good practice for providing a reasonable level of life safety and property protection from the hazards of fire, explosion or dangerous conditions in new and existing alcohol beverage production facilities (ABPF) such as distilleries, breweries, and wineries, and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. The objective is to consolidate regulations for materials, systems, processes, and conditions most commonly found in ABPFs to facilitate compliance with the intent of this chapter. 
The fire and building code officials are authorized to enforce applicable provisions of this code, referenced standards, and recommended practices not specifically addressed in this chapter provided they are consistent with the intent and objective of this chapter. Consideration shall be given to the unique materials and equipment utilized in this industry such as wooden casks (typically barrels) and high quality but as-yet, unlisted stills. 
Unless otherwise noted, where provisions in this chapter conflict with provisions in other sections of this code regarding ABPFs, the provisions of this chapter shall supersede the provisions in those sections. 
3801.2 Referenced Standards. The Fire Code Official is authorized to enforce applicable provisions of the standards listed in Chapter 80 of this code, as amended, to ensure safe operation of the ABPFs. 
3801.3 Recommended Practices. The Fire Code Official shall have the authority to utilize other chapters of this code and the recommended practices listed in Table 3801.3 to render interpretations and develop policies and procedures in the application of the provisions of this chapter. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and objective of this chapter. 
Table 3801.3 
NFPA 30 Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code NFPA 70 National Electrical Code NFPA 77 Recommended Practice on Static Electricity NFPA 497 Recommended Practice for the Classification of Flammable Liquids, Gases, or Vapors and of Hazardous (Classified) Locations for Electrical Installations in Chemical Process Areas NFPA 499 Recommended Practice for the Classification of Combustible Dusts and of Hazardous Locations for Electrical Installations in Chemical Process Areas FM Global Loss Prevention Data Sheet (FM LPDS) 7 Distilleries FM LPDS 8-8 Distilled Spirits Storage XL Catlin GAPS Guideline GAP.8.1.0.1 Barrel Storage of Distilled Spirits XL Catlin GAPS Guideline GAP.17.23.3.2 Distilleries The Distilled Spirits Council of the United States, Inc. Recommended Fire Protection Practices for Distilled Spirits Beverage Facilities Published industry research information, as determined credible by the Fire Code Official, not contained in formal standards  
3801.4 Construction Documents. Construction documents shall be submitted for review and permit issuance prior to the installation, construction, or modification of ABPFs or the operational equipment therein. 
SECTION 3802 
DEFINITIONS, ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 
3802.1 Definitions. The following definitions apply to this chapter. 
ALCOHOL BEVERAGE. A drinkable ethanol mixture in excess of one half of one percent ethanol intended for human consumption including wine, beer, and beverage spirits. 
ALCOHOL BEVERAGE PRODUCTION FACILITY (ABPF). Any building or portion thereof where ethanol mixtures are produced, stored, handled, blended, dispensed, or bottled in the production of alcohol beverages including areas for grain storage and handling. 
ALCOHOL BY VOLUME (ABV). Volume percentage of ethanol in an ethanol mixture. 
BEVERAGE SPIRIT (TTB). A drinkable spirit intended for human consumption including neutral spirits or alcohol (i.e., vodka or grain spirits), whiskey, gin, brandy, blended applejack, rum, tequila, cordials and liqueurs. 
BREWERY. An ABPF or portion thereof, including accessory uses, in which beer or other malt liquors are produced. For spirit production, beer and wash are synonymous as precursors to distillation. 
BULK STORAGE. The storage of ethanol mixtures in containers exceeding 1.3 gallons (5L) in volume. 
CASK. A closed vessel of 185 gallons (700 L) or less capacity, used primarily for storing Class I liquids, constructed of wooden staves and heads, held together by metal hoops, not equipped with provisions for emergency venting, and not intended for fixed installation. 
CLASS 1 LIQUIDS. Used in this chapter to identify ethanol mixtures that are Class IB or Class IC flammable liquids. 
CONTAINER. Any closed vessel of 119 gallons (450 L) or less capacity used for transporting or storing Class I liquids, not intended for fixed installation and not constructed of wood, but possibly equipped with an overpressure-relieving mechanism in accordance with FM Global Approved Standard for Plastic Plugs for Steel Drums, Class Number 6083, or equivalent. 
DISTILLATION. The separation and concentration of the constituents of an ethanol mixture by slowly raising the temperature of the mixture through the boiling points of its constituents then collecting and condensing the constituent vapors separately from the mixture. 
DISTILLERY (ALSO "DISTILLED SPIRITS PLANT - BEVERAGE"). An ABPF licensed by the TTB to produce, bottle, rectify, process or store beverage spirits including areas for fermentation, distillation, storage, blending, packaging, and accessory uses. Other types of distilleries licensed by the TTB include: 
DISTILLED SPIRITS PLANT - INDUSTRIAL. A distilled spirits plant established to manufacture articles, or produce, bottle or package, denature or warehouse spirits for industrial use. These spirits are not intended for beverage use. Distilled spirits - Vinegar Plants also fall into this category. 
DISTILLED SPIRITS PLANT - INDUSTRIAL / BEVERAGE. A distilled spirits plant that manufactures beverage and industrial spirits on the same premises. 
DISTILLED SPIRITS PLANT - EXPERIMENTAL. An experimental distilled spirits plant established for specific and limited periods of time solely for experimentation in, or development of, industrial spirits or sources of materials used to produce spirits, or processes for producing or refining spirits. 
ETHANOL (ALSO, "ETHYL ALCOHOL" OR "GRAIN ALCOHOL"). A volatile, flammable, colorless, neurotoxic liquid fit for human consumption with structural formula CH-3CH-2OH (abbreviated as C2H5OH or C2H6O). 
ETHANOL MIXTURE. Liquid mixture comprised of ethanol and materials with hazards not regulated by this code, namely water. 
FERMENTATION. An enzymatically controlled, anaerobic breakdown of energy-rich compounds such as simple carbohydrates by microorganisms such as yeast, to yield carbon dioxide and ethanol. 
HAZMAT INVENTORY STATEMENT (HMIS). A portion of an HMR containing a list of all the hazardous materials in a facility including information related to the materials such as product names, locations, quantities, regulated hazards, and Chemical Abstract Service (CAS) numbers. 
HAZMAT MANAGEMENT PLAN (HMMP). A portion of a hazardous material permit application containing site maps and facility floor plans identifying hazardous material locations and site and building features relevant to the management of hazardous material inventories, systems and operations. 
HAZMAT REPORT (HMR). A consolidated description of a facility and the hazardous materials therein including a contact list, code-based description of the building and adjacent outdoor areas, and a Hazardous Material Inventory Statement (HMIS). 
INTERMEDIATE BULK CONTAINER. Any closed vessel defined in Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 100 through 199 or in Part 6 of the United Nations' Recommendations on the Transport of Dangerous Goods having a liquid capacity of 793 gallons (3000 L) or less, used for transporting or storing Class 1 Liquids, not equipped with provisions for emergency venting, not intended for fixed installation, and not constructed of wood. 
MASH. Typically the mixture of ground or cracked grains, mashed fruit, or other crushed edible organic material steeped in hot water to release carbohydrates and reduce them to sugars. The term is used inconsistently (often overlapping with wort) for the various solutions in process up to the point where fermentation is complete. 
MINIMUM EXPLOSIVE CONCENTRATION (MEC). The lowest mass to volume concentration of combustible dust that will propagate a flame (sometimes referred to as LFL). The MEC for grain dust is 0.055 oz./ft 3 (55 g/m 3 ). 
NORMALLY CLOSED. A system or vessel in an ABPF used in the storage, production, dispensing, blending, bottling, or handling of Class 1 Liquids that, for up to 50 percent of the time it is in operation, its contents are not exposed to atmosphere and vulnerable to evaporation. Processes involving vessels such as casks opened only for filling, draining or sampling, distillation where all vapors are condensed below their flash point prior to collection, uncovered vessels of 5.3 gallon (20 L) capacity or less used to collect distillate below its flash point, and covered blending or maceration vessels are typically considered normally closed. 
NORMALLY OPEN. A system or vessel in an ABPF used in the storage, production, dispensing, blending, bottling, or handling of Class 1 Liquids that, for 50 percent or more of the time it is in operation, its contents are continuously exposed to atmosphere and vulnerable to evaporation, or where a Class 1 Liquid at or above its flash point is exposed to atmosphere at any time during transfer, dispensing, or release. Continuous blending or maceration in uncovered vessels, open draining of Class 1 Liquids above their flash points, and the act of "bleeding" heads (the initial vapors generated during distillation) or tails (the last vapors generated during distillation) to atmosphere are typically considered normally open. 
PILE. Independently stacked commodities possibly organized by separate spacers, dunnage, or pallets in which the demise of any storage container on a lower tier compromises the structural stability of the storage system. 
PORTABLE TANK. A tank that is readily capable of being relocated within the facility, not permanently attached to immovable structure or ground, and not constructed of wood. 
PROCESS DESCRIPTION. An operational description such as a flow chart of the sequence of events required to convert raw materials from the state in which they enter the ABPF through each development point until the finished products are derived. The process description identifies all input and output materials and includes quantities, concentrations, temperatures, pressures, types of equipment, systems, etc. at each development point using code-based terminology; e.g., "37 gallons of 55% ABV at standard temperature and pressure (STP)" vs. "all the high wines collected." All systems and processes utilized to produce all intermediate and finished products are required to be included in the description. 
PROCESSING VESSEL. An open or closed vessel other than stills used in the manufacture of ethanol mixtures. Processing vessels include fermentation tanks, mash tuns, blending tanks, etc., but do not include long-term storage vessels such as vats or casks. 
RACK. Shelves or similar structural frame-supported system of tiers in which the demise of any storage container on a lower tier does not affect the structural stability of the storage system. 
SPIRIT. An ethanol mixture produced by the distillation of wine, wash, or a previously distilled spirit. 
STATIONARY TANK. A tank not intended to be relocated that is physically attached to immovable structure or ground. 
STILL. Any appliance is which distillation of an ethanol mixture is performed. For the purposes of Chapter 38, still includes pots, columns and condensing coils. 
STORAGE AREA. ABPF or portion thereof where ethanol mixtures or materials incorporated or utilized in the manufacture of ethanol mixtures are held for maturation, awaiting transport, or subsequent handling (c.f., use area). 
USE AREA. ABPF or portion thereof where ethanol mixtures or materials incorporated or utilized in the manufacture of ethanol mixtures are actively handled in processes such as fermentation, distillation, rectification, transportation, remixing, dispensing, bottling, blending, etc. (c.f., storage area). 
VAT (ALSO FOUDRE). A stationary tank constructed primarily of wood. 
VESSEL. As used in this chapter, reference to reservoirs holding - unless otherwise noted - Class 1 Liquids including casks, containers, intermediate bulk containers, processing vessels, and tanks. 
WASH (ALSO BEER, MALT LIQUOR). The ethanol mixture intended for distillation produced by the fermentation of mash or wort. For spirit production, wash and wine are analogous as precursors to distillation. 
WINE. An ethanol mixture produced by the fermentation of organic products, namely fruits, including agave. For spirit production, wine and wash are analogous as precursors to distillation. 
WINERY. An ABPF or portion thereof, including accessory uses, in which wine is produced. 
WORT. The sugar solution strained from mash for fermentation. 
3802.2 Acronyms and abbreviations. The following acronyms and abbreviations shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings identified below: 
ABPF. Alcohol Beverage Production Facility. 
ABV. Alcohol by Volume. 
ASME. American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 
ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials. 
HMIS. Hazardous Material Inventory Statement. 
HMMP. Hazardous Material Management Plan. 
HMPA. Hazardous Material Permit Application. 
HMR. Hazardous Material Report. 
LEL. Lower Explosive Limit. 
LFL. Lower Flammable Limit. 
MAQ. Maximum allowable quantity per control area in accordance with IFC Section 5003.1.1. 
MEC. Minimum Explosive Concentration. 
SDS. Material Safety Data Sheet. 
NEC. National Electrical Code. 
TTB. Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau. 
SECTION 3803 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
3803.1 Material classification. Hazard classifications and analyses of ethanol mixtures shall account for altitude-dependent properties based on an elevation of 5,280 feet (1,609 m) above sea level. 
Ethanol mixtures that have no fire point when tested in accordance with ASTM D 92, Standard Test Method for Flash and Fire Points, by Cleveland Open Cup Tester and ethanol mixtures with 16 percent or less ABV with the remainder comprised of materials with hazards not regulated by code shall not be regulated as flammable or combustible liquids. 
Ethanol mixtures with greater than 16 percent ABV and less than or equal to 34 percent ABV, and the remainder comprised of water and other materials with hazards not regulated by this code shall be classified as Flammable 1C liquids. 
Ethanol mixtures with greater than 34 percent ABV, and the remainder comprised of water and other materials with hazards not regulated by this code shall be classified as flammable 1B liquids. 
3803.2 Occupancy classification. The occupancy classification of use areas and storage areas including grain-handling and bottling/packaging systems and processes shall be classified in accordance with Sections 3803.2.1 through 3803.2.3. 
3803.2.1 H-2 occupancy classification. An H-2 occupancy classification shall be assigned to buildings or portions thereof in accordance with Sections 3803.2.1.1 and 3803.2.1.2. 
3803.2.1.1 Combustible dust producing operations. ABPFs or portions thereof containing equipment, systems and processes where grains are stored, transferred or milled in such a manner that the confinement conditions and dust concentrations create a fire or explosion hazard shall be in accordance with Chapter 22 and Chapter 50, as amended. The fire and building code officials are authorized to require technical assistance in accordance with Section 104 to establish whether the building or portion thereof is required to be assigned an H-2 occupancy classification and to determine explosion and deflagration hazard reduction criteria. 
3803.2.1.2 Flammable liquids. ABPFs and portions thereof with quantities of Class 1 Liquids in excess of the MAQs, that are stored or processed in normally open vessels or systems, or vessels or systems that are pressurized at more than 15 pounds per square inch gauge (psig; 103.4 kPa), or where a Class 1 Liquid is released to atmosphere at or above its flash point temperature as part of normal operations shall be assigned an H-2 occupancy classification. 
3803.2.2 H-3 occupancy classification. ABPFs and portions thereof with quantities of Class 1 Liquids in excess of the MAQs, that are stored or processed in normally closed vessels or systems pressurized to 15 pounds per square inch gauge (psig; 103.4 kPa) or less, shall be classified as H-3 occupancies. 
Exception: Quantities of ethanol mixtures beverages exceeding the MAQs but packaged in individual containers not exceeding 1.3 gallons (5 L) in volume shall not cause the ABPF or portion thereof to be assigned an H-3 occupancy classification. 
3803.2.3 Non-high hazard occupancy classification. Control areas with Class 1 Liquids, combustible dust production, or other regulated hazards shall be assigned an occupancy classification in accordance with the International Building Code according to the fire safety and relative hazard involved. 
3803.3 Hazardous materials permit application (HMPA). An HMPA is required for all ABPFs using or storing hazardous materials. It shall contain at a minimum, an HMR, HMMP, process description, fire-safety and evacuation plans, and a storage plan. 
3803.3.1 Hazardous materials report (HMR). An HMR in an approved format is required for all facilities using or storing HazMat. It shall contain at a minimum, critical personnel contact information, pertinent building construction and occupancy information, and an HMIS. 
3803.3.2 Hazardous materials management plan (HMMP). An HMMP in accordance with Section 5001.5.1 and Appendix H101 shall be provided in an approved format. 
3803.3.3 Process description. A process description shall be provided in an approved format. All relevant process and storage operations in all Control Areas and Group H Occupancies shall be identified. The quantities of all materials with regulated hazards in each area at each step of all processes shall be calculated. The maximum capacity of all Class 1 Liquid bulk storage vessels, processing vessels and stills shall be used in the quantity calculation. The capacities of all such vessels and stills that can be used simultaneously shall be counted as being simultaneously full. 
3803.3.4 Emergency Planning. Fire safety and evacuation plans in accordance with Section 404, as amended, shall be prepared and maintained. 
3803.3.5 Storage plan. Aisle and storage plans shall be submitted in accordance with Chapter 50, as amended. 
3803.3.6 Material safety data sheets. MSDS shall be readily available on the premises for hazardous materials therein. 
3803.3.7 Unauthorized Discharges Preparation. Plans and provisions shall be made for controlling and mitigating unauthorized discharges. Holding and discharge of products shall meet City of Westminster Utilities Division guidelines. 
3803.3.8 Personnel training and written procedures. Persons responsible for the operations in Class 1 Liquid storage areas or use areas shall be familiar with the chemical nature of the materials and the appropriate mitigating actions necessary in the event of fire, leak, or spill. 
3803.3.9 Fire department liaison. Responsible persons shall be designated and trained to be liaison personnel to the fire department. They shall aid the fire department in preplanning emergency responses and identifying the locations of hazardous materials, shall have access to MSDS and be knowledgeable in the site's emergency response procedures. 
3803.4 Unauthorized discharges. When Class 1 Liquids are released in quantities reportable under state, federal or local regulations, the fire code official shall be notified and action shall be taken in accordance with Sections 3803.4.1 and 3803.4.2. 
3803.4.1 Records. Accurate records shall be kept of all unauthorized discharges of Class 1 Liquids by the permittee. 
3803.4.2 Responsibility for cleanup. The person, firm or corporation responsible for an unauthorized discharge shall institute and complete all actions necessary to remedy the effects of such unauthorized discharge, whether sudden or gradual, at no cost to the jurisdiction. When deemed necessary by the fire code official, cleanup may be initiated by the fire department or by an authorized individual or firm. Costs associated with such cleanup shall be borne by the owner, operator or other person responsible for the unauthorized discharge. 
3803.5 Construction. The construction of ABPFs shall be in accordance with Sections 3803.5.1 and 3803.5.2. 
3803.5.1 General. Special detailed requirements, building heights, allowable areas, construction types, control areas, rated assemblies, finishes, means of egress, accessibility, interior environment, energy efficiency, exterior walls, roofing, structural design, fire service features, building services and systems, and fire and smoke protection shall be in accordance with this code and the International Building Code for the assigned occupancy classifications and this chapter. 
3803.5.2 Floors. Floors of use areas and storage areas for Class 1 Liquids shall be of noncombustible construction. Floor surfacing shall not be reactive with ethanol. 
3803.6 Systems, features and components. Systems, features and components shall be provided in accordance with Sections 3803.6.1 through 3803.6.13. 
3803.6.1 Deflagration prevention by combustible concentration reduction. Atmospheric concentration of flammable vapors shall be maintained at or below 25 percent of the LFL, and combustible dusts at or below 25 percent of the MEC, in all areas of the ABPF or portion thereof where they could collect or migrate. Good housekeeping shall be exercised to prevent accumulation of combustible dust on all exposed surfaces at all levels throughout the building. 
Indoor storage areas and use areas are permitted to be provided with natural ventilation where it can be shown to maintain the atmospheric concentrations at or below 25 percent of the LFL and MEC for the materials under consideration. 
Where natural ventilation is not adequate, Class 1 Liquid use areas, storage areas and equipment, machinery, and operations which produce or emit combustible dust, shall be provided with an approved mechanical collection and exhaust system in accordance with Sections 501,502.1, 502.8, 502.9.5 and 503 of the International Mechanical Code. 
Use areas and storage areas in ABPFs or portions thereof where Class 1 Liquid vapor concentrations cannot be maintained at or below 25 percent of the LFL, or confined enclosures where the concentration of combustible dust cannot be maintained at or below 25 percent of the MEC, shall be provided hazardous exhaust in accordance with Sections 510 and 511 of the International Mechanical Code. 
3803.6.1.1 System requirements. Exhaust ventilation systems shall comply with all of the following: 
(1)  Installation shall be in accordance with the International Mechanical Code. 
(2)  Mechanical ventilation over the storage area or use area shall be at a rate of not less than 1 cubic foot per minute per square foot [cfm/ft2; 0.00508 cms/m2)] of floor area. 
Exception: Areas where Class 1 Liquids are stored in casks are permitted to be provided with an engineered ventilation system in accordance with International Mechanical Code Chapter 4. The air flow rate shall not be less than the greater of (1) that required to maintain the flammable vapor concentration in the storage area at or below 25 percent of the LFL, or (2) 0.06 cubic feet per minute per square foot (cfm/ft2; 0.000305 cms/m2). 
(3)  Systems shall operate continuously unless alternative designs are approved. 
(4)  A manual shutoff control shall be provided outside of the room in a position adjacent to the access door to the room, or in an approved location. The switch shall be a break-glass or other approved type and shall be labeled, VENTILATION SYSTEM EMERGENCY SHUTOFF." 
(5)  Exhaust ventilation shall be designed to consider the density of the material released. For ethanol vapor, inlet air shall be introduced, and exhaust shall be taken, from a point within 12 inches (305 mm) of the floor. For dust, inlet air shall be introduced at a point within 12 inches (305 mm) of the floor and exhaust shall be taken as close to the dust generation source as possible. 
(6)  The location and configuration of both the inlet and exhaust air openings shall be designed to provide air movement across all portions of the floor or room to prevent the accumulation of flammable vapors and suspended dust. 
(7)  Exhaust air shall not be recirculated to occupied areas. 
3803.6.2 Spill control and secondary containment. Spill control and secondary containment shall be provided in accordance with Sections 3803.6.2.1 through 3803.6.2.2. 
3803.6.2.1 Indoor. Spill control and secondary containment shall be provided for H-2 and H-3 occupancies in ABPFs where: 
(1)  The capacity of any single normally closed vessel or system with Class 1 Liquids exceeds 55 gallons (208 L); 
(2)  The aggregate capacity of multiple normally closed vessels or systems with Class 1 Liquids exceeds 1,000 gallons (3,785 L); or 
(3)  Class 1 Liquids are dispensed into or from a normally open vessel or system exceeding a 5.3-gallon (20 L) capacity. 
3803.6.2.1.1 Design. The drainage system shall be in accordance with the International Plumbing Code and the following: 
(1)  All portions of the drainage system including floors shall be liquid-tight and constructed of noncombustible materials compatible with ethanol. 
(2)  The drains and drainage system capacity shall be sized to carry the volumetric flow of water discharged from the automatic sprinkler system without backing up at the drains or pooling to a depth greater than 1/4" (6.5mm). The sprinkler coverage area used to calculate the required volumetric flow is permitted to be based on the smaller of (1) the remote area in accordance with NFPA 13 - provided it is located in the area served by the drains - or (2) the area of the building or portion thereof served by the drains. 
(3)  Floors shall slope to drains. Impermeable curbs and floor slope shall be designed to prevent spilled Class I Liquids and water discharged from the automatic sprinkler system from flowing to adjoining areas. Floor slope shall not be less than 2%. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Floors in existing buildings with less than 2% slope are permitted to be used provided they are made liquid tight and floor sinks are installed as necessary to preclude water discharged from the automatic sprinkler system from pooling in low spots. These drains shall be installed in addition to the drains required in Item 2 of this section. 
(2)  Where trench drains or a combination of impermeable curbs and trench drains surround the sprinkler coverage area, the floors shall slope to the drains at a rate of not less than 1%. Where a combination of impermeable curbs and trench drains is used, no less than 50% of the perimeter shall be protected by trench drains. 
(3)  Drainage systems shall terminate in an approved secondary containment reservoir designed to contain a spill from the largest vessel in the area served by the drains plus the volumetric flow of water calculated in Item 2 above for a period of 20 minutes. An approved automatic monitoring method shall be provided to detect material in the reservoir. Monitoring devices shall be connected to approved visual and audible alarms. Reservoir capacity to accommodate the required secondary containment volume shall be maintained at all times. 
Exception: Release of Class 1 Liquids and fire protection water directly into a sanitary or storm-water drainage system, onto the ground, or a combination thereof is permitted when in compliance with federal, state, local governmental agencies and City of Westminster Utilities Division regulations and permits. 
3803.6.2.2 Outdoor. Secondary containment for outdoor storage areas shall be in accordance with Chapter 50, as amended. 
3803.6.3 Occupant and property protection. Occupant and property protection shall be provided in accordance with Sections 3803.6.3.1 through 3803.6.3.4. 
3803.6.3.1 Automatic sprinklers. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout ABPF H-2 and H-3 fire areas in accordance with Sections 3803.6.3.1.1 through 3803.6.3.1.3. 
3803.6.3.1.1 Flammable liquids. Sprinkler discharge criteria for Class 1 Liquid use areas and storage areas in ABPFs or portions thereof shall be in accordance with standards identified in Table 3801.3 or a design density of 0.20 gpm/ft 2 over a design area of 3,000 ft 2 , whichever is greater. 
3803.6.3.1.2 Combustible dust producing operations. Automatic sprinkler protection criteria for H-2/Combustible Dust Producing Operations shall be determined in accordance with Section 3803.2.1.1. 
3803.6.3.1.3 Non-high hazard occupancies. Sprinkler discharge criteria for ABPFs or portions thereof not classified as a division of the high-hazard occupancy classification and where Class 1 Liquids are not present in quantities or conditions required to be regulated by NFPA 30 or this chapter, shall be in accordance with NFPA 13. 
3803.6.3.2 Sprinkler system supervision and alarms. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be electrically supervised in accordance with Section 903.4, as amended. Audible and visible occupant notification upon activation of water flow shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.5, as amended, throughout all areas in ABPFs with automatic sprinkler protection. 
3803.6.3.3 Emergency alarm. In addition to automatic sprinkler system flow detection and all fire safety functions required by other sections of this code, an approved manual fire alarm system in accordance with Sections 3803.6.3.3.1 through 3803.6.3.3.3 shall be provided in H-2 and H-3 occupancies in ABPFs. 
3803.6.3.3.1 Initiation. Manual fire alarm boxes shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.4.2 outside of each interior exit or exit access door in the fire barrier walls separating the H-2 or H-3 occupancies, and in the exterior walls surrounding the H-2 or H-3 occupancies. 
Exception: On exterior walls of H-2 or H-3 occupancies, fire alarm boxes are permitted to be installed inside of each interior exit, exit access, or exit discharge door in the exterior wall. 
Manual fire alarm boxes shall be installed at not more than 150-foot (45,720 mm) intervals along corridors, interior exit stairways or ramps, or exit passageways where Class 1 Liquids are transported. 
3803.6.3.3.2 Notification. Emergency alarm audible and visible occupant notification shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.5, as amended, throughout fire areas containing H-2 or H-3 occupancies. 
3803.6.3.3.3 Annunciation. The emergency alarm system shall be monitored and annunciated as a separate zone at the Fire Alarm Control Panel (FACP). A separate emergency alarm panel is required when prescribed by other sections of this code for regulated hazards other than, or in addition to, Class 1 Liquids or combustible dust production in the manufacture of ethanol mixtures. When the emergency alarm system is activated, information shall be communicated to the supervising station that the zone in alarm contains flammable liquids or combustible dust, or both. 
3803.6.3.4 Portable fire extinguishers. A minimum of one approved portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906, as amended, and having a rating of not less than 20-B shall be located not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) or more than 50 feet (15 240 mm) from any Class 1 Liquid storage area or use area or combustible dust production area. 
3803.6.4 Electrical. Electrical wiring, equipment and systems shall be installed and maintained in ABPFs in accordance with NFPA 70 (NEC) and Section 605 and Sections 3803.6.4.1 through 3803.6.4.4. 
3803.6.4.1 Classified electrical equipment. Classified electrical equipment per NFPA 70 (NEC) shall be installed in accordance with Section 5703.1.1 in areas of ABPFs or portions thereof where it cannot be justified to the fire and building code official during design review, and subsequently demonstrated to the fire code official on annual inspections, that an atmospheric concentration at or below 25 percent of the LFL or MEC can be maintained. 
A classified area shall not be required to extend beyond an unpierced floor, roof or other solid partition that prevents the migration of liquids, vapors and dust. 
3803.6.4.1.1 Stills. Electrical equipment attached to or part of stills in H-2 or H-3 occupancies shall be Class 1, Division 1 in accordance with NFPA 70 (NEC). 
3803.6.4.1.2 Electric motors. Electric motors located 8 feet (2438 mm) or less from any edge of equipment where Class 1 Liquid vapor/air mixtures could exist under normal operations and 3 feet (914 mm) or less above the floor or grade level within 25 feet (7620 mm) horizontally from any equipment with Class 1 Liquids shall be considered Class 1, Division 2 in accordance with NFPA 70 (NEC). 
3803.6.4.1.3 Other applications. The fire code official is authorized to determine the extent of the Class 1 electrical equipment and wiring location when a condition is not specifically covered by this chapter, Section 5703.1.1 or NFPA 70 (NEC). 
3803.6.4.1.4 Industrial trucks. Powered industrial trucks used in areas designated as classified electrical locations in accordance with Section 3803.6.4.1 shall be listed and labeled for use in the intended environment in accordance with NFPA 505. 
3803.6.4.2 Grounding. Equipment used for grain or Class 1 Liquids shall be electrically connected in accordance with NFPA 70 (NEC) and NFPA 77, and Sections 3803.6.4.2.1 and 3803.6.4.2.2 to prevent the accumulation of static electricity and sparking. 
3803.6.4.2.1 Conveyance equipment. All conveyance equipment including that used for grain or Class 1 Liquid transfer and shall be electrically connected by bond wires, ground cables, piping or similar means to a static grounding system. Conveyor belts shall be electrically conductive and equipped with static eliminators. 
Nozzles and vessels used for the transfer of Class 1 Liquids shall be electrically interconnected by: 
(1)  Metallic floor plates on which vessels stand while filling, when such floor plates are electrically connected to the fill stem; or 
(2)  Where the fill stem is bonded to the container during filling by means of a bond wire. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Vats or casks without internal metal or plastic components that could hold a potential difference. 
(2)  Equipment used in post bottling operations such as packaging and box storage shall be grounded in accordance with standards applicable to that equipment and industry practice. 
3803.6.4.2.2 Storage equipment. Plastic and metal grain storage bins or silos and Class 1 Liquid stationary tanks that are drawn down and refilled on a regular basis or are otherwise subjected to processes that could create an electric potential difference and sparking, shall be grounded. 
3803.6.4.3 Lightning protection. Lightning protection in accordance with NFPA 780 shall be provided on ABPFs with an H-2 occupancy; on miscellaneous structures with a combustible dust production hazard due to the storage, handling, or processing of grains; and on ABPFs with an H-2 occupancy and a still having a 750 gallon (2839L) or larger capacity, or aggregate bulk storage of Class I Flammable Liquids of 7,800 gallons (29,526L) or greater. 
3803.6.4.4 Standby or emergency power. Where mechanical ventilation, treatment systems, limit controls, alarm, detection or other electrically operated systems are required, such systems shall be provided with an emergency or standby power system in accordance with NFPA 70 (NEC) and Section 604.1, as amended. 
Exception: Subject to the fire and building code officials, standby power for mechanical ventilation and limit control systems shall not be required where an approved fail-safe engineered system is installed. 
3803.6.5 Location of stills and vessels. Stills and vessels in Class 1 Liquid use areas shall be located with respect to the lot lines of adjoining property which can be built on, in accordance with Tables 5703.4(1) and 5703.4(2). 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Where the exterior wall facing the adjoining lot line is without openings, has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours, and the ABPF is protected throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 3803.6.3.1, the fire and building code officials are authorized to reduce the minimum separation distances to not less than 1 foot (305 mm), or the minimum separation distances required by other provisions of this code or the International Building Code, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Where the capacity of the largest still or vessel within the minimum separation distance is 250 gallons (946 L) or less, the aggregate volume of all stills and vessels within the minimum separation distance is 750 gallons (2839 L) or less, the normal operating pressure of all vessels within the minimum separation distance is 2.5 psig (17.2 kPa) or less, and the ABPF is protected throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 3803.6.3.1, the minimum separation distance to lot lines is permitted to be 1 foot (305 mm), or the minimum separation distances required by other provisions of this code or the International Building Code, whichever is greater. 
3803.6.6 Security. Class 1 Liquid use areas and storage areas shall be secured against unauthorized entry and safeguarded in a manner approved by the fire code official. 
3803.6.7 Protection from vehicles. Bollards in accordance with Section 312 or other approved means shall be provided to protect all vessels, stills, and piping which handle Class 1 Liquids and are subject to vehicular, including industrial truck, damage. 
3803.6.8 Labeling and signage. When a permit is required in accordance with Section 105, visible hazard identification markings, labels, signs and placards shall be placed on vessels and process piping used for Class 1 Liquids, and in Class 1 Liquid storage areas, use areas and combustible dust production areas, and at the entrances thereto in accordance with applicable federal, state, and standards regulations, Sections 3803.6.8.1 through 3803.6.8.6, Chapters 50 and 57, as amended, and NFPA 704, or as approved. Content shall be in English, symbols permitted by this code and referenced standards, or both. Placards shall be in accordance with NFPA 704. The fire code official is authorized to require additional signs and placards at specific entrances and locations. Markings, labels, signs, and placards shall not be obscured or removed. 
Exception: Casks are not required to be labeled. 
3803.6.8.1 Warning signs. Warning signs shall be of a durable material, have a yellow background with black or red text or symbols, and shall convey the danger being identified. Warning sign text shall not be less than 3 inches (76 mm) in height with a 5/8 inch (15 mm) stroke. Warning signs shall be approved by the fire code official. 
3803.6.8.2 Information signs. Information signs shall be of a durable material, have a blue background with white or red text or symbols, or a white background with blue text, and shall convey the information required. Information sign text shall not be less than 3 inches (76 mm) in height with a 5/8 inch (15 mm) stroke. Information signs shall be approved by the fire code official. 
Exception: Where otherwise specified by applicable regulations or standards. 
3803.6.8.3 Location. Placards shall be located in accordance with NFPA 704 and shall be provided on the outside of each interior exit or exit access door in the fire barrier walls separating the H-2 or H-3 occupancies, and in the exterior walls surrounding the H-2 or H-3 occupancies. 
3803.6.8.4 Piping. Piping and tubing conveying Class 1, 2, or 3 flammable or combustible liquids between vessels including heat transfer fluids shall be identified in accordance with ASME A13.1 to indicate the material conveyed. 
3803.6.8.5 Individual containers, packages and cartons. Individual containers, intermediate bulk containers, packages and cartons shall be conspicuously identified in accordance with federal regulations and applicable state laws. 
3803.6.8.6 Tank marking. Every tank shall bear a permanent nameplate or marking indicating the standard used as the basis of design. Stationary tanks more than 100 gallons (379 L) in capacity used for the storage of Class 1 Liquids shall bear a warning sign and placard in accordance with Section 3803.6.8 corresponding to the material therein. 
Exception: Vats. 
3803.6.9 Sources of ignition. Control of sources of ignition shall be in accordance with Sections 3803.6.8.1 and 3803.6.8.2. 
3803.6.9.1 Smoking. Smoking areas shall be in accordance with Section 310 and shall be prohibited in Class 1 Liquid storage areas or use areas and in combustible dust production areas. "No Smoking" warning signs in accordance with Sections 310.3 shall be provided in such areas and at all entrances to them. 
Exception: Where designated smoking areas within ABPFs are permitted. Designated smoking areas shall be separated from Class 1 Liquid storage areas and use areas and combustible dust production areas by a minimum of 25 feet (7620 mm) and shall be clearly identified with information signs in accordance with Section 3803.6.8. 
3803.6.9.2 Open flames. Open flames including barrel charring operations, and devices operating at temperatures above 680 °F (360 °C) are prohibited throughout fire areas containing Class 1 Liquid storage areas or use areas or combustible dust production areas. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Areas where hot work has been approved by the fire code official. 
(2)  Listed and labeled gas fired or electric unit heaters installed in accordance with the International Mechanical Code, International Fuel Gas Code and NFPA 70 (NEC), located more than eight feet (2438 mm) from any edge of equipment where Class 1 Liquid vapor/air mixtures could exist under normal operations and more than three feet (914 mm) above the floor or grade level within 25 feet (7620 mm) horizontally from any equipment with Class 1 Liquids. 
3803.6.10 Separation of incompatible materials. Incompatible materials shall be separated in accordance with Section 5003.9.8. 
3803.6.11 Seismic protection. All equipment in ABPFs including machinery, racks, piping, and stationary tanks shall be braced and anchored in accordance with the seismic design requirements of the International Building Code for the seismic zone in which the ABPF is located. 
3803.6.12 Protection from corrosion. Machinery, piping, tank, process vessel, and container materials exposed to Class 1 Liquids shall be protected in accordance with Sections 3803.6.12.1 and 3803.6.12.2. 
3803.6.12.1 Protection from external corrosion and galvanic action. Where subject to external corrosion or galvanic action, machinery, piping, tank, process vessel, and container holding or conveying Class 1 Liquids shall be fabricated from noncorrosive materials or provided with corrosion protection. Dissimilar metallic parts subject to galvanic action shall not be joined. 
3803.6.12.2 Chemical protection. Machinery, piping, tank, process vessel, and container materials used for Class 1 Liquids shall be protected from all chemicals to which they are exposed including ethanol. Clean-in-place (CIPs) fittings shall be compatible with the cleaning agents used on the vessels and piping to which they are attached. Tank lining shall be in accordance with Section 3804.1.2.6. 
3803.6.13 Limit controls. Limit controls shall be provided in accordance with Sections 3803.6.13.1 through 3803.6.13.3. 
3803.6.13.1 Pressure control. Machinery, piping, tanks, vessels, and stills containing or conveying Class 1 Liquids shall be designed for the pressures they will be subjected to in accordance with applicable standards. Machinery, piping, tanks, containers, processing vessels, and stills containing or conveying Class 1 Liquids that can generate pressures exceeding design limits because of exposure fires or internal reaction shall have an approved means to relieve excessive positive and negative internal pressure. Vents provided to relieve excessive positive pressure shall discharge to an approved location. 
3803.6.13.2 High-liquid-level control. Stationary tanks and process vessels with Class 1 Liquids having a capacity greater than 500 gallons (1893 L) shall be equipped with a device or other means to prevent overflow into the building including, but not limited to a float valve, preset meter on the fill line, valve actuated by the weight of the tank's contents, low-head pump incapable of producing overflow, or a liquid-tight overflow pipe at least one pipe size larger than the fill pipe and discharging by gravity back to an approved location. 
Exception: Liquid-level sight gauges or other manual means approved by the fire code official to determine fill level are permitted in ABPFs where the use area or storage area is small enough that the stationary tank or process vessel is effectively under constant observation during filling operations. 
3803.6.13.3 Low-liquid-level control. Approved safeguards shall be provided to prevent a low-liquid level in stationary tanks, processing vessels and stills from creating a hazardous condition, including but not limited to overheating. 
3803.6.14 Handling and transportation. Containers, portable tanks, and casks holding more than 5 gallons (19 L) of Class 1 Liquids being transported in a corridor or enclosed exit shall be on a cart or truck in accordance with Sections 5003.10.2 and 5003.10.3. 
SECTION 3804 
EQUIPMENT 
3804.1 General. Equipment utilized for the production, storage, dispensing, blending or handling of Class 1 Liquids shall be listed or approved and shall be in accordance with Sections 3804.1.1 through 3804.1.4.4.2. 
3804.1.1 Piping systems. Piping systems for conveying Class 1 Liquids including piping, tubing, valves, pumps, and fittings shall be designed, installed, and maintained in accordance with Sections 3804.1.1.1 through 3804.1. 1.7, Section 5703.6, as amended, and ASME B31. The use of other standards is permitted when approved. 
3804.1.1.1 Component design and construction. Piping, tubing, hoses, valves, fittings and related components conveying Class 1 Liquids shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Piping, tubing, hoses, valves, pumps, fittings and related components shall be designed and fabricated from materials of adequate strength and durability to withstand the structural and environmental conditions to which they are subjected. 
(2)  Piping, tubing, hoses, valves, pumps, fittings and related components used in liquid transfer operations shall be approved or listed for the intended use. 
(3)  Where provided, in-line flame arresters in piping systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with their listing or API 2028. 
(4)  Where Class 1 Liquids are carried in piping pressurized above 15 pounds per square inch gauge (psig; 103 kPa), an approved means of leak detection shall be provided. 
Exception: Piping for overpressure relief devices. 
3804.1.1.2 Piping supports. Piping systems shall be substantially supported and protected against physical damage and excessive stresses arising from seismic activity, settlement, vibration, expansion and contraction. Piping supports shall be protected against exposure to fire by: 
(1)  Draining spilled liquid away from the piping support system at a minimum slope of not less than 2 percent; 
(2)  Providing protection with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours; or 
(3)  Other approved methods. 
3804.1.1.3 Pipe joints. Pipe joints shall be in accordance with Sections 5703.6.9 and 5703.6.10. 
Exception: Where located in concealed spaces within buildings, joints in piping systems used to convey Class 1 liquids shall be welded. 
3804.1.1.4 Valves. Piping systems with and without pumps shall contain a sufficient number of manual-control, auto-control, and check valves to protect the ABPF and properly control the flow of Class 1 Liquids; in normal operation, in the event of physical damage, or the condition of fire exposure, and shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Readily accessible manual valves, automatic remotely-activated fail-safe emergency shutoff valves, or excess flow control shall be installed on gravity-fed supply piping and tubing and in systems pressurized above 15 pounds per square inch gauge (psig; 103 kPa) as close to the source as practical. 
(2)  Manual emergency shutoff valves and controls for remotely activated emergency shutoff valves shall be clearly visible and readily accessible. Information signage in accordance with Section 3803.6.8 shall be provided identifying the emergency shutoff valves and controls. 
(3)  Backflow prevention or check valves shall be provided when backflow could create a hazardous condition or cause an unauthorized discharge. 
3804.1.1.5 Pumps. Solid or liquid fueled pumps are not permitted in Class 1 Liquid use areas or storage areas. 
Exception : Fire pumps separated from the Class 1 Liquid use areas and storage areas by 2-hour fire-resistance rated fire barriers in accordance with IBC Section 707. 
Positive-displacement pumps shall be provided with pressure relief discharging back to the vessel, pump suction or other approved location, or shall be provided with interlocks to prevent over-pressure. 
3804.1.1.6 Pressurized transfer systems. Gases introduced to provide for transfer of Class 1 Liquids shall be inert. Controls, including pressure relief devices, shall be provided to limit the pressure so the maximum working pressure of vessels cannot be exceeded. Where devices operating through pressure within a tank, intermediate bulk container, or container are utilized, the tank, intermediate bulk container, or container shall be a pressure vessel approved for the intended use. 
3804.1.1.7 Maintenance. Piping and appurtenances shall be maintained in a safe operating condition and in accordance with their applicable listings and standards. Damage to piping or appurtenances shall be repaired using materials having equal or greater strength and fire resistance or the equipment shall be replaced, taken out of service, repaired or disposed of in an approved manner. The repair, alteration or reconstruction, including welding, cutting and hot tapping of piping that has been placed in service, shall be in accordance with NFPA 30. 
3804.1.2 Vessels. The design and construction of vessels used in ABPFs for Class 1 Liquids shall comply with the applicable Sections 3804.1.2.1 through 3804.1.2.13.4 and NFPA 30, or shall be of an approved type. Pressure vessels shall comply with the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code. 
3804.1.2.1 Underground storage of Class 1 Liquids. Underground storage of Class I liquids is prohibited. 
3804.1.2.2 Outdoor storage of Class 1 Liquids. Outdoor storage shall be in accordance with Chapters 50 and 57, as amended. 
3804.1.2.3 Tank vehicles and tank cars. Tank vehicles and tank cars shall not be used as storage or processing vessels. 
3804.1.2.4 Design of supports. The supporting structure for stationary tanks and portable tanks with capacity greater than 660 gallon (2498 L) shall be designed in accordance with the International Building Code and NFPA 30. 
3804.1.2.5 Locations subject to flooding. Where a portable tank or intermediate bulk container with capacity in excess of 660 gallons (2498 L), or a stationary tank is located in an area where it is subject to a rise in the water table, flooding or accumulation of water from fire suppression operations, uplift protection shall be provided in accordance with NFPA 30, Sections 22.14 and 23.14. 
3804.1.2.6 Tank lining. Steel stationary tanks and steel portable tanks with capacity greater than 660 gallon (2498 L) are permitted to be lined only for the purpose of protecting the interior from corrosion or providing compatibility with a material to be stored. Only those liquids tested for compatibility with the lining material are permitted to be stored in lined tanks. 
3804.1.2.7 Manual drainage. Manual drainage control valves shall be provided on stationary tanks and portable tanks with capacity greater than 660 gallon (2498 L). Manual drainage control valves on stationary tanks shall be located at approved locations remote from the tanks to ensure their operation in a fire condition. 
3804.1.2.8 Connections. Filling and emptying connections to vessels shall be provided with liquid-tight caps, covers, plugs, or valves which shall be closed when not in use. 
Connections located below normal Class 1 Liquid levels in stationary tanks with capacity of 500 gallons (1893 L) or more shall be provided with internal or external isolation valves located as close as practical to the shell of the tank. 
3804.1.2.9 Materials used in tank construction. The materials used in tank construction shall be in accordance with NFPA 30. 
3804.1.2.10 Separation between adjacent tanks. The separation between stationary tanks containing Class 1 Liquids shall be in accordance with NFPA 30, Table 22.4.2.1. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Where a group of no more than 4 stationary tanks are aligned in a single row, the minimum separation distance between tanks is permitted to be reduced to 18" (457 mm) provided no single tank is over 960 gallons (3634 L) and clear access of 3 feet (914 mm) is provided around the group. 
(2)  Where stationary tanks are in the drainage path of Class 1 Liquids, and are compacted in three or more rows or in an irregular pattern, the fire code official is authorized to require greater separation than specified in NFPA 30, Table 22.4.2.1 or other means to make tanks in the interior of the pattern accessible for emergency response including firefighting purposes. 
3804.1.2.11 Maintenance. Vessels and their appurtenances shall be maintained in a safe operating condition in accordance with their listings, applicable standards, and industry practice. Damage and malfunctions shall be repaired using materials having equal or greater strength and fire resistance. Vessels leaking Class 1 Liquids shall be promptly emptied, repaired and returned to service. Stationary tanks not returned to service shall be abandoned in accordance with Section 5704.2.13, or removed in accordance with Section 5704.2.14. 
3804.1.2.12 Vent lines. Portable tanks with a storage capacity of 660 gallons (2498 L) or more and stationary tanks shall be provided with normal and emergency vents in accordance with Sections 3804.1.2.12.1 through 3804.1.2.12.5 to relieve positive and negative pressures such as those created from filling and draining. 
Vent lines shall not be used for purposes other than venting unless approved. 
3804.1.2.12.1 Installation of vent piping. Vent pipes shall be designed, sized, constructed and installed in accordance with Sections 5703.6, as amended, 5704.2.7.3 and 5704.2.7.4. Vent pipes shall be installed to drain toward the tank without sags or traps in which liquid can collect. Vent pipes shall be protected from physical damage and vibration. 
3804.1.2.12.2 Vent-line flame arresters and pressure-vacuum vents. Normal vents shall be equipped with vent-line flame arresters and pressure-vacuum vents in accordance with Section 5704.2.7.3.2. 
3804.1.2.12.3 Vent pipe outlets. To facilitate atmospheric dispersion, vent outlets shall be located so vapors are released at a safe point outside of buildings, directed upward or horizontally away from adjacent walls so vapors will not be trapped by eaves or other obstructions. Vent outlets shall not be less than 12 feet (3658 mm) above the finished ground level and shall not be less than 5 feet (1524 mm) from building openings or lot lines of properties that can be built upon. 
3804.1.2.12.4 Manifolding. Subject to the approval of the fire code official, vent pipes are permitted to be manifolded only for special purposes such as vapor recovery, vapor conservation or air pollution control. Manifolded vent pipes shall be adequately sized to prevent system pressure limits from being exceeded when manifolded tanks are subject to the same fire exposure. 
3804.1.2.12.5 Emergency venting. Tanks shall be equipped with additional venting that will relieve rapid overpressure due to fire. Emergency vents shall not discharge inside buildings. The venting shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 30, 22.7. 
3804.1.2.13 Vessel openings other than vents. Vessel openings other than vents shall comply with Sections 3804.1.2.13.1 through 3804.1.2.13.4 
3804.1.2.13.1 Filling and emptying connections. Filling and emptying connections to stationary tanks shall be properly identified in accordance with Section 3803.6.8. 
3804.1.2.13.2 Fill pipes and discharge lines. For top-loaded stationary tanks and portable tanks with capacity greater than 660 gallons (2498 L), a metallic fill pipe shall be designed and installed to minimize the generation of static electricity by terminating the pipe within 6 inches (152 mm) of the bottom of the tank. It shall be installed in a manner which avoids excessive vibration. 
3804.1.2.13.3 Manual gauging. Vessel openings for manual gauging, if independent of the fill pipe, shall be provided with a liquid-tight cap, cover, or plug. Covers shall be kept closed when not gauging. Such openings shall be protected against liquid overflow and possible vapor release by means of a spring-loaded check valve or other approved device. 
3804.1.2.13.4 Protection against vapor release. Tank openings provided for purposes of vapor recovery shall be protected against possible vapor release by means of a spring-loaded check valve or dry-break connection, or other approved vapor-tight device. Openings designed for combined fill and vapor recovery shall be protected against vapor release. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Where the opening is a pipe connected to a vapor processing system. 
(2)  Where connection of the liquid delivery line to the fill pipe simultaneously connects the vapor recovery line. 
3804.1.3 Stairs, platforms and walkways. Stairs, platforms and walkways installed to facilitate access to vessels, storage, pipes, and process equipment shall be noncombustible and designed and constructed in accordance with NFPA 30 and the International Building Code. 
3804.1.4 Testing. Equipment, devices and systems shall be tested in accordance with Sections 3804.1.4.1 through 3804.1.4.4.2. 
3804.1.4.1 Piping systems. Before being covered, enclosed or placed in use, piping shall be hydrostatically tested to 150 percent of the maximum anticipated pressure of the system, or pneumatically tested to 110 percent of the maximum anticipated pressure of the system, but not less than 5 pounds per square inch gauge (psig; 34.5 kPa) at the highest point of the system. This test shall be maintained for a sufficient time period to complete visual inspection of joints and connections. For a minimum of 10 minutes, there shall be no leakage or permanent distortion. Storage tanks shall be tested independently from the piping. 
Exception: Piping tested in accordance with the applicable section of ASME B31.9. 
3804.1.4.1.1 Existing piping. Existing piping shall be tested in accordance with this section when the fire code official has reasonable cause to believe a leak exists. Piping used for Class 1 Liquids shall not be tested pneumatically. 
Exception: Vapor-recovery piping is permitted to be tested using an inert gas. 
3804.1.4.2 Tanks. Prior to being placed into service, tanks shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 30, 21.5. 
3804.1.4.3 Safety systems. Automatic sprinkler systems, automatic sprinkler system monitoring, fire alarm systems, all limit controls, and all other fire- and life-safety systems shall pass the commissioning or acceptance tests in accordance with their respective design, installation, and testing standards prior to occupancy and use of the facility. Emergency alarms and limit-control monitoring shall be tested as for fire alarm systems in accordance with NFPA 72. 
3804.1.4.4 Periodic testing. Equipment and safety systems shall be periodically tested in accordance with Sections 3804.1.4.4.1 and 3804.1.4.4.2. Written records of the tests conducted or maintenance performed shall be maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 107. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Periodic testing shall not be required when approved written documentation is provided substantiating testing will damage the equipment, device or system and the equipment, device or system is maintained as specified by the respective manufacturer. 
(2)  Periodic testing shall not be required when the equipment and systems are utilized routinely as part of normal operations and maintained in good operating condition. 
(3)  Periodic testing shall not be required for equipment, devices and systems that fail in a fail-safe manner. 
(4)  Periodic testing shall not be required for equipment, devices and systems that self- diagnose and report trouble. Records of the self-diagnosis and trouble reporting shall be made available to the fire code official. 
(5)  Periodic testing shall not be required if system activation occurs during the required test cycle for the components activated during the test cycle. 
(6)  Approved maintenance in accordance with Section 5003.6 that is performed not less than annually or in accordance with an approved schedule shall be permitted to meet the testing requirements set forth in sections 5003.2.9.1 and 5003.2.9.2. 
3804.1.4.4.1 Equipment. The following equipment shall be tested periodically: 
(1)  Piping 
(2)  Limit controls required by Section 3803.6.13 
3804.1.4.4.1.1 Testing frequency. The equipment listed in Section 3804.1.4.4.1 shall be tested at one of the frequencies listed below: 
(1)  Not less than annually; 
(2)  In accordance with the approved manufacturer's requirements; 
(3)  In accordance with approved recognized industry standards; or 
(4)  In accordance with an approved schedule. 
3804.1.4.4.2 Safety systems. Safety systems listed in Section 3804.1.4.3 shall be periodically tested in accordance with their design, installation and testing standards. 
Emergency alarms and limit-control monitoring shall be tested as for fire alarm systems in accordance with NFPA 72. 
3804.2 Storage and use areas. Storage and process operations shall be in accordance with other provisions of this code and sections 3804.2.1 through 3804.2.3.3. 
3804.2.1 Storage areas. Storage of Class 1 Liquids shall be in accordance with Sections 3804.2.1.1 through 3804.2.1.4, Chapter 32, as amended, and NFPA 30. 
3804.2.1.1 General. Storage of vessels in closely packed piles, on pallets, in racks, or on shelves shall be in accordance with Sections 3804.2.1.1.1 through 3804.2.1.1.3. 
3804.2.1.1.1 Basement storage. Storage in excess of the MAQs is prohibited in basements. 
3804.2.1.1.2 Limited combustible storage. Limited quantities of class 1 through 4 commodities are permitted to be stored in the same non-separated area, room, or building as Class 1 Liquids provided the combustibles, other than those used for packaging the Class 1 Liquids, are separated from the Class 1 Liquids in storage by a minimum of 8 feet (2438 mm) horizontally either by open aisles, open racks, or racks filled with noncombustible commodities. 
3804.2.1.1.3 Shelf storage. Shelving shall be of substantial construction, and shall be braced and anchored in accordance with the seismic design requirements of the International Building Code for the seismic zone in which the ABPF is located. Shelving, chocks, scuffboards, floor overlay and similar installations shall be of noncombustible construction or of wood not less than a 1-inch (25 mm) nominal thickness; treatments, coatings and construction materials shall be compatible with ethanol. Shelves shall be provided with a lip or guard when used for the storage of individual containers or casks. 
Exception: Storage in flammable liquid storage cabinets specifically designed for such use. 
3804.2.1.1.4 Separation and aisles. Aisles shall be provided in storage areas such that all storage vessels are located no more than 20 feet (6096 mm) horizontally from a main aisle or access aisle. Main aisles shall be a minimum of 8 feet (2438 mm) wide in high piled combustible storage areas and a minimum of 4 feet wide in non-high piled combustible storage areas. Access aisles shall be a minimum of 4 feet (1219 mm) wide in high piled combustible storage areas and a minimum of 44 inches (1118 mm) wide in non-high piled combustible storage areas. Aisles utilized for manual stocking, separation between piles, separation between adjacent rows of racks, and separation between racks and adjacent pile storage shall be main aisles or access aisles. Aisles utilized for mechanical stocking shall be main aisles. All piles including palletized storage shall border a main aisle on a minimum of one side or end. Additional aisles shall be provided for access to doors, required windows and ventilation openings, standpipe connections, fire extinguishers, mechanical equipment and switches. Such aisles shall be a minimum of 3 feet (914 mm) in width. A single aisle is permitted to serve multiple functions provided its minimum width is the largest of the widths required for the functions served. 
3804.2.1.1.5 Material handling equipment. Material handling equipment shall be suitable to manipulate vessels at the highest tier level. 
3804.2.1.1.6 Housekeeping. Storage shall be maintained in an orderly manner. 
3804.2.1.1.7 Dunnage, scuffboards, floor overlay. Dunnage, scuffboards, floor overlay and similar installations shall be of noncombustible construction or of wood not less than a 1-inch (25 mm) nominal thickness. 
3804.2.1.1.8 High piled combustible storage. Storage of vessels in closely packed piles, on pallets, in racks, or on shelves, where the top of storage is greater than 6 feet (1829 mm) in height, shall be considered high piled combustible storage. Where applicable requirements in Chapter 32, as amended, are in conflict with those in Section 3804.2.1, the more restrictive shall govern. 
3804.2.1.2 Pile storage. Pile storage including palletized storage shall be in accordance with Sections 3804.2.1.2.1 through 3804.2.1.2.2.2. 
3804.2.1.2.1 Stabilizing and supports. Intermediate bulk containers, containers, and portable tanks shall be stored in accordance with NFPA 30. Horizontally oriented casks stored in piles shall be supported by stackable racks or cradles of substantial construction designed for that purpose. Lateral bracing shall be provided for horizontally oriented casks stored in piles where the height of the pile exceeds three times the least dimension of the base rack or cradle. Storage height of horizontally oriented casks in this configuration shall not exceed the lesser of the rack manufacturer's recommendations or industry standards. 
3804.2.1.2.2 Palletized storage. Palletized storage shall be in accordance with Sections 3804.2.1.2.2.1 and 3804.2.1.2.2.2. 
3804.2.1.2.2.1 Stabilizing and supports. Casks stacked vertically for storage shall be separated by pallets or other dunnage that spreads the weight of the casks on the tier above over the casks on the tier below. A lower tier shall not have less than four casks and shall not have an empty cask when a tier above has a cask that is not empty. No more than two tiers of casks are permitted to be stacked vertically in this configuration. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Where the collapse strength of the casks on the lowest tier is not exceeded, palletized storage of vertically oriented casks are permitted to be stacked to a height of four tiers where the casks are bound together in a square pattern groups of no less than four, by a steel band or other approved binding. 
(2)  Where the collapse strength of the casks on the lowest tier is not exceeded, palletized storage of vertically oriented casks are permitted to be stacked to a height of six tiers where the casks are bound together in a square pattern in groups of no less than nine, by a steel band or other approved binding. 
(3)  Where the collapse strength of the casks on the lowest tier is not exceeded, an engineered overturning analysis shall be provided demonstrating stability in accordance with the seismic design requirements of the International Building Code for the seismic zone in which the ABPF is located for storage configurations other than permitted in Exceptions 1 and 2. 
(4)  At no time shall the allowable quantities for the occupancy be exceeded. 
3804.2.1.2.2.2 Idle combustible pallets. Storage of idle wood pallets shall be in accordance with section 3206.4.1.1 and as limited by the capacity of the automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13. Pallet storage shall be separated from liquid storage by aisles that are a minimum of 8 feet (2438 mm) wide. 
3804.2.1.3 Portable tank, intermediate bulk container, and container storage. Portable tanks and intermediate bulk containers stored over one tier in height shall be designed to nest securely without dunnage. Stacked containers shall be separated by pallets or dunnage to provide stability and to prevent excessive stress to container walls. The storage height and configuration shall be in accordance with NFPA 30. 
3804.2.2 Grain storage. Grain storage shall be in accordance with Section 3803.2.1.1. 
3804.2.3 Use areas. Use areas for Class 1 Liquids in amounts exceeding the MAQ shall be in accordance with Sections 3804.2.3.1 through 3804.2.3.3. 
3804.2.3.1 General. Systems shall be suitable for the use intended and shall be designed by persons competent in such design. Controls shall be designed to prevent materials from entering or leaving the process or reaction system at other than the intended time, rate or path. Where failure of an automatic control could result in a dangerous condition or reaction, the automatic control shall be fail-safe. Use areas with Class 1 Liquids in excess of the MAQs are prohibited in basements. 
3804.2.3.2 Non-listed appliances. Stills where internal operating vapor pressures normally exceed 2.5 psig (103.4 kPa) or could potentially exceed 2.5 psig (103.4 kPa) due to failures in operating methods such as clogged head packing or other materials held on column plates shall be provided with a listed pressure relief valve piped to discharge to the exterior in an approved location. 
Exception: Stills listed for operation above 2.5 psig (103.4 kPa) and, where approved, stills constructed in accordance with the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code. 
3804.2.3.3 Class 1 Liquid transfer. Class 1 liquids shall be transferred by one of the following methods: 
(1)  From safety cans in accordance with NFPA 30. 
(2)  Through an approved closed piping system. 
(3)  From vessels by an approved pump taking suction through an opening in the top of the vessel. 
(4)  By gravity from a tank, intermediate bulk container, or container through an approved self-closing or automatic-closing valve. 
(5)  Approved engineered liquid transfer systems. 
Exception: Liquids transferred into and from containers not exceeding a 5.3-gallon (20 L) capacity. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 2, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-10-8. - Chapter 56 Explosives and Fireworks Amendments. 
(A)  General: Section 5601 of the International Fire Code is amended as follows: 
5601.1.3 Fireworks. Exception 1, Exception 2, and Exception 4 are deleted in their entirety and new exceptions are added to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
(1)  State of Colorado defined "permissible fireworks" will be allowed for possession, handling, and use only during the timeframe beginning at 12:00 a.m. on July 3rd and ending at 12:00 p.m. on July 5th of any given calendar year. 
(2)  Fireworks shall be prohibited in all City of Westminster parks and open spaces, unless approved by the Director of Parks, Recreation, and Libraries and the Fire Department. 
(3)  As provided in Section 6-8-3, W.M.C. 
(B)  Explosives Materials Storage and Handling: Section 5604 of the International Fire Code is amended to add Section 5604.1.1 to read as follows: 
5604.1.1 General Storage Limitations. The storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited within all zones except PUD (Planned Unit Development) where such storage is specifically listed as an allowed use, except for temporary storage for use in connection with approved blasting operations; provided that this prohibition shall not apply to wholesale and retail stocks of small arms, ammunition, explosive bolts, explosive rivets, or cartridges for explosive-actuated power tools in aggregate quantities involving less than five hundred pounds (500#) of explosive material. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 2, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-10-9. - Chapter 61 Liquefied Petroleum Gases Amendments. 
(A)  Subsection 6104.2 of the International Fire Code is amended to add the following text to read as follows: 
6104.2 Maximum Capacity within Established Limits. 
This maximum capacity limitation specifically applies to the following zoning areas: RA, RE, R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, B1, C1, T1, and PUD (Planned Unit Development) zoned districts. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 2, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-10-10. - Appendix B Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings Amendments. 
(A)  Section B105 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding the following sections: 
B105.4 Minimum Fire-Flow Requirements. 
The minimum fire-flow requirement for any building regardless of occupancy classification, table or reference in this appendix, shall be 1,500 gallons per minute. 
B105.5 Fire Flow Reduction Allowance: Buildings which are equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 of the International Fire Code are allowed a minimum fire-flow of 50% of the value in Table B105.1(2), provided the fire-flow shall be a minimum of 1,500 gallons per minute. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 2, 11-27-2017 ) 
11-10-11. - Appendix C Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution. 
(A)  Table C102.1 of the International Fire Code is amended as follows: 
Footnote f: A 50-percent spacing increase may be permitted where the building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1 of the International Fire Code. 
Footnote g: A 25 percent spacing increase may be permitted where the building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.2 or 903.3.1.3 of the International Fire Code or Section P2904 of the International Residential Code. 
( Ord. No. 3908, § 2, 11-27-2017 ) 
CHAPTER 11. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

11-11-1. - Legislative Intent. 
    Whereas, it is the intent of the regulations herein set forth to recognize that signs are a necessary means of visual communication for the convenience of the public and to insure the right of those concerned to identify businesses, services, and other activities by the use of signs; and 
    Whereas, in order to meet this intent, it is necessary to limit those signs that are accessory and incidental to the use on the premises where such signs are located; and 
    Whereas, to provide a reasonable balance between the right of an individual to identify his business and the right of the public to be protected against the visual discord resulting from the unrestricted proliferation of signs and similar devices; and 
    Whereas, to insure that signs are compatible with adjacent land uses and with the total visual environment of the community; and 
    Whereas, to protect the public from hazardous conditions that result from signs that are structurally unsafe, obscure vision of motorists, and/or compete or conflict with necessary traffic signals and warning signs; and 
    Whereas, to promote an overall visual effect that has a minimum of overhead clutter; and 
    Whereas, to recognize that the size of signs that provide adequate identification in pedestrian-oriented business areas differs from that necessary in vehicular-oriented areas where traffic is heavy, travel speeds are greater, and required setbacks are greater than in pedestrian areas; and 
    Whereas, to encourage signs that are well-designed and compatible with their surroundings and with the buildings to which they are appurtenant; and 
    Whereas, to recognize that the expeditious and reasonable elimination of certain existing signs not in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance is necessary to the public health, safety, and welfare and to the protection of the visual environment, as is the prohibition of new signs that would violate the provisions of this ordinance. 
(2534) 
11-11-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Abandoned sign shall mean a sign, including its structure, that no longer identifies or advertises a business, lessor, service, owner, product or activity, and/or for which no legal owner can be found. An abandoned sign is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
    Animated shall mean any sign or part of a sign that changes physical position or light intensity by any movement, rotation, illumination or other means, or that gives the visual impression of such movement, rotation, illumination or rotation. 
    Awning sign shall mean any sign painted, printed, attached, or otherwise applied to any facet or support structure of an awning. 
    Awning, internally illuminated shall mean any awning lit by means of a light source that is within an awning that is constructed from any, but not limited to, translucent or opaque material. 
    Banner sign shall mean a sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material with no enclosing framework. 
    Canopy sign shall mean a structure of rigid or non-rigid material on a framework sheltering an area or forming a sheltered walk to the entrance of a building. 
    Changeable sign shall mean a sign that is designed so that the words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, or copy can be changed or rearranged without altering the sign face or sign structure in any way. 
    Construction sign shall mean a temporary sign announcing subdivision, development, construction, or other improvement of a property by a builder, contractor, or other person furnishing services, materials or labor to said premises. A "construction sign" shall not be constructed to be a "real estate sign" as defined by this chapter and shall contain only the project name, developer, architect, builder, and/or consultants, lender, and opening date. 
    Directional/informational sign shall mean an on-premise sign giving directions, instructions, or facility information and that may contain the name or logo of an establishment, but no advertising copy (e.g., parking or exit and entrance signs.) Such sign may contain a logo, provided that the logo may not comprise more than 20 percent of the total sign area. 
    Double-faced sign shall mean a sign with two faces back-to-back. 
    Exposed neon shall mean a neon sign in which the neon tubes are not covered by an opaque shield. 
    Gasoline pricing sign shall mean a sign displaying only the prices of gasoline, uses only internal scrolling or magnetic mechanisms, does not contain a light emitting diode (led), and whose message does not change more often than twice in a 24-hour period. 
    Illegal sign shall mean a sign that does not meet the requirements of this Code and that has not received legal nonconforming status. 
    Illuminated sign shall mean a sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting, either by lights on or in the sign, or directed toward the sign. 
    Illuminated awning shall mean any awning lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting, either by lights on or in the awning, or directed toward the awning. 
    Institutional uses shall include church, public or private school, college or university, fraternal or civic association, municipal building, hospital, or convention center. 
    Maintenance shall mean the cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter in any way the approved signage. 
    Marquee sign shall mean any sign painted, printed, attached or otherwise applied to any facet or support structure of a marquee. 
    Monument sign shall mean any sign that is anchored to the ground with a monolithic base and is independent of any other structure. 
    Nonconforming sign shall mean any sign that does not conform to one or more applicable provisions of this Code, but that was lawfully erected and maintained, or approved in an official development plan, prior to the applicable provision or provisions. 
    Off-site commercial directional sign shall mean a permanent ground sign intended to direct vehicular traffic through the private roads or easements of a regional shopping center to a commercial establishment. 
    Owner shall mean a person recorded as such on official records. The owner of property on which a sign is located is presumed to be the owner of the sign, unless facts to the contrary are officially recorded or otherwise brought to the attention of the City. 
    Portable sign shall mean any sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure or building. 
    Projecting sign shall mean a sign, other than a flat wall sign, that is attached to and projects from a building wall or other structure not specifically designed to support the sign. 
    Public property shall mean any property, real or personal, owned, leased or licensed by the City, county, state or federal government, including public rights-of-way, and for which the right to possess and control such property has not been legally surrendered, granted, licensed, or conveyed to a private person or entity. 
    Real estate sign shall mean a temporary, non-illuminated sign indicating the availability for sale, rent, or lease of a specific lot, building, or portion of a building on the property upon which the sign is located. 
    Roof shall mean the outside top covering of any building or structure. 
    Roof sign shall mean a sign that is mounted on the roof of a building, or that is wholly or partially dependent upon the building for support, and that projects above the highest point of a building with a flat roof, the eave-line of a building with a gambrel, gable, or hip roof, or the deck-line of a building with a mansard roof. 
    Sign shall mean any object, device, flag, display, structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, that is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including, but not limited to, words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. 
    Sign area shall mean the entire sign face, including the advertising surface and any framing, trim, or molding, but not including the supporting structure. The sign area shall be measured as a rectangle, encompassing the largest horizontal width and largest vertical height. 
    Sign copy shall mean the graphic content of a sign in either permanent or removable words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. 
    Sign face shall mean the area or display surface used for the graphic message. 
    Sign structure shall mean any combination of materials to form a construction for the purpose of attaching, fixing, or otherwise supporting a sign, whether installed on, above, or below the surface of the land, a building, or any other solid surface. 
    Sign height shall mean the vertical distance measured from the highest point of a sign to the lowest grade beneath the sign. 
    Subdivision identification sign shall mean a monument or wall sign identifying a recognized subdivision, condominium complex, or residential development. 
    Temporary sign shall mean a sign constructed of either rigid or non-rigid material, and physically attached to, or freestanding on, the ground or any improvement thereon, and designed or intended to be so attached or freestanding impermanently for a limited period of time. 
    Traffic control sign shall mean any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the City, county, state or federal government for traffic direction or traffic control; designating the location of or providing directions to any school, hospital, historical site, or public service, property, or facility; or for warning or informing pedestrians or motorists of any matter related to the operation, maintenance or condition of any public street or public right-of-way. 
    Under canopy sign shall mean a sign suspended beneath a canopy, awning, ceiling, marquee, or roof overhang. 
    Wall sign shall mean a sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or other structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of, the sign. 
    Warning signs shall mean any temporary or permanent sign for warning or informing the public of any hazardous, dangerous or unsafe condition of any public or private property. 
    Window sign shall mean a sign installed on a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
(2534 2862 2881 3018 3328) 
11-11-3. - General Sign Provisions. 
(A)  Sign Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided by section 11-11-4, W.M.C., it shall be unlawful for the owner, manager, or occupant of any property located within the City to erect, maintain, or permit the erection or maintenance of any temporary or permanent sign on such property without first obtaining a sign permit through the following procedure: 
(1)  An application for a sign permit shall be filed with the Community Development Department and must contain the following information, unless waived by the Community Development Director or his/her designee. 
(a)  An elevation of the proposed sign, drawn to scale, showing the sign that is proposed to be erected and the message that it will carry. 
(b)  The color scheme and construction materials of the sign. 
(c)  A plot plan showing the location of the sign on the property. If the sign is to be attached to the face of the building, the elevation shall also show the outline of the building. 
(2)  If, after review, the City staff finds the sign to be in conformity with this Code and the building code of the City, and any applicable official development plans, a sign permit shall be issued. If the application is denied, the community development director or his/her designee shall inform the applicant of the reason for denial. 
(3)  An application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as required in Subsection 11-9-3(E), W.M.C. 
(4)  Any person installing, structurally altering or relocating a sign for which a permit has been issued shall notify the City upon completion of the work. The City may require a final inspection, including an electrical inspection. 
(B)  Measurement: In determining the size of any sign, the following procedure shall be used: 
(1)  For signs involving individual letters that are placed flat against the facade of a building or that are to be supported on individual standards and that will be freestanding, the area of said sign will be considered to be that of a single rectangle or square encompassing all of the letters used to convey the message of the sign, and shall include the open space between letters of words within that square or rectangle. 
(2)  For signs, either freestanding or facade mounted, with background material, the area measurement shall be determined by the area of the entire sign, including the background material. 
(3)  For all two-faced freestanding or projecting signs, the area measurement shall be determined by measurement of one face of the sign only. 
(4)  The height of any sign shall be determined by the distance between the topmost portion of the sign, or the structure supporting the sign, whichever is higher, and the elevation of the ground at the base of the sign or its structure or support. 
(C)  Altering or Moving Existing Signs: A new permit shall be required prior to moving an existing sign from one location to another or altering a sign in any manner, other than for normal maintenance. An alteration to an existing sign that requires a new permit includes, but is not limited to, a change in text, height, size, shape, construction material, or lighting. 
(D)  Lawful Nonconforming Signs: Any legal, nonconforming sign that exists prior to the adoption or amendment of this Code may be continued, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such sign shall be enlarged or altered in such a manner as to increase its nonconformity; however, any sign or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
(2)  If any such sign or nonconforming portion thereof be destroyed by any means or removed for any reason, voluntary or otherwise, to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of said removal or destruction, it shall not be reconstructed or reassembled except in conformity with this chapter. 
(3)  If any such sign should, for any reason, be removed from its location, it shall conform to the provisions of the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(E)  Signs in Planned Unit Developments: All official development plan documents shall contain a section in which the specifications for all allowed signs are included. The plan shall contain overall sign program performance standards that address size, height, design, lighting, color, materials, location and method of construction to assure that all signage within the planned unit development (PUD) is designed in a harmonious, consistent, and compatible manner. Signs permitted in PUD's shall be all signs that are permitted pursuant to Sections 11-11-4, 11-11-6 and 11-11-7, W.M.C. Development standards, as specified in those sections, may be modified, if it can be shown that the conditions within a particular PUD warrant a sign program with standards that do not conform to standard zoning districts, subject to the provisions of Section 11-11-8, W.M.C. Any variance approved in accordance with section 11-11-8, W.M.C., shall be specifically listed on the official development plan. 
(2534 2862 3328) 
11-11-4. - Signs Not Requiring Permits. 
    Subject to the provisions of Section 11-11-5, W.M.C., the following signs, which shall be non-illuminated unless specifically stated to the contrary, are permitted in all zoning districts and require no permit for erection. 
(A)  Public Signs: Any sign erected by any governmental entity in conjunction with the conduct of any governmental program, operation or activity, including, but not limited to, federal, state, county and City governments, and school and recreation districts. 
(B)  Interior or Window Signs: As defined in Section 11-11-2, W.M.C. Such signs shall be limited to 30 percent of the total window area of each separate place of business. Window signs may be further restricted for PUD developments. 
(C)  Commemorative Plaques: Any memorial or commemorative plaque or tablet that contains the primary name of a building, the date of erection and use of the building when the sign is built into the building or mounted flat against the wall of the building, or is designed to designate any particular location of historical significance as determined by the City. 
(D)  Address Signs: Any sign attached to a building designed to identify a particular parcel of land, provided such sign contains only the street address and name of the owner of the property or the name of the property and does not exceed two square feet in area for residential land uses and five square feet in area for nonresidential land uses. 
(E)  Special Event Signs: Signs and decorations for special events, such as a philanthropic campaign, church, circus, carnival, holidays or of community celebration, provided that such are removed within ten days of the termination of the event of which they are a part. 
(F)  Real Estate Signs: Temporary, non-illuminated real estate signs indicating the availability for sale, rent, or lease of a specific lot, building, or portion of a building upon which the sign is erected or displayed that do not exceed six square feet in total area and four feet in height for residential properties or 20 square feet in total area and six feet in height for nonresidential properties and are located on properties to be sold, limited to one such sign per street frontage. Such signs shall not remain in place more than seven days following sale or rental of the subject property. 
(G)  Building Identification Signs: Signs that identify by name or number individual buildings within institutional or residential building group complexes that are limited to signs attached to the building, not more than two signs per building, and not more than four square feet each. These signs may be illuminated or non-illuminated. 
(H)  Directional Signs: 
(1)  Traffic Signs. Private traffic directional signs guiding or directing vehicular or pedestrian traffic onto or off of a lot or within a lot, when such do not exceed three square feet per sign per face in area and eight feet in height, do not contain any advertising or trade name identification, and are non-illuminated, internally or indirectly illuminated. Private traffic control signals shall conform to the standards of the Colorado Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and exceed three square feet per face in area, but shall not exceed seven square feet per face. Such signs shall not exceed four feet in height and shall be set back at least five feet from the property line. 
(2)  On-Premise Information Signs. Signs commonly associated with and limited to information and directions related to the permitted use on the lot on which the sign is located, provided that each such sign does not exceed two square feet in total area and is non-illuminated, internally illuminated or indirectly illuminated. This category shall be interpreted to include such signs as "No Smoking," "Restroom," "No Solicitors," "Self Service," "Vacancy," and similar informational signs located at least five feet from the property line. 
(3)  Off-Premises Informational Directional Sign. A single or double-faced sign designed to give direction to a church, school, philanthropic organization, or similar use of a non-retail or business nature. Sign may contain only name of organization, direction, and number of blocks. Sign shall be metal, no more than two square feet, and shall be mounted on minimum two-inch square steel pole. Bottom of sign shall be a minimum of seven feet above grade. No more than five such signs shall be permitted for each individual organization. 
(I)  Flags: For any single lot, one flag, pennant or insignia that does not exceed the following requirements: 
Building Height Maximum Height of Pole Maximum Flag Size 1 story 20 feet 3x5 2 stories 25 feet 4x6 3-4 stories 30 feet 5x8 5 stories or more 35 feet 6x10  
(J)  Holiday Decorations: Temporary decorations or displays, when such are clearly incidental to and are customarily and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday or celebration. Such decorations shall not include the name of any business or product. 
(K)  Construction Signs: A temporary sign not exceeding 32 square feet announcing subdivision, development, construction or other improvement of a property on which the sign is located by a builder, contractor or other person furnishing services, materials or labor to said premises. For the purposes of this Code, a "construction sign" shall not be construed to be a "real estate sign," as defined herein, and shall contain only project name; developer, architect, builder, and/or consultants; lending institution; and opening date. 
(L)  Garage Sale Sign: A sign advertising the existence of a garage sale for the sale of personal property and advertising the date, time and location of the garage sale, with such signs having a maximum area of six square feet, a maximum height of three feet, and a minimum setback of ten feet, posted for the period three days prior and three days following the date of the garage sale. Such signs shall not block or interfere with traffic visibility. 
(M)  Non-Commercial Signs: A sign containing political, religious, or other noncommercial speech, as defined by applicable federal and state court opinions. 
(1)  Permitted in all zone districts. 
(2)  Maximum area 50 square feet in Zones T1, C1, C2, M1 and O1 and in non-residential areas of planned unit developments; six square feet in all other zones and in residential areas of planned unit developments. 
(3)  Maximum height-six feet. 
(4)  No limitation in number. 
(5)  Nothing in this subsection (M) shall be applied in a manner that results in a non-commercial sign being treated in a less favorable or more restrictive manner than an authorized commercial sign in the same zoning district. 
(N)  Bus Shelter Signs: Any signs that are incorporated into a shelter for the public's use of any public transportation systems pursuant to agreement or lease with the City. 
(2534 2862 3328) 
11-11-5. - Prohibited Signs. 
    Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, the following types of signs are prohibited in all districts: 
(A)  Any sign not specifically permitted by this Code. 
(B)  Any permanent or temporary sign on or over any public property, except public signs as defined in Subsection 11-11-4(A), W.M.C., and traffic control signs and warning signs as defined in Section 11-11-2, W.M.C. 
(C)  Signs with visible moving, revolving, or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement, or any description or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic or mechanical means, and all animated and electronically activated changeable signs as defined in Section 11-11-2, W.M.C., except for time-temperature-date signs, traditional barber poles, gauges, and dials that may be animated to the extent necessary to display correct measurement, menu board, order confirmation signs, and gasoline pricing signs at fueling facilities. An exception to this subsection (C) must comply with all other regulations of this chapter, such as size and placement regulations. 
(D)  Signs that are animated with lights or illuminations that flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, vary in intensity, vary in color, or use intermittent electrical pulsations. 
(E)  Strings of light bulbs used in connection with commercial premises for commercial purposes (other than traditional holiday decorations), pennants, streamers, balloons, and any other inflatable object or material shall also be prohibited. 
(F)  Imitations of Official Government Protective or Warning Signs: Any sign using the word "stop" or "danger," or that otherwise presents or implies the need or requirement of stopping, or a caution for the existence of danger, or that is a copy of, or that for any reason is likely to be confused with any municipally approved official signs, such as those signs approved and shown in the Uniform Traffic Code. 
(G)  Any sign that obstructs any window, door, fire escape, stairway, ladder, or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress, or egress for any building, as required by law. 
(H)  Portable Signs: 
(1)  Any sign displayed on a vehicle, when said vehicle is used primarily for the purpose of displaying such sign when used outside a building. Any advertising device used on a vehicle meeting the following criteria shall be excepted: 
(a)  Such vehicle at no time remains in one visible place for more than 24 consecutive hours; 
(b)  Such vehicle is actually used by its owner or another as a means of transportation of people or goods; and 
(c)  Such vehicle displays current registration and is insured to operate on public streets in the State of Colorado. 
(2)  Sandwich board signs. 
(I)  Any sign that violates any provision of any law of the State of Colorado relative to outside advertising. 
(J)  Temporary signs attached to utility poles or utility boxes that have the intent of advertising merchandise or services for sale. 
(K)  Any sign that causes any direct glare into or upon any residential building or premises, other than the building or premises to which the sign is attached. 
(L)  Exposed neon signs and lighting. All roof signs. 
(M)  Any attached sign projecting above the roof line of a structure. 
(N)  Abandoned signs as defined in Section 11-11-2, W.M.C. Any such sign abandoned for a period of 90 days or longer shall be considered an illegal sign. This provision shall not apply to permanent signs accessory to businesses that are open only on a seasonal basis, provided there is clear intent to continue operation of the business. 
(O)  Off-premise advertising or directional sign, except as allowed in Subsections 11-11-4 (H)(3) and 11-11-4(L), W.M.C. 
(P)  Back-lit awnings. 
(Q)  Freestanding monument signs greater than 100 square feet in size. 
(R)  Signs achieved by light projection on a surface. 
(2534 2862 2983 3018 3328) 
11-11-6. - Temporary Signs Requiring Permits. 
(A)  Temporary Project Identification Sign: 
(1)  Permitted in all zoning districts. 
(2)  Characteristics. Intended to identify or advertise structures being built, sold, leased, rented or remodeled. 
(3)  Maximum area. 
(a)  For developments over ten acres in size, 100 square feet. 
(b)  For developments ten acres or less in size and individual structures on lots over two acres in size, 60 square feet. 
(c)  For individual lots two acres in size or less, 32 square feet. 
(4)  Maximum height. 
(a)  For signs over 60 square feet in area, 12 feet. 
(b)  For signs over 32 square feet in area, but less than 60 square feet in area, eight feet. 
(c)  For signs 32 square feet in area or less, six feet. 
(5)  Minimum setback. Thirty feet. 
(6)  Limitation in number. One sign per 60 acres, not to exceed a total of four, and not to exceed an aggregate of 200 square feet. 
(7)  Restrictions, additions, clarifications and exceptions. 
(a)  Must be located on the property being advertised. Off-site signs are not permitted. 
(b)  Signs shall be unlit. 
(B)  Temporary Outside Signs: 
(1)  Permitted in zoning districts B1, C1, PUD and M1. 
(2)  Characteristics. A sign, banner, or similar device, not including pennants on a string or rope, or display that is intended for a temporary period of display for the purpose of announcing a special event for a business, such as a grand opening, a sale or a new service. Said sign may be constructed of cloth, canvas, cardboard, wallboard, plywood or other light temporary material. Sign must be attached flat against a building. 
(3)  Maximum Area. Forty square feet per sign. 
(4)  Maximum Height. May not project above the roof line on the building to which the sign is attached. 
(5)  Minimum Allowable Setback. Same setback as the building to which the sign is attached. 
(6)  Limitation in Number. One per street frontage, not to exceed two signs. 
(7)  Restrictions, Additions, Clarifications, and Exceptions. 
(a)  May be erected for a period not to exceed 30 consecutive days or 60 days in any one-year period for any particular business. 
(b)  Must be removed at the expiration of the temporary permit. 
(2534 2862 3328) 
11-11-7. - Permanent Signs Requiring Permits. 
(A)  Monument Signs: 
(1)  Permitted in zoning districts PUD, B1, C1, C2, T1, and M1. 
(2)  Maximum Area. 
(a)  For developments over ten acres in size or greater, 100 square feet. 
(b)  For developments less than ten acres, but greater than two acres in size, 60 square feet. 
(c)  For developments two acres in size or less, 32 square feet. 
(d)  For individual uses over 100,000 square feet in area, signage restrictions may vary from the provisions of this section and shall be approved on an official development plan. 
(3)  Maximum Height. 
(a)  For signs over 60 square feet in area, 25 feet. 
(b)  For signs over 32 square feet in area, but less than 60 square feet in area, eight feet. 
(c)  For signs 32 square feet in area or less, six feet. 
(4)  Minimum Allowable Setback From Property Line. 
(a)  For signs over eight feet in height or over 60 square feet in area, 25 feet. 
(b)  For signs eight feet in height or less and under 60 square feet in area, ten feet. 
(5)  Limitation and Number. 
(a)  For developments or individual structures over ten acres in size, one per frontage with a maximum of two, said signs to be identical in design. 
(b)  For developments or individual structures ten acres in size or less, one. 
(6)  Restrictions, Clarifications and Exceptions. 
(a)  Identification signs for retail business centers or office/industrial/technical parks or centers shall contain only the name, address and logo or trademark of the office park or center. Such signs may include the name of not more than six of the tenants therein, with said names to be integrated into the overall design of the sign, with the name of the center utilizing at least 25 percent of the sign area. Minimum letter height for tenant names shall be eight inches for 32 square foot signs, ten inches for 60 square foot signs, and 12 inches for 100 square foot signs. 
(b)  Illuminated signs are permitted. 
(c)  For properties of ten acres or more, no monument sign over eight feet in height is permitted within 175 feet of any residential district boundary or residential development. 
(d)  Supporting structure of monument signs must be solid construction at least two-thirds the dimension of the width and thickness of the sign it supports. 
(e)  Where a non-retail business center or office/industrial/technical park or center is planned as a series of individual structures on individual lots with each individual lot having frontage on a public street, each individual structure may be permitted to have freestanding signs in accordance with this paragraph, if said sign(s) are included and approved on an official development plan(s). Where a non-retail business center or office/industrial/technical park is planned as a series of individual structures on a single lot, each individual structure is permitted to have a freestanding sign of not more than 32 square feet in area and six feet in height. Such signs shall be consistent in design and color. 
(f)  Monument signs must be located on the premises of the use being advertised or identified. For use in this section, premises does not include easements or similar adjacent parcels of land. 
(g)  Menu boards. Menu boards in conjunction with restaurant or other drive-through pick up activities may be allowed under the following restrictions: 
(i)  Not more than two such signs. 
(ii)  Twenty-five-foot setback from property lines. 
(iii)  Forty square feet maximum area. 
(iv)  Six-foot maximum height. 
(v)  May be freestanding or wall mounted. 
(vi)  One order confirmation board may also be provided with the following restrictions: 
a)  Twenty-five-foot minimum setback from property lines. 
b)  Three square foot maximum sign area. 
c)  Four feet maximum height. 
d)  May be freestanding, wall mounted, or incorporated into the menu board. 
e)  May be 100 percent electronic changeable copy, and copy may be changed without time restriction. 
f)  Signs must be screened or oriented away from public streets. 
(h)  When shopping centers, business centers, and office/industrial/technical parks or centers are to be developed or redeveloped, overall sign program performance standards to be included in the official development plan shall be submitted that address size, location, height, design, lighting, color, materials, and type and method of construction to insure that all signage within the center is designed in a harmonious, consistent, and compatible manner. The overall sign program shall be included in required official development plans. 
(i)  Individual uses over 100,000 square feet in area, signage restrictions may vary from the provisions of this section and shall be as approved on an official development plan. 
(j)  Automated gasoline pricing signs may use internal scrolling or magnetic mechanisms, but may not contain a light emitting diode (LED) and may not change pricing more often than twice in a 24-hour period. 
(7)  Institutional Use Monument Signs. 
(a)  Maximum Area: 
(i)  For developments ten acres in size or greater, 100 square feet. 
(ii)  For developments less than ten acres, but greater than two acres in size, 60 square feet. 
(iii)  For developments two acres in size or less, 32 square feet. 
(b)  Maximum height: 
(i)  For signs over 60 square feet, 25 feet. 
(ii)  For signs 32 square feet to 60 square feet, eight feet. 
(iii)  For signs less than 32 square feet, six feet. 
(c)  An electronic reader board component of an institution monument sign shall be allowed, which component shall be no more than one-third of the total sign size or 30 square feet, whichever is less. The text on an electronic reader board may be changed no more frequently than every 30 minutes. 
(B)  Wall Signs: 
(1)  Permitted in zoning districts PUD, T1, B1, C1 C2 and M1. 
(2)  Characteristics. Intended to identify individual businesses, offices, office buildings, industrial, technical and employment establishments. Signs may be either placed flat against the building or projecting from the building. 
(3)  Maximum Area. 
(a)  The greater of 30 square feet or one square foot sign area for each lineal foot of building or tenant frontage, not to exceed 150 square feet in area for all types of signs, except that signs composed of individual raised letters may contain two square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of building or tenant frontage, not to exceed 300 square feet in area. This criteria shall not apply to signs for individual tenants in buildings that are primarily multi-tenant office buildings. 
(b)  Combinations of cabinet and individual letter signs shall not be permitted, except that a cabinet-style logo not exceeding nine square feet may be added to individual letter signs. The total square feet permitted for such signs shall not exceed the total permitted in sub-subsection (3)(a), above. 
(4)  Maximum Height. May not project above the roof line of the building to which sign is attached. 
(5)  Minimum Allowable Setback. Same setback as the building to which sign is attached. 
(6)  Limitation in Number. One sign per street frontage not to exceed two frontages, or three frontages with an area not to exceed the total sign area permitted for two frontages. 
(7)  Restrictions, Additions, Clarifications and Exceptions. 
(a)  Projecting signs may not exceed 30 square feet in area. Projecting signs may not project over public right-of-way or more than five feet from the building wall. 
(b)  The total length of any individual sign may not exceed 75 percent of the length of the frontage of the establishment, store front or tenant space on which the sign is placed. 
(c)  Illuminated signs are permitted. 
(d)  Buildings that are primarily office buildings may have no tenant or user signs above the first floor, with the exception that building identification signs may be located above the first floor. 
(e)  Changeable copy signs are permitted for motion picture theaters or theater complexes with a total maximum area not to exceed the greater of 80 square feet or 30 square feet per individual theater. 
(f)  Where approved on an official development plan, the total allowable square footage of signage for an individual use containing over 20,000 square feet of gross floor area may be divided into a primary sign and not more than two secondary signs, with each secondary sign not to exceed more than 60 square feet in area. 
(g)  For individual uses over 100,000 square feet in area, signage restrictions may vary from the provisions of this section and shall be as approved on an official development plan. 
(h)  Tenant sign. For multi-tenant office buildings, a maximum of 40 square feet per sign, 120 square feet per frontage shall conform to sub-subsection (7)(b) and (7)(e) The building identification sign shall be in conformance with sub-subsection (7)(b), above, with a maximum of 100 square feet, except signs composed of individual letters that will have a maximum of 200 square feet. 
(i)  When shopping centers, business centers, and office/industrial/technical parks or centers are to be developed or redeveloped, overall sign program performance standards shall be submitted that address size, height, design, lighting, color, materials, and type and method of construction to insure that all signage within the center is designed in a harmonious, consistent, and compatible manner. 
(j)  Wall signs must be located on the portion of the building in which the business being advertised is located. 
(k)  Wall signs may not be located on the rear of buildings that abut a residential zone district or property. 
(l)  Automated gasoline pricing signs may use internal scrolling or magnetic mechanisms, but may not contain a light emitting diode (LED) and may not change pricing more often than twice in a 24 hour period. 
(C)  Directional/Informational Signs: 
(1)  Permitted in zoning districts T1, B1, PUD, C2, C1, and M1. 
(2)  Characteristics. A freestanding sign intended to provide information and directions related to the principal permitted use on that lot. 
(3)  Maximum Area. 
(a)  Wall sign, 15 square feet. 
(b)  Freestanding sign, five square feet. 
(4)  Maximum Height. 
(a)  Wall sign, eight feet. 
(b)  Freestanding sign, three feet. 
(5)  Minimum Allowable Setback. Twenty-five feet from the property line. 
(6)  Limitation in Number. Two. 
(7)  Restrictions, Additions, Clarifications and Exceptions. Illuminated signs are permitted. 
(D)  Directory Sign for Retail Shopping Centers: 
(1)  Permitted in zoning districts B1 and C1. 
(2)  Characteristics. A freestanding sign intended to list and locate all merchants within the center for pedestrian or internal automobile traffic. 
(3)  Maximum Area. 
(a)  For a retail center four acres or less in area, 16 square feet. 
(b)  For a retail center over four acres in area, 30 square feet. 
(4)  Minimum Allowable Setback. Fifty feet from property line. 
(5)  Limitation in Number. 
(a)  For retail center four acres or less in area, one sign. 
(b)  For retail center over four acres in area, one per four acres, not to exceed four signs. 
(6)  Restriction, Additions, Clarifications and Exceptions. Internally illuminated signs are permitted. 
(E)  Permanent Residential Subdivision Identification Signs: 
(1)  Permitted in zoning districts PUD, RE, R1, RA, R2, R3, R4, R5 and T1. 
(2)  Characteristics. A freestanding sign intended to provide identification of a residential subdivision by name and logo only. 
(3)  Maximum Area. Forty square feet. 
(4)  Maximum Height. Seven feet. 
(5)  Minimum Allowable Setback. Three feet from the curb. This sign may be located in the right-of-way, but not over existing or future utilities. Location and placement shall insure traffic visibility as determined by the City. 
(6)  Limitation in Number. One per subdivision or one per each arterial or collector street. Signage may be split and two signs may be permitted per each arterial or collector street entrance; however, no more than 40 square feet of signage may be located at any such entrance. 
(7)  Restrictions, Additions, Clarifications and Exceptions: 
(a)  A right-of-way maintenance agreement must be on file with the City signed by the responsible party from the homeowners association, if the signs(s) are to be located in public right-of-way. 
(b)  External lighting is permitted. 
(c)  Sign material and design must be approved by the City. 
(d)  Under unusual hardship circumstances, as determined appropriate by the City Manager, a single off-site sign may be permitted with the permission of the property owner on whose property said sign would be located. Such a sign will have a maximum area of 20 square feet and a maximum height of three feet. 
(F)  Home Occupation Signs: 
(1)  Permitted in all zoning districts. 
(2)  Characteristics. To identify a home occupation. Wall or window signs only. 
(3)  Maximum Area. One square foot. 
(4)  Maximum Height. Below the eave of the building on which the sign is located. 
(5)  Minimum Setback. Must be attached to the front of the building on which the sign is located. 
(6)  Limitation in Number. One. 
(7)  Restrictions, Additions, Clarifications and Exceptions. Signs may not be illuminated. 
(G)  Off-Site Commercial Development Directional Signs: 
(1)  Permitted for commercial establishments on out-parcels surrounding a regional shopping center with access to a public street, which street connects to an arterial street only through use of a private road or easement. 
(2)  Characteristics. A permanent ground sign intended to direct vehicular traffic through the private roads or easements of a regional shopping center to a commercial establishment. 
(3)  Location. Such signs shall be permitted next to the private drives within the center with written permission of the owner of the parcel for the sole purpose of directing vehicular traffic through the regional shopping center. All such signs shall be located outside the required sight distance triangles. 
(4)  Maximum Area. Sixteen square feet per sign. 
(5)  Maximum Height. Four feet. 
(6)  Limitation in Number. Four per commercial establishment. 
(7)  Restrictions, Clarifications and Exceptions. 
(a)  Maximum of one sign on each corner (the intersection of two private roads or a private road and a public road) leading to the commercial establishment. 
(b)  Co-Location: Where more than one commercial establishment requests signs under this section, all establishments will be required to use the same sign structures. Such joint signs shall not exceed the sign restrictions for the individual signs. 
(c)  Maintenance: Signs erected under this section shall be structurally sound and maintained to the satisfaction of the City or to the regional shopping center, so as not to become a nuisance to the surrounding businesses or to the public. 
(d)  Sign Design, Color and Construction: The entire sign structure shall be of neutral colors, white, cream, tan or beige. Sign panels shall be coordinated with other directional signs and may be of any color except fluorescent, Day-Glo, or other reflective or brilliant colors. 
(e)  Signs shall be the minimum number necessary to direct traffic to the establishment. Such signs may only contain the name of the establishment, a directional arrow, or directional words. 
(f)  Supporting structure of ground signs shall be of solid construction at least two-thirds the dimension of the width and thickness of the sign it supports. 
(8)  Approval. A master sign plan that indicates the location and conformance with this section shall be required to be submitted for review and approval by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(H)  Flags: 
(1)  Permitted in zoning districts PUD, B1, C1, C2, M1 and T1. 
(2)  Maximum Height. 
Building Height Maximum Height of Pole Maximum Flag Size 1 story 20 feet 3x5 2 stories 25 feet 4x6 3-4 stories 30 feet 5x8 5 stories or more 35 feet 6x10  
(3)  Setback. Ten feet. 
(4)  Limitation in Number. One per street frontage. Additional flags may be permitted through the official development plan process, subject to approval by the Planning Commission or City Council, as required. 
(5)  Maximum Area. Total area of all flags in excess of that shown in the above table shall be included in the maximum allowable area for wall signs on the site in accordance with Subsection 11-11-7(B), W.M.C. 
(2534 2567 2862 2881 2982 3328 3599) 
11-11-8. - Variances. 
(A)  Signs in Planned Unit Developments: All signs proposed for or within a planned unit development may apply for modifications to the requirements of this sign code by making application to the planning commission using the procedures specified in Section 11-5-8 or 11-5-10, W.M.C. Such variances may be granted administratively, if the provisions of this Code are not exceeded by more than 20 percent. Such variances shall consider sub-subsections (1) through (5) under subsection (B), below. 
(B)  Signs Not in Planned Unit Developments: All signs within any zone district other than planned unit development may apply for modifications to the requirements of this Sign Code by making application to the Planning Commission using the procedures specified in Section 2-2-8, W.M.C. In considering a request for a variance to the Sign Code, the planning commission shall determine that: 
(1)  There are special circumstances or conditions, such as the existence of buildings, topography, vegetation, sign structures, or other matters on adjacent lots or within the adjacent public right-of-way that would substantially restrict the effectiveness of the sign in question; provided, however, that such special circumstances or conditions must be peculiar to the particular business or enterprise to which the applicant desires to draw attention and do not apply generally to all businesses or enterprises. 
(2)  The variance, if authorized, will weaken neither the general purpose of the sign code nor the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which the sign is located. 
(3)  The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the zoning district in which the sign is located. 
(4)  The variance, if authorized, will not substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent conforming property. 
(5)  The planning commission may not grant any application for a type of sign that would not otherwise be permitted under this Code. 
(2862 3634) 
11-11-9. - Enforcement. 
(A)  Public Nuisance: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(1)  Abatement of public nuisances shall be according to the provisions of Title VIII, Chapter 4, W.M.C. 
(2)  Summary abatement procedures (Subsection 8-4-4(A), W.M.C.) may be followed for the following reasons: 
(a)  Any sign whose condition or placement is found by the Code Enforcement Officer to constitute an imminent danger of serious injury to persons or property, including, but not limited to, danger of collapse or blocking views of streets, alleys, driveways, or other entrances and exits from public ways. 
(b)  Any sign placed unlawfully in the public right-of-way. Such signs may be immediately removed and destroyed without notice or liability. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine or imprisonment, or both, pursuant to Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. Each day that a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter continues to exist shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct violation. 
(2862 3564) 
CHAPTER 12. - RENTAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

11-12-1. - General Intent. 
(A)  Title: These regulations shall be known as the Rental Property Maintenance Code of the City of Westminster, herein referred to as the "Rental Code." 
(B)  Purpose: The purpose of this Rental Code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of all residential structures available for rent within the City. This Rental Code establishes minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities, for light, ventilation and heating; for safety from fire; for the use and amount of space for human occupancy; and for the safe and sanitary maintenance of residential rental properties. 
(C)  Scope: The provisions of this Rental Code shall apply to all existing residential rental buildings, and structures, excluding manufactured homes, and all existing premises, or portions thereof used, designed, or intended to be used for dwelling purposes on a rental basis, as well as the site, including parking lots, driveways and landscaping, and accessory structures, such as fences, retaining walls, sheds, and other such structures. Rooming houses, congregate residences or lodging houses shall comply with all the requirements of this rental code. Except as provided herein, properties, including buildings, or portions thereof, equipment, devices and safeguards that were required by the building codes shall be maintained in conformance with the building codes under which they were installed, provided such continued use is not dangerous to life. Where there are conflicts between the building codes and this Rental Code, the provisions of this rental code shall apply. 
(D)  Nonconforming Rights: Except for smoke detectors and carbon monoxide alarms as required by Subsections 11-12-5(B) and 11-12-5(C), W.M.C., of this Rental Code, existing residential rental units that were constructed and approved under a previous edition of the building codes shall be considered as demonstrating compliance with the construction provisions of this rental code, provided that the approved construction is not dangerous to life or health. Nothing in this Rental Code shall be construed to allow the degradation of those systems, devices and equipment required by the building codes under which the building was constructed. 
(2532 2534 2798 3560) 
11-12-2. - Minimum Standards. 
    No person shall lease to another for occupancy any structure that does not comply with the requirements of this Rental Code. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of compliance as required herein. 
(2532 2534 3560) 
11-12-3. - Definitions. 
(A)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Rental Code, shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Agent shall mean a manager or operator, or any person, agent, firm or corporation who is designated in writing by the owner to act as the representative of the owner on issues related to a rental property or rental dwelling or for receipt of notices related to a rental property or rental dwelling. 
    Bedroom shall mean any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes. 
    Building shall mean any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
    Building codes shall mean any of the codes currently adopted by the City as part of Title XI, Chapter 9, of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
    Common authority shall mean the status of having joint access or control over a leased premise for most purposes. 
    Floor area shall mean the area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts and courts. The floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the useable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. 
    Habitable space shall mean the space in a building for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable space. 
    Imminent danger shall mean a condition that could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time. 
    Income-restricted property shall mean a unit of rental property over which the owner, whether a non-profit or a for-profit entity, lacks the sole discretion to increase rent due to state or federal law. By way of example, and not limitation, units within a Section 8 housing project, as defined by 42 U.S.C. § 1437(f), as amended, as well as properties for which the owner takes an income tax credit pursuant to Sections 38 and 42 of the Internal Revenue Code (Title 26, U.S.C.), as amended, qualify as income-restricted properties. However, units not within a Section 8 housing project that are rented with tenant-based Section 8 vouchers, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1437(f), as amended, do not qualify as income-restricted properties. 
    Infestation shall mean the presence within or around a structure of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests of such kind, or in such numbers, as to cause a hazard to health. 
    Lease shall mean: 
(1)  An agreement by which an owner gives up to a tenant, for valuable consideration, possession and use of his property or a portion thereof for a definite term, at the end of which term the owner has an absolute right to retake control and use of the property; or 
(2)  The act of an owner giving to a tenant, for valuable consideration, possession and use of his property or a portion thereof for a definite term, at the end of which term the owner has an absolute right to retake control and use of the property. 
    Occupancy shall mean the purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied. 
    Owner shall mean any person, agent, firm or corporation, or a designated representative of the same, having a legal or equitable interest in a rental dwelling or a rental property; or otherwise having control of such property, including the guardian of an estate and an executor or administrator of an estate when ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
    Person shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other type of entity capable of owning or managing property, or an agent, servant, or employee of any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other entity capable of owning or managing property. 
    Premises shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land, including any buildings thereon. 
    Property shall mean one lot or adjacent lots under common ownership. 
    Rental dwelling shall mean any building or buildings, or portion thereof, on a property under common ownership consisting of no more than three units that provides shelter for human habitation or residential purpose, any portion of which is leased by the owner for occupation by a tenant. "Rental dwelling" shall not mean hotels; motels; hospitals, state-licensed residential care facilities, assisted living facilities, or nursing homes. 
    Rental property shall mean any building or buildings, or portion thereof, on one property under common ownership consisting of more than three units that provides shelter for human habitation or residential purposes, any portion of which is leased by the owner for occupation by a tenant. "Rental property" shall not mean hotels; motels; hospitals; state licensed residential care facilities, assisted living facilities, or nursing homes; or a facility qualified as life care institution pursuant to Section 12-13-101, et seq., C.R.S., as amended. 
    Structure shall mean that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
    Tenant shall mean a person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof. 
    Unit shall mean a rental property or a rental dwelling, in whole or in part, that is separately available to be leased and that contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, as required by the building codes. 
(B)  Words, terms and phrases used in this rental code and not defined above shall have the same meaning as assigned by the building codes currently adopted by the City in Title XI, Chapter 9, of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(2532 2534 3560 3601) 
11-12-4. - Space and Occupancy Standards. 
(A)  Improper Occupancy: Buildings or structures shall not be used for purposes other than those for which the building or structure was designed or intended or in violation of any other provisions of the Westminster Municipal Code or ordinances. 
(B)  Room Dimensions: 
(1)  Ceiling Heights. Habitable rooms in units shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet. In rooms with sloped ceilings, the required ceiling height shall be provided in at least 50 percent of the room. No portion of any room with a ceiling height of less than five feet shall be considered as contributing to the minimum floor area as required in subsection (2) below. 
(2)  Floor Area. 
(a)  Every unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of habitable floor space for the first occupant and an additional 100 square feet of floor space for each additional occupant. Every room used for sleeping purposes shall have at least 70 square feet of floor space for the first occupant and an additional 30 square feet of floor space for each additional occupant. 
(b)  The building official may waive or modify the above-stated minimums in appropriate circumstances, such as the birth or adoption of additional children, a temporary need for medical care for a family member, or care of children by a non-custodial parent. 
(3)  Width. No room used for living or sleeping purposes shall be less than seven feet in any dimension. Each toilet shall be installed in a clear space of at least 27 inches in width. 
(C)  Light and Ventilation: 
(1)  General. For the purpose of determining light or ventilation required by this section, any room may be considered as a portion of an adjoining room, if one-half of the common wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening of at least ten percent of the floor area of the interior room. 
(2)  Light. Every habitable room within a unit shall be provided with windows or skylights with an area of at least ten percent of the floor area. All public hallways, stairways and other exit ways shall be illuminated at all times with not less than five foot-candles at the floor level. 
(3)  Ventilation. 
(a)  Habitable rooms within a unit shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of at least one openable exterior window or skylight with an area of not less than one-twentieth of the floor area with a minimum of five square feet. 
(b)  In lieu of required exterior openings for natural ventilation, an approved mechanical ventilation system may be provided. Such system shall be capable of providing two air changes per hour in all habitable rooms and public hallways. In such case, one-fifth of the required air supply shall be taken from the outside. 
(c)  Bathrooms, water closet compartments and similar spaces shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an area not less than one-twentieth of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of one and one-half square feet. 
(d)  In lieu of required exterior openings for natural ventilation in bathrooms containing a bathtub or shower and similar rooms, a mechanical ventilation system connected directly to the exterior, capable of providing five air changes per hour, shall be provided. The point of discharge of exhaust containing only a toilet or lavatory, or combination thereof, and similar rooms may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air. 
(D)  Sanitation: 
(1)  Units. Every unit shall be provided with a toilet, lavatory, and either a bathtub or shower. These facilities shall be located within the same building as the occupants and occupants shall not be required to go outside the building or through another dwelling unit to reach the facilities. 
(2)  Fixtures. All plumbing fixtures and piping shall be maintained as provided in the building codes. Each plumbing fixture shall be provided with hot and cold running water necessary for its normal operation and be properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. Plumbing system waste piping shall be maintained free of all sewage obstructions and leaks. Potable water piping shall be free of leaks that cause a consistent flow of water. All plumbing fixtures shall be of smooth, impervious, easily cleanable surfaces and be maintained in safe and sanitary working condition, free of cracks, breaks, rust and leaks. All plumbing fixtures shall be of an approved glazed earthenware type or similar nonabsorbent material. All plumbing fixtures shall be adequately secured, so that no strain is placed on the piping connections. 
(3)  Lavatory Basins. Every room containing a toilet shall have a lavatory located in the same room or in the room immediately adjacent to the room containing the toilet. Laundry tubs, kitchen sinks, or bathtubs are not acceptable substitutes for lavatory purposes. 
(4)  Room Separation. Every room containing a toilet, bathtub or shower shall be completely enclosed by partitions, doors, or windows from floor to ceiling and wall to wall that will afford privacy to the occupant. 
(5)  Bathtub and Shower Enclosures. The interior of every shower enclosure shall be watertight, maintained in sound condition, and be easily cleanable. Walls and floors of every shower enclosure shall be made of smooth, nonabsorbent materials, free of sharp edges, and properly sloped to drain completely. Joints in any bathtub or shower enclosure shall be maintained waterproof with caulking or similar material. Repairs shall be required if more than two square feet of the enclosure wall or floor is no longer waterproof, or more than two linear feet of caulking has failed, or if the leak is causing an unsafe electrical condition. 
(6)  Kitchen Sink. Every unit shall contain a kitchen sink of seamless construction and impervious to water and grease. Where garbage disposals are provided, they shall be in working order, free of leaks, installed per manufacturer installation instructions, and powered by a UL listed power cord. 
(7)  Openings for Piping. All exterior openings into the interior of the building, including those in a crawl space, provided for the passage of piping shall be properly sealed with snug-fitting collars of metal or other material, so as to be rodent and insect resistant and securely fastened in place. 
(8)  Environmental Health. All surfaces in and around the dwelling unit shall be maintained free of mold and mildew. 
(E)  Structural Requirements: 
(1)  General. Roofs, floors, walls, foundations, ceilings, stairs, handrails, guardrails, doors, porches, all other structural components, and all appurtenances thereto shall be capable of resisting any and all forces and loads to which they may be normally subjected, and shall be kept in sound condition and in good repair. 
(2)  Foundations. Every foundation shall be maintained plumb and free of open cracks and breaks, kept in sound condition and good repair, and shall be weathertight and watertight. 
(3)  Weather Protection. Every foundation, floor, roof, ceiling, and exterior and interior wall and all exterior doors and windows shall be weathertight and watertight and maintained free of holes, cracks or other defects that admit rain, so as to provide shelter for the occupants against the elements and to otherwise exclude dampness. Windows that are designed to open vertically shall be capable of remaining open without the use of tools, props or special knowledge. 
(4)  Interior Maintenance. Floors, walls, doors and ceilings shall be secure and free of holes, cracks, and breaks. Floor coverings shall be free from any defects that could cause tripping or would prevent the floor from being easily cleaned. Floor coverings such as carpeting, tile, linoleum, and similar material shall be repaired or replaced when more than ten percent of the floor covering area is severely deteriorated or if defects create an unsafe or unsanitary condition. Floor coverings that have tears in excess of six inches that are raised above the floor surface to present a tripping hazard shall be repaired. 
(5)  Drainage. All rain water shall be so drained and conveyed away from every roof and away from every foundation, so as to not cause dampness in basements or in walls, ceilings or floors of any building, or erosion of exterior surfaces. Water shall not be discharged in a manner that adversely affects the safety of the general public. 
(F)  Mechanical Requirements: 
(1)  Heating. 
(a)  Every unit shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a minimum room temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit at a point three feet above the floor in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments. Units shall be supplied with heat during the period of October through April. Electric heating appliances that are not permanently installed, cooking appliances of any type, or decorative appliances shall not be considered heating facilities for the purpose of providing heat as required by this section. Unvented fuel-burning heaters or decorative appliances are not permitted, except as permitted and approved by the building division. 
(b)  All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type and installed as required in the building codes and maintained in safe working condition. Required clearances to protected or unprotected combustible materials shall be maintained for heating equipment, as well as sufficient clearance to permit the cleaning, maintenance, service and repair of the appliance. Required clearances are those listed on the equipment or otherwise required by the building codes. Venting systems for gas-fired appliances shall be maintained in accordance with the building codes. 
(c)  Except within an efficiency dwelling unit, gas-fired water heaters shall not be installed in any sleeping area. Water heating equipment serving any dwelling unit shall be capable of providing water at a temperature of at least 120 degrees Fahrenheit at the fixture outlet and a recovery capacity of at least 20 gallons per hour for each dwelling unit. Water heaters shall be provided with an approved temperature and pressure relief valve and drain extension that terminates at an approved location. 
(d)  Closets containing heating equipment shall be kept free of stored items, combustibles, flammables or accelerants. 
(2)  Electrical. 
(a)  All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with the building codes. All electrical equipment shall be permanently installed and be an integral part of the electrical wiring of the entire building. Electrical appliance or fixture cords shall be protected with proper coverings having no frayed or exposed wiring. 
(b)  Every habitable room, bathroom, kitchen, laundry room and public hallway shall have at least two convenience outlets or one convenience outlet and one electric light fixture. Every water closet compartment, furnace room and public stairway shall contain at least one electric light fixture. Electrical light fixtures should house only those bulbs approved by the manufacturer. Wattage of bulbs shall not exceed the manufacturer's maximum wattage recommendations for the fixture. Exterior fixtures shall be free of missing or broken globes that may leave the bulb exposed to the elements. 
(c)  Breaker panels shall be readily accessible, shall not be blocked or covered by storage or decoration, and shall not be painted shut. There shall be no unapproved openings within any electrical enclosure. 
(3)  Extension Cords. Extension cords shall not be used as permanent electrical wiring or required electrical outlets. No extension cords shall extend or pass from one room to another room. No extension cord shall be placed across any doorway, through any wall or partition, or in an area where such cord is subject to physical damage. 
(G)  Exits: 
(1)  General. All buildings or structures shall be provided with exits, including stairways, handrails, and guardrails, and have access to the public way, as required by the building codes. All doors, windows, corridors, stairways, fire escapes or other means of egress shall be maintained free of stored or discarded materials or other obstructions or locks as to prevent or impede egress from the building or structure. 
(2)  Dwelling Units. Every unit or guest room shall have access directly to the exterior of the building or to a public corridor that leads to the exterior. Sleeping rooms located below the fourth (4th) story and in basements shall have at least one operable window or exterior door meeting the building codes requirements for emergency escape or rescue. These required windows or doors shall be operable from the inside to provide the required full clear opening without the use of separate tools or keys and not requiring special knowledge or effort. 
(H)  Appliances: Appliances, whether supplied by the owner or tenant, shall be maintained in good working condition, free of leaks or other defects, so as not to cause any unsafe or unsanitary condition. 
(2532 2534 2798 3560) 
11-12-5. - Fire Protection. 
(A)  General: Required fire rated assemblies shall be maintained as specified in the building codes and the Fire Code adopted in Title XI, Chapter 10, of the Westminster Municipal Code. Such assemblies shall be properly repaired, restored, or replaced when damaged, altered, breached, penetrated, removed or improperly installed. Fire protection equipment, including, but not limited to, extinguishing systems, fire alarm systems, smoke detectors, and fire extinguishers, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition as required by the fire department. 
(B)  Smoke Detectors: Smoke detectors shall be installed in all units as required by the building codes. 
(C)  Carbon Monoxide Alarms: Any unit that includes fuel-fired appliances or an attached garage in which interior alterations, repairs, fuel-fired appliance replacement or additions, any of which requires a building permit to be issued, have been made, or any unit that has a change in tenant or occupancy, shall have carbon monoxide alarms installed as required by the building codes. 
(D)  Open Flame Cooking Devices: Open flame cooking devices shall be regulated as required by the provisions of the building codes and the Fire Code adopted in Title XI, Chapter 10, of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(2532 2564 3541 3560) 
11-12-6. - Exterior Maintenance and Accessories. 
(A)  Weather Protection: Buildings, or portions thereof, shall have exterior walls that are weathertight and watertight and kept free of deterioration, holes, breaks, or loose boards or coverings. Roof surfaces shall be watertight and not have any defects that will allow water to enter into the structure. 
(B)  Exterior Maintenance: 
(1)  The exterior finish of all structures shall be maintained. If the exterior finish of a structure is paint or stain, the structure shall be painted or stained prior to a time when the exterior finish has substantially deteriorated. Graffiti shall be removed per Title VIII, Chapter 4, of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(2)  All architectural projections, such as cornices, moldings, lintels, sills and similar projections, shall be maintained in good repair and free of defects. 
(3)  All chimneys, antennae (including satellite dishes), vents, gutters and downspouts and similar projections or building accessories shall be structurally sound and in good repair. Such projections shall be properly secured, when applicable, to an exterior wall or roof. 
(C)  Windows and Doors: Windows and exterior glazing shall be soundly and adequately glazed, free from loose and broken glass and cracks that could cause physical injury or allow the elements to enter the structure. Windows and doors are to be maintained so that they can be secured in a closed position. Exterior doors shall be maintained weather tight, watertight and rodent-proof. Exterior doors of units shall be solid core or equivalent and be provided with a deadbolt locking device that tightly secures the door. Where window-mounted cooling appliances are utilized, the opening around the appliance must be sealed with materials resistant to weather. 
(D)  Screens: Screens shall be provided year-round for all operable windows. All screens, including screen doors, shall be maintained in good repair and free from tears, holes, or other imperfections of either screen or frame that would admit insects, such as flies, flying insects or mosquitoes. Screens with holes one square inch or larger or with tears in excess of two inches shall be repaired or replaced. Screens shall not be damaged or warped, shall fit tight in the framework of the window, and be removable for cleaning and maintenance purposes. Sliding screen doors are required wherever sliding glass doors are present. 
(E)  Infestation: All structures and exterior property shall be maintained free of rodent, insect or vermin infestation, which creates an unsafe or unsanitary environment on the subject, or adjacent buildings or properties. All structures and exterior property shall be maintained free of conditions that may cause an unsafe or unsanitary environment. 
(F)  Addresses: Address numbers a minimum of three inches in height shall be provided on every occupied building or structure, located so as to be visible from the street. Individual units within a building or structure shall be individually identified. Address numbers shall be of a contrasting color to their background for easy visibility. 
(G)  Accessory Structures: All accessory structures shall be maintained in a state of good repair or removed from the site. Such structures shall include, but not be limited to, clubhouses, offices, maintenance buildings, carports, retaining walls, fences, garages, and miscellaneous sheds or structures. These structures should be constructed of materials consistent for the use of the structure and not constructed in a makeshift or haphazard manner. 
(2532 2534 2798 3560) 
11-12-7. - Site Maintenance. 
(A)  General: The accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk (including, but not be limited to, abandoned, unused or nonoperational appliances, equipment, vehicles, machinery, or household furnishings), dead organic matter, debris, garbage, stagnant water, combustible materials or similar materials or conditions shall be subject to the provisions of Title VIII, Chapter 1 of the Westminster Municipal Code and shall be subject to abatement provisions therein. 
(B)  Parking Areas: All off-street parking and access drives shall be improved with asphalt pavement or an equivalent approved surface as determined by the City. Parking areas shall be kept free from potholes, cracks or other deterioration. No dirt, grass or sod parking areas are allowed. All striping and signage, including parking signage and fire lane or access signage, shall be maintained in good condition and clearly legible. 
(C)  Landscaping: 
(1)  All landscape areas, improvements and materials shall comply with and be maintained according to the City of Westminster Landscape Regulations and the Westminster Municipal Code. All landscape areas shall be landscaped with approved landscaping, including grass, shrubs, and trees. All landscape areas shall be maintained, and all dead or severely damaged plant materials shall be replaced with plant materials, as required by the City of Westminster Landscape Regulations. All turf areas shall be maintained so that no turf area exceeds six inches in height. Weeds shall not exceed 12 inches in height. Landscape areas may not include tree canopy, dirt, weeds, artificial turf or paving and drive improvements. Properties with an existing official development plan shall be maintained as required by such plan. 
(2)  Rental dwellings shall be required to have one tree and three shrubs in the front yard landscape area. As required by the City of Westminster Landscape Regulations, a minimum of 50 percent of each yard area adjacent to a street, or public or private park or open space shall be landscape area. Remaining lot area not landscape area may only be paving or drives, as defined in the City of Westminster Standards and Specifications for the construction of public improvements. 
(3)  Rental properties shall be required to have one tree and three shrubs per 1,000 square feet of landscape area. A minimum of 30 percent of the lot shall be landscape area, as defined by the City of Westminster Landscape Regulations, unless an exception is made by the city for good cause. Remaining lot area not landscape area may only be paving or drives, as defined in the City of Westminster Standards and Specifications for the Construction of Public Improvements. 
(D)  Trash: Trash enclosures shall be installed and maintained as required by the Westminster Municipal Code. All trash shall be kept inside the enclosure. Oversized trash that will not fit within the trash enclosure shall be removed from the property as required by Westminster Municipal Code. 
(E)  Properties not in compliance with the requirements of this section shall become compliant by January 1, 2016. Properties determined not to be in compliance based on inspection or review of the site plan required by Subsection 5-12-5(A)(11), W.M.C., shall have, before January 1, 2012, submitted to the City a plan for property improvements detailing how the property will be timely brought into compliance. 
(2532 2534 3133 3338 3560 3664) 
11-12-8. - Vacant or Abandoned Buildings. 
(A)  Vacant or abandoned buildings shall be secured to prevent unauthorized entry. 
(B)  Exterior building maintenance and site maintenance of abandoned or vacant buildings shall be the same as required for occupied buildings. 
(C)  Vacant or abandoned buildings and properties shall be maintained free of accumulations of combustible or hazardous material. 
(2532 2534 3560) 
11-12-9. - License Required; Rental Property. 
    Prior to leasing any rental property for occupancy, an owner shall obtain and maintain in good standing a rental property license from the City pursuant to Title V, Chapter 12, of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(3560) 
11-12-10. - Registration Required; Rental Dwellings. 
    Prior to leasing any rental dwelling for occupancy, an owner shall obtain and maintain in good standing a rental dwelling registration with the City pursuant to Title V, Chapter 12, of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(3560) 
11-12-11. - Inspections. 
(A)  General: 
(1)  The City Manager, acting by and through the building division, shall establish a regular and orderly schedule to inspect all rental property within the City. Such schedule shall not preclude inspection of a rental property at other times, based on a request of a resident, owner or manager, or other complainant. 
(2)  Rental dwellings shall be inspected by the City on a complaint basis or as conditions warrant with no regular inspection schedule. 
(3)  Any violations shall be documented and a photographic record may be made of the property or of any violations discovered on the property. 
(B)  Right of Entry: 
(1)  When necessary to make an inspection for compliance with the provisions of this Rental Code as part of scheduled inspections, or when the City has probable cause to believe that there exists upon any premises any condition that constitutes a violation of the provisions of this Rental Code, the city manager or authorized representative, hereinafter referred to as the "inspector," may enter a premise at all reasonable times to inspect or to perform any duty imposed on him, provided that the following procedure has been followed: 
(a)  If a premise is currently leased, the inspector shall first present proper credentials and request permission to enter from a tenant or other person having common authority over the premise. If the leased premise is currently unoccupied, the inspector shall make a reasonable effort to locate the tenant and, upon locating the tenant, shall present proper credentials and request permission to enter. If a tenant or other person having common authority over the premise cannot be located after a reasonable effort, a notice of intent to inspect shall be posted on the premises, giving notice that an inspection may proceed after a court order is obtained from the municipal judge of the City. 
(b)  If a premise is not currently leased, the inspector shall present proper credentials and request permission to enter from the owner or agent. If the owner or agent cannot be located after a reasonable effort, a notice of intent to inspect shall be posted on the premises, giving notice that an inspection may proceed upon issuance of a court order by a municipal judge of the City. 
(2)  If entry is refused, or 24 hours after the premises have been posted, the inspector may appear before the Municipal Judge and shall request, pursuant to Rule 241(b)(2) of the Municipal Court rules of procedure, as amended, a court order entitling the inspector to enter upon the premises. Upon presentation of the court order and proper credentials, or possession of same in the case of unoccupied premises, the inspector may enter upon the premises, using such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, "probable cause" for a court order exists upon a showing that the inspection is part of the systematic schedule of inspections that is a condition of licensing the rental property, and that the tenant or other person having common authority over the premise has failed or refused to grant entry to the inspector, or upon a showing that the facts and circumstances within the inspector's knowledge are sufficient to warrant a person of reasonable caution in the belief that a violation of this rental code may exist. The inspector shall not be required to demonstrate specific knowledge of the condition of the particular premises at issue in order to obtain a court order. 
(C)  Unlawful Resistance: It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant, or person having common authority of a rental property or rental dwelling to deny entry of an inspector acting pursuant to a court order that has been issued according to the procedure outlined in this section. 
(2532 2534 2798 3560) 
11-12-12. - Inspection Procedures. 
(A)  Authority: The City Manager, acting by and through the building division, may inspect rental properties and rental dwellings, individual units thereof, and their associated properties, in order to determine compliance with the provisions of this rental code. 
(B)  Scheduled Inspections of Rental Properties: 
(1)  The frequency of inspections on rental properties shall be as follows: 
(a)  Properties less than six years old shall not be scheduled for inspection. 
(b)  Properties between six and 20 years old shall be inspected every four years. 
(c)  Properties older than 20 years shall be inspected every two years. 
(2)  Inspections may be increased in frequency upon a determination that violations of this Rental Code, revealed during an inspection, individually or in combination, demonstrate a failure to maintain the rental property in a decent, safe, and sanitary condition. 
(3)  Inspections may be decreased in frequency based on satisfactory results of the latest inspection of the entire rental property; however, a modification of the scheduled inspection schedule shall not be extended more than two years for any property and no inspection schedule shall exceed six years between inspections. 
(4)  Any rental property may be inspected at any time due to complaints or as conditions warrant. 
(C)  Notification Prior to Inspections: It shall be the responsibility of the owner or agent to notify the individual tenants of the property of the scheduled inspection and to request that permission for the City to enter the premises be granted at the time of the inspection by a tenant or person with common authority over the premise, either in person or in writing. Without such express permission to enter a unit scheduled for inspection, the City shall not proceed to inspect and shall instead obtain a court order, according to the process outlined in Subsection 11-12-11(B), W.M.C. In addition to the right of entry process set forth in Subsection 11-12-11(B), W.M.C., regular inspections may be preceded by the following notice: 
(1)  A letter of intent to inspect a property, based on the systematic inspection schedule mailed to the owner or agent of the property stating the proposed date and time of the inspection and given a minimum of 30 days before inspection. 
(2)  Notice to the owner or agent at least seven days in advance of the scheduled inspection to verify the time and date. 
(3)  If it is necessary for the city to cancel a scheduled inspection, it may send a cancellation notice to the owner or agent of the affected property at least three days prior to the scheduled inspection date. 
(D)  Inspections of Rental Dwellings: Inspection of rental dwellings shall be on a complaint basis or as conditions warrant, with no regular inspection schedule, and shall proceed according to the process for right of entry set forth in Subsection 11-12-11(B), W.M.C. 
(2532 2534 3560) 
11-12-13. - Notice of Non-Compliance; Inspection Report. 
(A)  When the City determines that noncompliance with this Rental Code exists, a notice of noncompliance and order to correct shall be issued. The notice of noncompliance shall be in writing and shall describe the violation with sufficient detail for it to be properly addressed and corrected. The notice of noncompliance shall provide a reasonable time for correction, no less than seven and no more than 90 days. 
(B)  Inspection Report: A report of inspection results, including notice of noncompliance, if any, shall be sent to the property owner or agent within ten days of completion of an inspection. 
(1)  The inspection report shall include the results of the inspection, the period of time for correction of any noncompliant conditions, and the scheduled reinspection date and time. 
(2)  An inspection report containing only satisfactory results with no notice of noncompliance need not be personally served and may be mailed to the owner or agent at the address currently on file with the City as part of the licensing or registering of the property pursuant to Title V, Chapter 12, of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(C)  Any notice of noncompliance and order to correct, and any inspection report containing a notice of noncompliance and order to correct, shall be served by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Personally upon the owner or agent, in which case service shall be deemed complete on the date such service occurs. 
(2)  Notice posted on the premises and mailed to the owner or agent at the address currently on file with the City as part of the licensing or registering of the property pursuant to Title V, Chapter 12, of the Westminster Municipal Code. Service by this method shall be deemed complete three days after mailing and posting, even if no acknowledgment of receipt is provided. 
(D)  Reinspections: Reinspections may be conducted to verify that the violations identified in a notice of non-compliance have been corrected. Violations that were not noted during the initial inspection, but are discovered on the reinspection, shall not be subject to correction as part of the initial notice of noncompliance, but may result in the issuance of an additional notice of noncompliance. Imminent hazards identified on a reinspection shall be subject to the provisions of Section 11-12-18, W.M.C. 
(E)  Owner Certification for Corrections: The City may accept written affirmation from the owner or agent confirming correction of any or all violations documented in the formal notice of noncompliance. 
(F)  Reinspection Fees: A reinspection fee may be assessed for each follow-up inspection required after the initial reinspection due to an owner's failure to correct satisfactorily the identified violations. For each follow-up inspection required after the initial reinspection, a reinspection fee of $50.00 per unit and common area may be assessed, which fee amount may be amended by subsequent resolution of City Council. Reinspection fees not paid in full within 30 days of assessment shall constitute a lien on the property and shall be recorded as such with the County Clerk. 
(G)  Extensions: If an owner cannot complete the required corrective action in the time set forth in the notice of non-compliance, the owner or agent may request an extension to the completion date, which may be granted upon a determination that substantial progress is being made to correct the violation(s). Such request shall be made in writing and shall contain the reasons that an extension is necessary and the requested length of extension. A request for extension shall be made no less than three days prior to a scheduled reinspection or the required completion date, whichever is earlier. 
(H)  No Show Fees: If an owner or agent fails to attend an inspection or reinspection, fails to request a timely extension, or fails to provide notice to tenants of the City's request for permission to enter, a no-show fee of $50.00 per missed appointment may be assessed. The fee amount may be amended by subsequent resolution of City Council. 
(2532 2534 2798 3560) 
11-12-14. - Unlawful Conduct; Public Nuisance. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent to lease or to allow the use, maintenance, or occupancy of any residential dwelling or residential property that does not comply with the requirements of this Rental Code. 
(B)  Securing Structures: Any residential dwelling or residential property that is abandoned or uninhabited and is dilapidated, deteriorated or has become a place frequented by trespassers or transients or has otherwise been declared as a hazard shall be deemed a public nuisance. 
(C)  The City Manager or authorized representative is hereby deemed a peace officer for the limited purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Rental Code and shall have the power to issue complaints and summons for violations of these provisions, pursuant to Rule 204, Municipal Court rules of procedure, as amended, and Section 1-22-18, W.M.C. 
(D)  Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this rental code shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine or imprisonment or both, pursuant to Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. Each day that a violation of any of the provisions of this Rental Code continues to exist shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct violation. 
(E)  A violation of any of the provisions of this Rental Code is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated according to the procedures established in Title VIII, Chapter 4, of the Westminster Municipal Code for the abatement of nuisances. 
(F)  In addition to all other penalties available, a violation of the provisions of this Rental Code may result in an action to revoke or suspend a rental property license or a rental dwelling registration according to the process set forth in Title V, Chapter 12, of the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(2532 2534 3560) 
11-12-15. - Enforcement. 
    If, after notice and order to correct, an owner fails to timely correct the violation and fails to timely appeal the notice and order, the City manager or authorized representative may issue a complaint and summons for prosecution in Municipal Court or for abatement as a nuisance. 
(3560) 
11-12-16. - Appeal. 
(A)  An owner may appeal a notice of noncompliance and order to correct to the Building and Fire Code Appeals Committee. Any such appeal shall be filed in writing with the City Manager within 30 days of the date of service of the notice of noncompliance. 
(B)  The Building and Fire Code Appeals Committee shall hear the appeal within a reasonable time. Procedure for the hearing shall be as established in Title II, Chapter 10, of the Westminster Municipal Code. Compliance with a notice of noncompliance shall be stayed until the committee has met and issued its decision. 
(C)  Any appeal of the decision of the committee shall be made to the District Court. The appellant shall pay for the costs of preparing a transcript and other expenses of preparation of the record of hearing before the committee. 
(2532 2534 3560 3725) 
11-12-17. - Remedies; Recovery of Costs. 
    The cost of enforcement proceedings, together with the cost of abatement, if so ordered, shall be assessed in any judgment rendered. If the costs identified are not paid, they shall constitute a lien upon the property. 
(2532 2534 3560) 
11-12-18. - Imminent Danger. 
(A)  If any structure, premise or portion thereof is found to present an imminent hazard to life or health, the premises shall be posted and the property shall be ordered vacated. Upon order to vacate, the property, or portion thereof, shall be posted as "Dangerous, Do Not Occupy" and written notification of the violations that deem the property, or portion thereof, as an imminent hazard shall be served as required in Subsection 11-12-13(C), W.M.C. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or deface the posted notice, or to occupy the property or to enter the structure except for the purpose of repair. The violations identified as causing the property or portion thereof to be an imminent hazard shall be corrected and reinspected before the posting is removed and the property or portion thereof is reoccupied. 
(C)  The owner or agent may appeal the order to vacate to the Building and Fire Code Appeals Committee in the same manner as stated in Section 11-12-16, W.M.C., except that the duty to comply with the order to vacate shall not be stayed pending a hearing. 
(2532 2534 3560 3725) 
CHAPTER 13. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

11-13-1. - Declaration of Policy and Purpose. 
(A)  The council finds that the pressures of population growth and development may result in the destruction, impairment or drastic alteration of the buildings, structures and areas important to the City's social, cultural, historic and architectural heritage. It is further found that the prevention of such destruction and impairment and the attendant preservation of the City's social, cultural, historic and architectural heritage is essential to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(B)  The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through: 
(1)  The protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of buildings, structures, sites and areas that are reminders of past eras, events and persons important in local, state or national history, or that provide significant examples of architectural styles of the past, or that are unique and irreplaceable assets to the City and its neighborhoods, or that provide for this and future generations examples of the physical surroundings in which past generations lived; 
(2)  The development and maintenance of appropriate settings and environments for such buildings and structures, and in such sites and areas; 
(3)  The enhancement of property values, the stabilization of neighborhoods and areas of the City, the increase of economic and financial benefits to the City and its inhabitants, and the promotion of visitor trade and interest; 
(4)  The preservation and enhancement of a City of varied architectural styles, reflecting the distinct phases of its history: cultural, social, economic, political and architectural; 
(5)  The enrichment of human life in its spiritual, educational and cultural dimensions by fostering knowledge of the living heritage of the past; and 
(6)  The provision of educational opportunities and to increase the appreciation of local and state history. 
(C)  The intent of this chapter is to create a reasonable balance between private property rights and the public interest in preserving Westminster's unique historic character and culture. It is also the intent of this chapter not to preserve every old building in the City, but rather to provide incentives to preserve historic and architecturally significant sites, buildings, structures, neighborhoods and districts by providing guidelines for the appropriate use of land and the moving, demolition, reconstruction, restoration or alteration of such buildings, sites and structures that comply with state and federal historic preservation laws, thereby making certain tax credits available to private property owners and making other benefits and incentives available for preservation projects. 
(3015) 
11-13-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Alteration shall mean any act or process that changes either one or more of the exterior architectural features of a structure; or one or more of the physical features of a site or district, except color or paint. 
    Board shall mean the City's historic landmark board as created in this chapter. 
    Certificate of historic appropriateness shall mean a certificate issued by the City showing approval of plans for construction, demolition, moving, reconstruction, restoration or alteration of any structure in a historic landmark district or designated as a historic landmark. 
    Contributing structures shall mean those structures or physical features within a site or district that help to define the historic significance of that site or district. 
    Cultural landscape shall mean a geographic area (including both cultural and natural resources and the wildlife or domestic animals therein) associated with a historic event, activity, or person or exhibiting other cultural or aesthetic values. 
    Demolition shall mean any act or process that destroys, in part or in whole, any historic landmark. 
    Designated landmark or district shall mean a structure, site or district officially included in the State of Colorado or National Register of Historic Places, or designated pursuant to this chapter as a historic landmark. 
    Director shall mean the City's Director of Community Development or his or her designee. 
    Exterior, architectural features shall mean the architectural style and general arrangement of the exterior of the structure, including type and texture of the building materials, and including all windows, doors, siding, roofs, lights, signs and other fixtures appurtenant thereto, if such physical component is visible from a public way or adjoining properties. 
    Historic designation shall mean the formal recognition of a historic structure, site, or district by the City pursuant to this chapter. 
    Historic landmark shall mean any resources of this city, either public or private, including buildings, homes, replicas, structures, objects, properties, cultural landscapes or sites that have importance in the history, architecture, archeology, or culture of this City, state or nation, as determined by the board and having received a historic designation because of its significance and importance to the community. 
    Historic landmark board shall mean the City Council or a citizen committee appointed by the City Council to make recommendations to the council on the designation of historic landmarks and historic districts and to administer the city's historic landmark program, and hereinafter referred to as the "board." The board shall perform the various functions and duties provided for it in this chapter. 
    Historic landmark district shall mean a geographically definable area, including a concentration, linkage or continuity of subsurface sites, cultural landscapes, buildings, structures, and/or objects. A district is related by a pattern of either physical elements or social activities. The term "district" may include, but is not limited to, neighborhoods, agricultural or commercial districts. 
    Historic significance shall mean that which has a special historic or aesthetic interest or value as part of the development, heritage, cultural or historic character of the City, region, state or nation. 
    Historic site shall mean a landscape significant for its association with a historic event, activity or person. 
    Maintenance and repair shall mean any work, for which a building permit is not required by law, where the purpose and effect of such work is to correct any deterioration, decay of, or damage to a structure or any architecturally significant part thereof, and to restore or replace, as nearly as may be practicable, to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay or damage, and which work does not effect a significant change in the external appearance of the structure. 
    Overwhelming historical significance shall mean: 
(1)  Possessing such unusual or uncommon significance that any structure's potential demolition or major alteration would diminish the character and sense of place in the City; or 
(2)  Possessing superior or outstanding examples of the architecture, social or geographic historic significance criteria outlined in the standards and criteria set forth in this chapter. The term "superior" shall mean excellence of its kind and the term "outstanding" shall mean marked by eminence and distinction. 
    Owner shall mean the person or persons listed in the records of the County Clerk and Recorder or County Assessor as owner of a subject property. 
    Preservation shall mean the act or process of applying measures necessary to sustain the existing form, integrity, and materials of a historic landmark. 
    Reconstruction shall mean the act or process of depicting, by means of new construction, the form, features, and detailing of a non-surviving site, landscape, building, structure, or object for the purpose of replicating its appearance at a specific period of time and in its historic location. 
    Rehabilitation shall mean the act or process of making a compatible use for a property through repair, alterations, and additions, while preserving those portions or features that convey its historic, cultural or architectural values. 
    Restoration shall mean the act or process of accurately depicting the form, features, and character of a property as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of features from other periods in its history and reconstruction of missing features from other periods in its history. 
    Significant change shall mean an alteration or modification in the external appearance that has or is likely to have influence or effect on the historic or architectural merit of a structure or site, including, but not limited to, all activities for which a building permit is required. 
(3015) 
11-13-3. - Historic Landmark Board Created. 
(A)  There is hereby created a Historic Landmark Board, which shall have the principal responsibility for matters involving historic landmarks as set forth in this chapter. The City Council may act as the board pursuant to this chapter until it appoints a qualified citizen board as provided herein. 
(B)  The board shall consist of five to seven members, appointed by the city council, who have a demonstrated interest, competence or knowledge in historic preservation. The City Council may appoint up to two alternate members, who shall attend meetings and participate fully in the activities, programs, and duties of the board. An alternate shall serve as a voting member of the board in the absence of a regular member, including the abstention of a member due to a conflict of interest. The board shall be composed of both professional and lay members and at least 40 percent shall be professionals in preservation-related disciplines, such as architecture, landscape architecture, architectural history, archaeology, history, and planning, or related disciplines, such as building trades, real estate, law, cultural geography or cultural anthropology. 
(C)  Initial appointments shall be made for one- and two-year terms, in order to stagger the expiration of terms, and thereafter members shall be appointed for two-year terms. 
(D)  From among its regular members, the board shall select a chair and vice-chair at the first meeting of each calendar year. 
(E)  The board shall meet at least quarterly, unless applications or other requests for action are pending, in which case, the board shall meet at least monthly. All board meetings shall be open to the public with exceptions for executive sessions, as provided for the City Council in this Code and as provided by any preservation-related state and federal law. 
(F)  A majority of the number of currently appointed regular board members shall constitute a quorum. An alternate may substitute for a regular board member to create a quorum. If a quorum is not present, then the Chair of the Board may set a new date for a special hearing or the matters scheduled for that hearing shall be heard on the next regularly scheduled hearing date. 
(G)  The board shall adopt bylaws and other administrative guidelines to govern the conduct of its meetings, which shall be made available to the public. 
(3015) 
11-13-4. - Powers and Duties of the Historic Landmark Board. 
    Within available staff, volunteer and financial resources, the Historic Landmark Board shall: 
(A)  Adopt criteria for review of historic resources and for review of proposals to alter, demolish, or move designated resources that are in addition to and consistent with the criteria set forth in this chapter. 
(B)  Review properties nominated for designation as a historic landmark or a historic landmark district, and make recommendations to the City Council regarding historic designation. 
(C)  Encourage owners of historic properties to maintain them in good repair, and advise and assist owners of historic properties concerning physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, and restoration, including nomination to the National and State registers of Historic Places. 
(D)  Develop and assist in public education programs, including, but not limited to, school programs, walking tours, brochures, a marker program for historic properties, interpretive sites and programs, lectures, and conferences about the history of the local and regional community, the value of preserving historic properties, and the materials and methods of preservation. 
(E)  Review applications for and issue certificates of historic appropriateness pursuant to this chapter. 
(F)  Conduct surveys of historic properties, structures and areas, in order to define those of historic significance for the purpose of creating a preservation plan of historic properties and districts. 
(G)  Pursue financial assistance for preservation and history-related programs. 
(H)  Maintain records and files on all board actions and provide documentation as necessary to the state historical fund. 
(I)  Develop and modify as needed a checklist of activities critical to the maintenance of a historic landmark to be completed as a requirement for receiving a tax rebate. 
(J)  Identify and implement other incentives for owners of historic properties. 
(K)  Authorize and implement such steps as it deems desirable to recognize the merit of and to encourage the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of any historic landmark or historic landmark district by, without limitation, issuing certificates of recognition and authorizing plaques to be affixed to the exteriors of such structures. 
(L)  Pursue these duties and any others required by state and federal law, in order to qualify the City as a certified local government under applicable historic preservation laws. 
(M)  Foster civic pride and awareness of the unique heritage of the City. 
(3015) 
11-13-5. - Criteria for Designation. 
    The board will consider the following criteria in reviewing nominations of properties for designation: 
(A)  Properties receiving historic designations shall be at least 50 years old, except as otherwise provided herein, and possess architectural, social, or geographical/environmental importance by meeting one or more of the following: 
(1)  Exemplifies specific elements of an architectural style or period; 
(2)  Is an example of the work of an architect or builder who is recognized for expertise nationally, statewide, regionally, or locally; 
(3)  Demonstrates superior craftsmanship or high artistic value; 
(4)  Represents an innovation in construction, materials or design; 
(5)  Represents a style particularly associated with the Westminster area; 
(6)  Represents a built environment of a group of people in an era of history; 
(7)  Represents a pattern or grouping of elements representing at least one of the above criteria; 
(8)  Has undergone significant historic remodel; 
(9)  Is the site of historic event that had an effect upon society; 
(10)  Exemplifies cultural, political, economic or social heritage of the community; 
(11)  Represents an association with a notable person or the work of a notable person; 
(12)  Represents a typical example/association with a particular ethnic group; 
(13)  Represents a unique example of an event in Westminster's history; 
(14)  Enhances sense of identity of the community; 
(15)  Is an established and familiar natural setting or visual feature of the community. 
(B)  Additional Criteria for Historic Landmark Districts: A district is related by a pattern of either physical elements or social activities. Significance is determined by applying criteria in this chapter to the patterns and unifying elements. District designations will not be considered unless the application contains written approval of all property owners within the district boundaries. Properties that do not contribute to the significance of the historic landmark district may be included within the boundaries, as long as the noncontributing elements do not noticeably detract from the district's sense of time, place and historic development. Noncontributing elements will be evaluated for their magnitude of impact by considering their size, scale, design, location, and/or information potential. 
(C)  Any site listed on the state or national register of historic places shall be deemed to qualify for local designation under this chapter, but shall not be locally designated until an application for designation is filed and processed pursuant to this chapter. 
11-13-6. - Procedures for Nomination of Historic Landmarks and Districts. 
(A)  Who May Nominate: The board, City Council, or the Westminster Historical Society may nominate a property, area or structure for designation as a historic landmark or historic landmark district or a property owner may nominate his or her own property. If a nomination is received from a party other than the property owner, the nominating party shall contact the owner or owners of such historic property, outlining the reasons for and the effects of designation as a historic property, and shall secure the consent of the owner or owners to such designation before the nomination is accepted as complete for review. 
(B)  The nominating party shall file an application with the director on forms prescribed by the board, and shall include the names of all owners of property included in the proposed designation, and shall be accompanied by all information required by the board. The Director shall transmit copies of the application to relevant city departments and the Westminster Historical Society for comment. If the nominating party is not the property owner, the Director shall keep the owner informed of all steps in the designation proceedings and provide copies of documents that are filed with the city. 
(C)  Nomination Contents: Each such nomination shall include a description of the characteristics of the proposed historic landmark that justify its designation pursuant to this chapter, a description of the particular features that should be preserved, and shall include a legal description of the location and boundaries of the historic property. Any such designation shall be in furtherance of and in conformance with the purposes and standards of this chapter. 
(3015) 
11-13-7. - Procedures for Designation of Historic Landmarks and Districts. 
(A)  Application: 
(1)  Any completed application for designation, once reviewed by the Director, shall be promptly referred to the board. The board shall hold a public hearing on the proposal, not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days after the filing of the application, to consider the adoption of the designation resolution. The hearing may be held less than 30 days after submission of the application, upon mutual consent of the applicant and the board. 
(2)  Notice of the public hearing shall be published and posted at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(3)  The Director shall review the proposed designation with respect to: (a) its relationship to the comprehensive plan; (b) the effect of the designation on the surrounding neighborhood; (c) the criteria set forth in this chapter; and (d) such other planning considerations as may be relevant to the proposed designation. The director shall provide written comments and recommendations regarding the proposed designation to the board no less than seven days before the hearing. 
(B)  Public hearings shall be conducted as quasi-judicial hearings, following procedures comparable to those used by City Council, unless specific procedures are provided by board bylaw. 
(C)  The board recommendation to the City Council shall be made after the board has heard all interested parties and relevant evidence. With the consent of the nominating party, the board may continue the hearing from time to time as necessary to gather all relevant evidence to make its recommendation. The board shall consider the conformance or lack of conformance of the proposed designation with the purposes, standards and criteria of this chapter. The board shall either recommend approval, modification and approval, or disapproval of the proposal and shall promptly refer the proposal, with a copy of its report and recommendations, to the council. If the landowner is not satisfied with the recommendation to the council, the landowner may withdraw the application, or withdraw consent to the application made by another nominating party, prior to the council's action on the proposed designation. 
(D)  Proceedings Before the Council: 
(1)  Within 30 days after the date of any referral from the board, the council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed designation. Notice of the public hearing shall be published and posted at least four days prior to the hearing. 
(2)  The council shall, by resolution, approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the proposed designation and shall issue written findings in accordance with and after considering the criteria as set forth for historic landmarks and historic landmark districts. Such designating resolution shall include a description of the characteristics of the site that justify its designation and a description of the features that should be preserved or enhanced, and shall include a legal description of the location and boundaries of the historic landmark. The designating resolution may also indicate alterations that would have a significant impact upon, or be potentially detrimental to, the historic landmark. The owner(s) of the property nominated shall be notified of council's decision. Once designated, the landmark shall be required to display appropriate signage as determined by the board, notifying the public of such designation. 
(E)  Recording the Designation: 
(1)  The historic designation resolution of the City Council shall be recorded within the real estate records of the county in which the property is located as soon as possible after the effective date of the resolution. 
(2)  Within 15 days after recording of the historic designation, the director shall send a copy of the resolution to the owner. 
(F)  A property designated as a historic landmark shall retain that designation in perpetuity, unless the property has lost its historic character as determined pursuant this chapter. 
(3015) 
11-13-8. - Revocation of Designation. 
(A)  If a structure or physical feature on a designated historic landmark site was lawfully removed or demolished, the owner may apply to the board for revocation of designation. The board shall recommend revocation of a historic landmark designation if it determines that, without the demolished structure or physical feature, the site as a whole no longer meets the purposes and standards of this chapter and the board's review standards for designation. 
(B)  Upon the board's recommendation to revoke a designation, the Director shall cause to be prepared a resolution, including the legal description of the affected property, stating notice of the revocation, and schedule the item for City Council review. Upon adoption by the City Council, the resolution shall be recorded within the real estate records of the county in which the property is located. 
(C)  The City Council may revoke designation of a historic landmark, if the public benefits of alteration, removal or demolition of the landmark outweigh the public benefits of maintaining the designation. 
(3015) 
11-13-9. - Special Duties and Obligations of Owners of Historic Properties. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for owners of historic landmarks to allow: 
(1)  The deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports; 
(2)  The deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members; 
(3)  The deterioration of external chimneys; 
(4)  The deterioration or crumbling of exterior plasters, mortars, brick, stone or wood siding; 
(5)  The ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, and foundations, including windows and doors; 
(6)  The peeling of paint, rotting, holes and other forms of decay; 
(7)  The lack of maintenance of surrounding environment, e.g., fences, gates, sidewalks, steps, signs, accessory structures and landscaping to produce a detrimental effect on a historic landmark; 
(8)  The deterioration of any feature so as to create or permit the creation of any hazardous or unsafe condition or conditions. 
(B)  Before an owner is cited for failure to maintain the historic landmark or structure in a historic landmark district, the board shall notify the property owner, lessee, or occupant of the need to repair or maintain, and shall assist the owner, lessee, or occupant in determining how to preserve the property, and shall give the owner a reasonable time to perform such work, which time shall not exceed 120 days. The board may grant extensions of the time period for good cause. 
(3015) 
11-13-10. - Certificate of Historic Appropriateness. 
(A)  A certificate of historic appropriateness shall be required for any work other than maintenance and repair on a property subject to a historic designation. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any work, other than maintenance and repair, without having first obtained a certificate of historic appropriateness. 
(B)  The Director shall maintain a current record of: (1) designated historic landmarks; (2) historic landmark districts; and (3) all pending proposed designations. 
(C)  Upon any application for a permit to carry out any construction, alteration, removal or demolition of a building or other designated feature to a historic landmark or in a historic landmark district that would materially alter the exterior of such a building, site or structure, or that involves more than ordinary maintenance and repair, the department of community development shall not issue the requested permits until approved as provided herein, and shall promptly forward such application to the board. 
(D)  The board shall review any permit applications so forwarded to it to determine whether a certificate of historic appropriateness for the work proposed should be issued. 
(E)  Applications shall contain such information as is required by the board, so as to assure full presentation of pertinent facts for proper consideration of the application. The application shall be accompanied by plans and specifications showing the proposed exterior appearance, including color, texture of materials and architectural design and detail. Drawings or photographs showing the property in the context of its surroundings shall also be required. In addition, the applicant shall file with his/her application the names and addresses of abutting property owners, including properties across the street from the property. 
(F)  An application shall be promptly referred to the board. The board shall hold a public hearing on the proposal not less than 30 days, nor more than 60 days, after the filing of the application to consider the adoption of the designation resolution. The hearing may be held less than 30 days after submission of the application, upon mutual consent of the applicant and the board. 
(G)  Notice of the public hearing shall be published and posted at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(H)  In determining whether to issue a certificate of historic appropriateness, the board shall consider: 
(1)  The effect of the proposed change on the general architectural and/or historic character of the structure or district; 
(2)  The architectural style, arrangement, textures and materials used on existing and proposed structures and their relation to other structures in the district, if applicable; 
(3)  The uniqueness of the structure and how it ties in with the history of the area; 
(4)  The size of the structure, its setbacks, its site, location, and the appropriateness thereof, when compared to existing nearby structures and the site; 
(5)  The effects of the proposed work in creating, changing, destroying or otherwise affecting the exterior architectural features of the structure upon which such work is done; 
(6)  The effect of the proposed work on the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of the structure, area or district; 
(7)  The condition of existing improvements and whether they are a hazard to the public health or safety; 
(8)  The economic viability of maintaining the structure or area as is; 
(9)  Whether the property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment; 
(10)  Whether the historic character of a property is being retained and preserved; and 
(11)  Visual compatibility with designated historic structures located on the property, in terms of design, finish, material, scale, mass and height. When the subject site is within a historic landmark district, the board must also find that the proposed development is visually compatible with the development on adjacent properties. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "compatible" shall mean consistent with, harmonious with, and/or enhances the mixture of complementary architectural styles, either of the architecture of an individual structure or the character of the surrounding structures. 
(I)  Limitations on Alterations: The following criteria shall apply to all alterations or changes: 
(1)  Distinctive features, finishes and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be preserved. 
(2)  The removal or alteration of any historical material or distinctive features shall be avoided when possible. 
(3)  Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired, rather than replaced, when possible. When the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical or pictorial evidence. 
(4)  Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. 
(5)  Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken. 
(6)  New additions, exterior alterations or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property and shall be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic landmark and its environment would be unimpaired. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment. 
(7)  All historic or contributing buildings, structures, and sites shall be recognized as products of their own time and place. Changes that may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and development of a building, structure, site or environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and shall be retained and preserved. Alterations that have no historical basis and that seek to create an earlier or non-local appearance shall be discouraged. 
(8)  Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use for a property that requires minimal alteration to the defining characteristics, as identified in the application for designation, of the building, structure, or site and its environment, or to use the property for its originally intended purpose. 
(J)  Board Action: The board shall approve or disapprove the application in whole or in part. Any decision of the board approving or disapproving a certificate of historic appropriateness shall be final in 30 days. The board shall issue a certificate of historic appropriateness for any proposed work on a designated historical landmark only if the board can determine that the proposed work would not detrimentally alter, destroy, or adversely affect any feature that was found by the board in the original designation to contribute to the designation of the property as a landmark. 
(3015) 
11-13-11. - Relocation of a Historic Landmark. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to relocate a historic landmark, a contributing structure on a historic site, a building or structure within a historic landmark district; a structure onto a historic site; or a structure onto property in a historic landmark district without having first obtained a certificate of historic appropriateness. In addition to the alterations criteria in this chapter, the board shall apply the following criteria in considering applications for relocating a historic landmark; a contributing structure on a historic site; a building or structure within a historic landmark district; a structure onto a historic site; or a structure onto property in a historic landmark district: 
(A)  With regard to the original site, the board will review for compliance with all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Documentation showing the structure cannot be rehabilitated or reused on its original site to provide for any reasonable beneficial use of the property; 
(2)  Whether the structure makes a substantial contribution to its present setting; 
(3)  Whether plans are specifically defined for the site to be vacated and have been approved by City staff; 
(4)  If the structure can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity, and the applicant can show the relocation activity is the best preservation method for the character and integrity of the structure; 
(5)  Whether the structure has been demonstrated to be capable of withstanding the physical impacts of the relocation and re-siting; and 
(6)  Whether a structural report submitted by a licensed structural engineer experienced in preservation of structures adequately demonstrates the soundness of the structure proposed for relocation. 
(B)  With regard to the new location, the board will review for compliance with all of the following criteria: 
(1)  The building or structure must be compatible with its proposed site and adjacent properties, and if the receiving site is compatible in nature with the structure or structures proposed to be moved; 
(2)  The structure's architectural integrity is consistent with the character of the receiving neighborhood; 
(3)  The relocation of the historic structure would not diminish the integrity or character of the neighborhood of the receiving site; and 
(4)  A relocation plan has been submitted and approved by City staff, including posting a bond, to ensure the safe relocation, preservation and repair (if required) of the structure, site preparation and infrastructure connections. 
(3015) 
11-13-12. - Demolition of a Historic Landmark. 
    It shall be unlawful for any historic landmark or property in a historic landmark district to be demolished without having first obtained a certificate for demolition. If a certificate for demolition is requested on any basis other than that of an imminent hazard or economic hardship, a certificate of demolition will not be issued until all criteria in subsection (A) of this section are met. 
(A)  Review Criteria for Total Demolition: Applicants requesting a certificate of demolition must provide data to clearly demonstrate that the situation meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  The structure proposed for demolition is not structurally sound, despite evidence of the owner's efforts to properly maintain the structure; and 
(2)  The structure cannot be rehabilitated or reused on-site to provide for any reasonable beneficial use of the property; and 
(3)  The structure cannot be practically moved to another site; and 
(4)  The applicant demonstrates that the proposal mitigates to the greatest extent practical the following: 
(a)  Any impacts that occur to the visual character of the neighborhood where demolition is proposed to occur. 
(b)  Any impact on the historic importance of the remaining structure(s) located on the property and adjacent properties. 
(c)  Any impact to the architectural integrity of the remaining structure(s) located on the property and adjacent properties. 
(5)  In the case of archeological sites, consideration will be given to whether information can be recovered as part of the demolition process. 
(B)  Review Criteria for Partial Demolition: 
(1)  The partial demolition is required for the renovation, restoration or rehabilitation of the structure; and 
(2)  The applicant must mitigate, to the greatest extent possible: 
(a)  Impacts on the historic importance of the structure(s) located on the property. 
(b)  Impacts on the architectural integrity of the structure(s) located on the property. 
(3015) 
11-13-13. - Action of Board Upon Denial of Certificate of Historic Appropriateness. 
(A)  If the proposed certificate of historic appropriateness to alter, relocate or demolish is denied, the board, acting with all due diligence, shall explore with the applicant available means for substantially preserving the historic landmark that was affected by the determination. These investigations may include, by way of example and not of limitation: 
(1)  Feasibility of modification of plans. 
(2)  Feasibility of any alternative use of the structures that would substantially preserve the original character. 
(B)  One year after denial of a certificate of historic appropriateness for demolition, if no feasible use or ownership is found for the structure, the owner may request a waiver of all or a part of the restraint of demolition. The board will include the following factors in their consideration of the request: 
(1)  Documented evidence of applications and written correspondence, including written consultations, illustrating efforts made by the property owner to make necessary repairs, to find an appropriate user, or to find a purchaser for the property; and 
(2)  The adequacy of the property owner's efforts to locate available assistance for making the property functional without demolition. 
(3015) 
11-13-14. - Hardship Exemption. 
    The board may exempt a property from the requirement of obtaining a certificate of historic appropriateness, if the board finds that the property owner has shown the historic designation creates or would create an undue hardship. 
(A)  An exemption based on non-economic hardship may be found by the board when designation creates a situation substantially inadequate to meet the applicant's needs because of specific health and/or safety issues. 
(B)  An exemption based on economic hardship may be found by the board applying the following standards: 
(1)  The applicant's knowledge of the designation at the time of acquisition, or whether the property was designated subsequent to acquisition; 
(2)  The current level of economic return on the property, as considered in relation to the following: 
(a)  The marketability of the property for sale or lease, considered in relation to any listing of the property for sale or lease, and price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous two years. 
(b)  The infeasibility or feasibility of alternative uses that can earn a reasonable economic return for the property. 
(c)  Economic incentives and/or funding available to the applicant through federal, state, city, or private programs. 
(C)  Board Determination of Economic Hardship: The board shall hold a public hearing as soon as practical, after notice, to take final action on the application. 
(1)  Finding of Economic Hardship. If, after reviewing all of the evidence, the historic preservation board finds that the application of the standards set forth in subsection (B) of this section results in economic hardship, then the board shall issue a certificate of demolition. 
(2)  Denial of Economic Hardship. If the board finds that the application of the standards set forth in subsection (B) of this section does not result in economic hardship, then the certificate of demolition shall be denied. 
(D)  Willful or Negligent Acts: Economic hardship does not include self-created hardships, willful or negligent acts by the owner, purchase of the property for substantially more than the market value, failure to perform normal maintenance and repairs, failure to diligently solicit and retain tenants, or failure to provide normal tenant improvements. 
(3015) 
11-13-15. - Unsafe or Dangerous Conditions Exempted. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any measures of construction, alteration, removal, or demolition necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous condition of any structure, other feature, or parts thereof, where such condition is declared unsafe or dangerous by the City and where the proposed measures have been declared necessary by the chief building official to correct the condition, as long as only such work that is necessary to correct the condition is performed. Any temporary measures may be taken without first obtaining a certificate of historic appropriateness under this chapter, but a certificate is required for permanent alteration, removal, or demolition. 
(3015) 
11-13-16. - Enforcement and Penalties. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this chapter or the terms of a certificate of historic appropriateness. Any person, either as owner, lessee, occupant, or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of this title, or any amendment thereof, or who interferes in any manner with any person in the performance of a right or duty granted or imposed upon him by the provisions of this title, shall be subject to the fines provided by Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
(B)  In Addition: 
(1)  Alterations to a designated historic landmark or historic landmark district without an approved certificate of historic appropriateness will result in a one-year moratorium on all building permits for the subject property. 
(2)  Moving or demolishing or allowing demolition by neglect of a designated structure without an approved certificate of historic appropriateness will result in a five-year moratorium on all moving, demolition, or building permits for the structure and for the property at the structure's original location. 
(3)  In addition to the other remedies provided in this chapter, the City Attorney may commence an action at law or equity in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(3015) 
11-13-17. - City Council Review of Designation, Alteration, Removal and Demolition. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City Council from revoking a historic landmark designation in order to carry out specified public purposes with benefits to the public that outweigh the benefits of maintaining the historic landmark designation. 
(3015) 
CHAPTER 14. - BUILDING AND FIRE CODE APPEALS COMMITTEE 

11-14-1. - Building and Fire Code Appeals Committee. 
(3725) 
11-14-2. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a Building and Fire Code Appeals Committee, hereinafter referred to as "the committee," consisting of three members appointed by the City Manager to serve at his or her pleasure. 
(3725) 
11-14-3. - Member Qualifications; Secretary; Ad Hoc Body. 
(A)  Member Qualifications: Each member of the committee shall be either a licensed architect, a registered engineer with building related experience, or a construction company executive or superintendent with at least ten years of construction experience. Committee members shall not be employees of the City. No committee member may hear or vote upon any appeal in which that member has any personal, professional, or financial interest, pursuant to applicable state statutes and City Charter and ordinance provisions. 
(B)  Secretary to the Committee: The City shall provide a secretary to the committee, who shall be the custodian of the committee's records, conduct the committee's correspondence, collect all fees, and be responsible for the clerical work of the committee. The secretary to the committee shall have no voting power on any matter coming before the board. 
(C)  Ad Hoc Committee: The City Manager shall appoint, convene and reconstitute the committee on an ad hoc basis to hear any appeal the City Manager deems to be properly filed pursuant to Subsection 11-14-4(C) below. 
(3725) 
11-14-4. - Powers and Duties. 
(A)  Appeals: The committee is authorized to hear the following matters: 
(1)  The Chief Building Official or Fire Marshal has rejected or refused to approve an alternate method or material of construction that the appellant alleges to be the equivalent of that prescribed in the applicable code in terms of suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety, or sanitation. In order to grant the appellant's request, the board must find that test results, factual documentation, or other such data or evidence provided by the appellant substantiates the appellant's claim that the method or material of construction is equal to or superior to that prescribed in the applicable code in terms of suitability, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety, or sanitation. 
(2)  The appellant alleges that the Chief Building Official or Fire Marshal has made an error in the interpretation of a code. In order to grant the appellant's request, the board must find that the Chief Building Official or Fire Marshal has made an error in the interpretation of a code. 
(3)  The appellant alleges that the Chief Building Official or Fire Marshal is imposing certain provisions of a code that do not apply to the project being constructed. In order to grant the appellant's request, the board must find that the provisions of the applicable code do not apply to the project being constructed. 
(4)  The appellant alleges that the Chief Building Official or Fire Marshal is imposing a wrongful requirement in a building matter that is not specifically addressed in the applicable code. In order to grant the appellant's request, the board must find that the requirement is not addressed in the applicable code, is not appropriate, and that granting the request would be consistent with the intent of the applicable code. 
(5)  The appellant alleges that there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships caused by conformance to the strict letter of a code, that the literal interpretation of a code will produce undesirable results that are inconsistent with the intent of the applicable code, or that there are special individual reasons that make the strict application of the provisions of a code impractical. In order to grant the appellant's request, the board must find that all of the following requirements would be satisfied: 
(a)  The granting of the request would not endanger public health, safety, or welfare; 
(b)  The granting of the request would be in compliance with the spirit and intent of the applicable code; 
(c)  The granting of the request is site specific and shall not in any way constitute a modification of the applicable code; 
(d)  The granting of the request would result in substantial justice being done; and 
(e)  There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships involved in conforming to the strict provisions of the applicable code, the literal interpretation of the applicable code will produce undesirable results that are not consistent with the intent of the applicable code, or there are special individual reasons that make strict conformance to the provisions of the applicable code impractical. 
(6)  The appellant alleges that an omission or error in the plans, specifications, or other data submitted to the City for review was not addressed by City staff and has resulted in a code violation that the Chief Building Official or the Fire Marshal is now requiring to be corrected and brought into compliance with the applicable code. In order to grant the appellant's request, the board must find that the code violation resulting from the omission or error in the plans, specifications, or other data is not substantial in nature, and that public health, safety, or welfare will not be endangered in the absence of the correction. 
(7)  The appellant alleges that the Chief Building Official has erred in issuing a notice or order or in taking an action under the Uniform Code for the abatement of dangerous buildings. In order to grant the appellant's request, the board must find that the Chief Building Official erred in the enforcement of the Uniform Code for the abatement of dangerous buildings. The procedure for appeals brought under this paragraph shall be consistent with this chapter and with the Uniform Code for the abatement of dangerous buildings. However, if a conflict exists in the provisions, the latter shall control. 
(B)  Recommendations of the Committee: The committee shall render a written recommendation to the City Manager within 15 days after a hearing, accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon. Conclusions based upon any provision of this chapter, a code, or any City rule or regulation shall contain a reference to such provision, rule, or regulation and shall also contain the reason the conclusion is appropriate in light of the facts found. 
(C)  Filing an Appeal: All appeals pursuant to this chapter must be submitted in writing to the Director of Community Development within 30 days of the decision of the Chief Building Official or Fire Marshal being appealed. Any appeal not submitted within said 30 day period shall be barred. The appeal must set forth the specific authority for the appeal under subsection (A) above, the decision of the Chief Building Official or Fire Marshal being appealed, a summary of the facts that support the appeal, and a statement of the specific relief being sought. 
(D)  Decisions of the City Manager: 
(1)  Upon receipt of the recommendation of the committee, the City Manager may: 
(a)  Accept the findings and conclusions of the committee and order the Chief Building Official or Fire Marshal to carry out the committee's recommendation according to its terms. 
(b)  Accept the findings and conclusions of the committee in part and issue such order to the Chief Building Official or Fire Marshal as the City Manager determines is supported by the committee's findings and conclusions that the City Manager determines to accept. 
(c)  Accept the findings but reject the conclusions of the committee and issue such order to the Chief Building Official or Fire Marshal as the City Manager determines is supported by the committee's findings. 
(2)  The City Manager shall issue his or her decision within 15 days of receipt of the committee's recommendation. 
(3725) 
11-14-5. - Applicable Codes. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all building, fire and rental maintenance codes and amendments thereto as adopted by reference in Chapters 9, 10 and 12 of Title XI of this Code. References in this chapter refer to the codes specified in this section. 
(3725) 
11-14-6. - Meetings. 
    The committee shall meet at such times as may be necessary to hear and decide any matter assigned to it by the City Manager. 
(3725) 
11-14-7. - Rules of Procedure. 
    The hearings of the committee shall be informal, the rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply, and the committee may hear and receive such evidence in such form as it may deem appropriate to assist it in making its recommendation to the City Manager. 
(3725) 
11-14-8. - Hearings. 
    The committee shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the following requirements: 
(A)  All hearings shall be open to the public. The Secretary to the Committee shall notify all interested parties of the time and place of hearings. 
(B)  The committee shall keep a record of the proceedings, either stenographically or by sound recording. At the hearing, the Secretary to the Committee shall record the vote of each member on every case or, if a member is absent or fails to vote, shall record such fact. A transcript of the proceedings and copies of graphic or written material received in evidence shall be made available to any person upon request and payment in advance of the estimated cost of production. 
(C)  At the hearing, following the introduction of the case, the Chief Building Official or Fire Marshal, or their designee, may present the city's position and recommendation, after which the appellant or a representative of the appellant may present any pertinent information regarding the request. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant. 
(D)  All witnesses shall be sworn or shall affirm their testimony in the manner required in the courts of record where the City is located. 
(3725) 
11-14-9. - Appeals from Decisions of the Board. 
    The City or the appellant may appeal a decision of the City Manager to the District Court under the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 106(a)(4). 
(3725) 
11-14-10. - Acting Chairperson; Quorum; Procedure. 
    A quorum shall consist of all three members, and a decision of a majority of the members present shall control. 
(3725) 
CHAPTER 15. - CONSTRUCTION DEFECT CLAIMS CONCERNING CONDOMINIUMS AND TOWNHOMES 

11-15-1. - Definitions. 
(A)  The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this title, shall have the following meaning unless specifically defined in another Chapter: 
    Association shall be defined as provided in the Colorado Common Interest Ownership Act, Article 33.3 of Title 38, C.R.S., as amended. 
    Condominium shall be defined as provided in the Colorado Common Interest Ownership Act, Article 33.3 of Title 38, C.R.S., as amended. 
    Common interest community shall be defined as provided in the Colorado Common Interest Ownership Act, Article 33.3 of Title 38, C.R.S., as amended. 
    Construction defect claim shall mean a civil action or an arbitration proceeding for damages, indemnity, or contribution brought against a development party to assert a claim, counterclaim, cross-claim, or third-party claim for damages or loss to, or the loss of the use of, real or personal property or personal injury caused by a defect in the design or construction of an improvement to real property that is part of a condominium or townhome. 
    Declarant shall be defined as provided in the Colorado Common Interest Ownership Act, article 33.3 of Title 38, C.R.S., as amended. 
    Declaration shall be defined as provided in the Colorado Common Interest Ownership Act, Article 33.3 of Title 38, C.R.S., as amended. 
    Development party shall mean an architect, contractor, subcontractor, developer, declarant or affiliates of a declarant, builder, builder vendor, engineer, or inspector performing or furnishing the design, supervision, inspection, construction, or observation of the construction of any improvement to real property that is part of the common interest community or any other party responsible for any part of the design or construction of any portion of the common interest community, or any of such parties' affiliates, or the officers, directors, partners, shareholders, members, managers, employees or servants of any of them. 
    Executive Board shall be defined as provided in the Colorado Common Interest Ownership Act, Article 33.3 of Title 38, C.R.S., as amended. 
    Townhome is defined as a dwelling unit, often with a shared wall, in a common interest community, distinct from a condominium, whose owners often share common areas which are owned by a homeowners' association. 
    Unit shall be defined as provided in the Colorado Common Interest Ownership Act, Article 33.3 of Title 38, C.R.S., as amended. 
    Unit Owner shall be defined as provided in the Colorado Common Interest Ownership Act, Article 33.3 of Title 38, C.R.S., as amended. 
( Ord. No. 3867, § 2, 1-9-2017 ) 
11-15-2. - Relationship of City Building Codes to Construction Defect Claims Made by the Executive Board Associated with a Condominium or Townhome. 
(A)  In General: Subject to the following, a violation of any city building code as adopted in Chapter 9 of Article XI, W.M.C., or a failure to substantially comply with any such code shall not in and of itself create a private cause of action for an executive board associated with a condominium or townhome. A violation of any city building code as adopted in Chapter 9 of Article XI, W.M.C. or a failure to substantially comply with any such code may not be used to support or prove any construction defect claim made by the executive board associated with a condominium or townhome, regardless of the statutory or common law theory under which the claim is asserted, unless the violation or failure to substantially comply results in one or more of the following: 
(1)  Actual damage to real or personal property; 
(2)  Actual loss to the use of real or personal property; 
(3)  Bodily injury or wrongful death; or 
(4)  A risk of bodily injury or death to, or a threat to the life, health, or safety of, the occupants of residential real property. 
(B)  No Strict Liability for Building Code Violations: Under no circumstances shall a violation of any city building code as adopted in Chapter 9 of Article XI, or a failure to substantially comply with any such code, support or prove a construction defect claim made by the executive board associated with a condominium or townhome based upon a theory of strict liability, or under the common law doctrine of negligence per se. 
(C)  Code Compliant Improvements Shall be Presumed to Not be Defective: The building codes adopted in Chapter 9 of Article XI are intended to establish a minimum standard for safe and sound construction in Westminster. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any particular element, feature, component or other detail of any improvement to real property that is specifically regulated under the city's codes and is constructed or installed in substantial compliance with such codes is presumed to not be defective for purposes of proving any Construction Defect Claim made by the executive board associated with a Condominium or Townhome. 
( Ord. No. 3867, § 3, 1-9-2017 ) 
11-15-3. - Informed Consent for Construction Defect Claims Made by the Executive Board Associated with a Condominium or Townhome. 
(A)  Additional Information Required in Notice to Unit Owners: Before the Executive Board of a Condominium or Townhome institutes any legal action involving a Construction Defect Claim concerning five or more Units, the Executive Board shall include in the notice to Unit Owners required by § 38-33.3-303.5, C.R.S. the following additional information to more fully advise the Unit Owners of the nature of the action and the relief sought, in substantially the following form: 
(1)  If the Association does not file a claim by (DATE), the claim cannot be filed at all under the applicable statute of limitations, statute of repose, or both. 
(2)  If the Association prevails, the Executive Board expects that the Association may recover from the defendant(s) an amount between $_______ and $_______. 
(3)  Whether the Executive Board intends to enter into a contingency fee arrangement with the attorneys representing the Association, under which, of the amount the Association recovers from the defendant(s), the attorneys will be paid a contingency fee equal to _______ percent of the (net) (gross) recovery, or whether a different fee arrangement is proposed. The Executive Board estimates that, in addition to the attorney fees, the Association may incur costs totaling approximately $_______ for consultants, expert witnesses, depositions, filing fees, and other expenses of litigation. 
(4)  If the Association makes a claim and does not win, the Executive Board expects that the Association may have to pay for its own attorney fees, consultant fees, expert witness fees, and other costs (the amount listed in paragraph (3), above) and may have to pay defendant's consultant fees, expert witness fees, and court costs. Alternatively, if the Association prevails, such fees referenced above may be awarded to the Association. 
(5)  If the Association does not recover from the defendant(s), it may have to pay to repair or replace the claimed defective construction work. 
(6)  Until the claimed defective construction work is repaired or replaced, or until the construction defect claim is concluded, the market value of the affected units may be adversely affected. 
(7)  Until the claimed defective construction work is repaired or replaced, or until the claim is concluded, owners of the affected units may have difficulty refinancing and prospective buyers of the affected units may have difficulty obtaining financing. In addition, certain federal underwriting standards or regulations may prevent refinancing or obtaining a new loan in projects where a construction defect is claimed. In addition, certain lenders as a matter of policy might not refinance or provide a new loan in projects where a construction defect is claimed. 
(B)  Timing for Delivery of Notice to Unit Owners: The notice to Unit Owners required by §38-33.3-303.5, C.R.S., including the additional information set forth in subsection (A) of this section, must be sent at least 60 days before service of the notice of a Construction Defect Claim under the Colorado Construction Defect Action Reform Act, section 13-20-803.5, C.R.S. 
(C)  Majority Consent of Unit Owners Required: A Construction Defect Claim filed by the Executive Board is not authorized unless the Executive Board obtains the signed, written consent from owners, other than the Declarant, of Units to which at least a majority of the total votes, excluding votes allocated to Units owned by the Declarant, in the Association are allocated, which written consent acknowledges that the owner has received the notice required under §38-33.3-303.5, C.R.S., including the additional information set forth in subsection (a) of this section, and approves of the Executive Board's proposed action. 
(D)  Preservation of Privileged Information: Nothing in this section shall be construed to: 
(1)  Require the disclosure in the notice or disclosure to a Unit Owner of attorney-client communications or other privileged communication. 
(2)  Permit the notice to serve as a basis for any person to assert the waiver of any applicable privilege or right of confidentiality resulting from, or to claim immunity in connection with, the disclosure of information in the notice. 
( Ord. No. 3867, § 4, 1-9-2017 ) 
11-15-4. - Enforcement of Covenants Requiring Alternative Dispute Resolution for Construction Defect Claims Associated with a Condominium or Townhome. 
(A)  Whenever a Declaration for a Condominium or Townhome requires any form of alternative dispute resolution for Construction Defect Claims asserted by the Association, by the Executive Board, or by any Unit Owners, and the Declaration expressly prohibits any future amendment to the Declaration that would modify or eliminate the requirement for alternative dispute resolution without the consent of the Declarant, then any attempt to modify or eliminate the requirement for alternative dispute resolution by the Association, by the Executive Board or by the Unit Owners absent the consent of the Declarant shall be deemed ineffective, an abrogation of a contractual obligation, and void as against public policy. This section shall apply if and only if: 
(1)  The Declaration contains a provision substantially in the following form: 
"The terms and provisions of the Declaration requiring alternative dispute resolution for Construction Defect Claims inure to the benefit of Declarant, are enforceable by Declarant, and shall not ever be amended without the written consent of Declarant and without regard to whether Declarant owns any portion of the real estate at the time of such amendment. By taking title to a unit, each Owner acknowledges and agrees that the terms of the Declaration requiring alternative dispute resolution of construction defect claims are a significant inducement to the Declarant's willingness to develop and sell the units and that in the absence of the alternative dispute resolution provisions contained in the Declaration, Declarant would have been unable and unwilling to develop and sell the units for the prices paid by the original purchasers."; and 
(2)  The provisions of the Declaration requiring alternative dispute resolution for Construction Defect Claims require that any arbitration shall be governed by the substantive law of Colorado; and 
(3)  If the arbitrator fails to follow the substantive law of Colorado, a court may vacate or refuse to confirm the arbitrator's decision on that basis; and 
(4)  The provisions of the Declaration requiring alternative dispute resolution for Construction Defect Claims inures to the benefit of other Development Parties in addition to the Declarant; and 
(5)  The provisions of the Declaration requiring alternative dispute resolution for Construction Defect Claims are consistent with the requirements of the Colorado Uniform Arbitration Act, Part 2 of Article 22 of Title 13, C.R.S., including but not limited to the requirement that any mediator or arbitrator selected to preside over a Construction Defect Claim must be a neutral third party as required by §13-22-211(2), C.R.S., and that the mediator or arbitrator shall make the disclosures required by §13-22-212, C.R.S.; and 
(6)  The provisions of the Declaration requiring alternative dispute resolution for Construction Defect Claims require that any mediation or arbitration must be held at a mutually agreeable time and location. 
( Ord. No. 3867, § 5, 1-9-2017 ) 
CHAPTER 16. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS PERMITS 

11-16-1. - Purpose and Intent. 
    In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community, the City Council finds that these regulations are necessary to: 
(A)  Establish a local policy concerning communications service providers; 
(B)  Promote competition in the provision of communications services; 
(C)  Facilitate the provision of wireless communications services to the residents and businesses of the City; 
(D)  Minimize adverse visual effects of towers, antennas and both wireless and wired communication facilities through careful design and siting standards, including but not limited to camouflage design techniques, appropriate screening, and undergrounding of associated equipment whenever possible; 
(E)  Encourage collocation and maximize the use of existing and approved towers, buildings, and other structures to accommodate new wireless communications facilities in order to reduce the number of support structures needed to serve the community; 
(F)  Encourage the deployment of smaller, less intrusive wireless communications facilities to replace or supplement existing larger wireless communications facilities; 
(G)  Effectively manage telecommunications or broadband provider facilities in the dedicated rights-of-way and dedicated utility easements of the City; and 
(H)  Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the City and its taxpayers for the use of any appropriate property, owned or acquired by the City in its proprietary capacity, as a site for communications facilities. 
( Ord. No. 3891, § 6, 6-26-2017 ) 
11-16-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Alternative tower structure or ATS shall mean flagpoles, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, farm silos, water towers, and similar alternative design mounting structures that are compatible with its setting and surrounding structures, natural or otherwise, and which camouflages or conceals the presence of antennas or towers. This term also includes any antenna or antenna array attached to the alternative tower structure. A freestanding pole in the public right-of-way that accommodates small cell facilities is considered an alternative tower structure to the extent that it meets the camouflage and concealment standards of this Chapter. 
    Antenna(s) shall mean any device used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves such as, but not limited to panel antennas, reflecting discs, microwave dishes, whip antennas, directional and non-directional antennas consisting of one or more elements, multiple antenna configurations, or other similar devices. 
    Base station shall mean a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, except that a base station does not include or encompass a tower as defined herein or any equipment associated with a tower. Base station does include, without limitation: 
(1)  Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this Chapter, has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support. 
(2)  Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplied, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems "DAS" and small-cell networks) that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this Chapter, has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support. 
The definition of base station does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this Chapter, does not support or house equipment described in Sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) above. 
    Broadband facility shall mean any infrastructure used to deliver broadband service or for the provision of broadband service. 
    Broadband provider shall mean a person that provides broadband service. 
    Broadband service shall mean any technology identified by the U.S. Secretary of Agriculture as having the capacity to transmit data to enable a subscriber to the service to originate and receive high-quality voice, data, graphics, and video. 
    Camouflage, concealment, or camouflage design techniques shall mean when any measures are used in the design and siting of towers, base stations or wireless communication facilities with the intent to minimize or eliminate the visual impact of such facilities to surrounding uses. A site utilizes camouflage design techniques when it (i) is integrated as an architectural feature of an existing structure such as a cupola, or (ii) is integrated in an outdoor fixture such as a flagpole, or (iii) uses a design which mimics and is consistent with the nearby natural, or architectural features (such as an artificial tree) or (iv) is incorporated into or replaces existing permitted facilities (including without limitation, stop signs or other traffic signs or freestanding light standards) so that the presence of the tower, base station or wireless communications facility is not readily apparent. For base stations and other associated equipment, below grade vault placement will constitute camouflage or concealment. 
    Collocation shall mean the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes so that installation of a new support structure will not be required. 
    Eligible facilities request shall mean a request for modification of an existing tower or existing base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving (i) collocation of new transmission equipment, (ii) removal of transmission equipment, or (iii) replacement of transmission equipment. 
    Eligible support structure shall mean any tower or base station as defined in this Section, provided that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this Chapter. 
    Existing shall mean a constructed tower or base station that was reviewed, approved, and lawfully constructed in accordance with all requirements of applicable law as of the time of an eligible facilities request, provided that a tower that exists as a legal, nonconforming use and was lawfully constructed is existing for purposes of this definition. 
    FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Landowner shall mean a natural person or persons, partnership, company, corporation or other legal entity recorded, in the records of the Adams or Jefferson County Clerk and Recorder, as the owner of the real property upon which the communications facility is located or proposed to be located. For the purposes of a communications facility located on a building or other existing structure that is owned by a different legal entity than the owner of the real property, both the real property owner and the owner of the building or structure will be considered to be landowners. 
    Micro wireless facility shall mean a small wireless facility that is no larger in dimensions than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, that is no more than 11 inches in length. 
    Public right(s)-of-way shall mean dedicated roads, streets, alleys and dedicated generic utility easements. The term does not include any portion of a road, street, alley or utility easement that was not dedicated to the City but was acquired by means of purchase, eminent domain, exchange of property, or payment of other compensation, nor does it include specific-purpose utility easements, unless the specific purpose of the utility easement dedication included transportation facilities or public access. ;p0; Screen wall shall mean an opaque structure, typically located on top of, but integrated with the design of, a building that conceals mechanical, communications or other equipment from view from the surrounding rights-of-ways and properties. 
    Site shall mean for towers other than towers in the public right-of-way and eligible support structures, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower or eligible support structure and any access or utility easements currently related to the site. For other alternative towers structures, base stations, and small cell facilities in the right-of-way, a site is further restricted to that area comprising the base of the structure and to other related transmission equipment already deployed on the ground. 
    Small cell facility shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  A wireless service facility that meets both of the following qualifications: 
(a)  Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than three cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than three cubic feet; and 
(b)  Primary equipment enclosures are no larger than 17 cubic feet in volume as measured on the exterior surface of the enclosure. The following associated equipment may be located outside of the primary equipment enclosure and, if so located, is not included in the calculation of equipment volume: Electric meter, concealment, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, back-up power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, and cut-off switch; or 
(2)  A micro wireless facility. 
    Small cell network shall mean a collection of interrelated small cell facilities designed to deliver wireless service. 
    Substantially change shall mean any of the following, and refers to a single change or a series of changes over time (whether made by the same or different entities) viewed against the initial approval for the tower or base station that individually or cumulatively produces: 
(1)  For towers other than alternative tower structures in the right-of-way, increases in the height of the tower by more than ten percent or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, increases in the height of the structure by more than ten percent or more than ten feet, whichever is greater; 
(2)  For towers other than towers in the right-of-way, the addition of an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for eligible support structures, the addition of an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet; 
(3)  For any eligible support structure, the installation of more than, but not to exceed four, the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved (but not to exceed four); or for towers in the right-of-way and base stations, the installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure. 
(4)  For any eligible support structure, any excavation or deployment outside the current site; 
(5)  For any eligible support structure, an undermining of the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or 
(6)  For any eligible support structure, non-compliance with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment, unless the non-compliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, addition of cabinets, or new excavation that would not exceed the thresholds identified in Paragraphs (1)-(4) of above. 
For the purpose of determining whether a substantial change exists, changes in height are measured from the original support structure in those case where deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on building rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height are measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to February 22, 2012. 
    Telecommunications provider shall mean a person that provides telecommunications service or services, with the exception of cable services and aggregators of telecommunications services as those terms are defined by federal law. Telecommunications provider does not mean a person or business using antennas, support towers, equipment, and/or buildings used to transmit high power over-the-air broadcast of AM. and FM radio, VHF and UHF television, and advanced television services, including high definition television. 
    Telecommunications service(s) shall mean the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used. 
    Tower shall mean any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including private, broadcast, and public safety services, unlicensed wireless services, fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and other similar structures. 
    Transmission equipment shall mean equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. 
    Wireless communications facility or wireless service facility (WCF) shall mean a facility used to provide personal wireless services as defined at 47 U.S.C. Section 332 (c)(7)(C), or wireless information services provided to the public or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public via licensed or unlicensed frequencies, or wireless utility monitoring and control services. A WCF may include an antenna or antennas (but does not include coaxial or fiber optic cable that is not immediately adjacent to, or directly associated with, a particular antenna), base stations, alternative tower structures, and towers. A WCF does not include a facility entirely enclosed within a permitted building where the installation does not require a modification of the exterior of the building. It does not include the support structure to which the WCF or its components are attached if the use of such structures for WCFs is not the primary use. The term does not include mobile transmitting devices used by wireless service subscribers, such as vehicle or hand held radios/telephones and their associated transmitting antennas, nor does it include other facilities specifically excluded from the coverage of this Chapter. 
( Ord. No. 3891, § 6, 6-26-2017 ; Ord. No. 3981 , § 1, 4-8-2019) 
11-16-3. - Applicability. 
(A)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply, except as noted herein, and it shall be unlawful for a tower, antenna, or other communications facility to be placed within the City except in compliance with these provisions. 
(B)  The following facilities are not subject to the requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  Antennas or Towers Used by FCC-Licensed Amateur Radio Operators. Such facilities shall be permitted in any non-PUD or non-SPD zoning district up to the maximum height specified for principal structures for that district. In existing PUD and SPD districts, the operator must apply for an official development plan (ODP) amendment to establish permissible structure heights if the ODP fails to specify height limitations for antennas or towers for that district. 
(2)  Television or Radio Antennas. Those antennas, including over the air reception devices, located on single family dwellings or duplexes, less than five feet above the highest point of the existing principal structure, or for ground mounted antennas, the requirement that the height be no more than the distance from its base to the property line or the maximum height specified for accessory structures for that district, whichever is less. The City Manager or his or her designee has the authority to approve modifications to the height restriction related to over the air reception device antennas and antenna structures, if in the reasonable discretion of the City, modifications are necessary to comply with federal law. 
(3)  City-Owned Facilities. City-owned communications facilities located on City-owned property and/or public rights-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 3891, § 6, 6-26-2017 ) 
11-16-4. - Operational Standards. 
(A)  Federal Requirements. All WCFs shall meet the current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate WCFs. If such standards and regulations are changes, then the owners of the WCF shall bring such facility into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the time period mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to meet such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the WCF at the owner's expense. 
(B)  Radio Frequency Standards. All WCFs shall comply with federal standards for radio frequency emissions. If concerns regarding compliance with radio frequency emissions standards for a WCF have been made to the City, the City may request that the owner or operator of the WCF provide information demonstrating compliance. If such information is not sufficient, in the reasonable discretion of the City, to demonstrate compliance, the City may request and the owner or operator of the WCF shall submit a project implementation report which provides cumulative field measurements of radio frequency emissions of all antennas installed at the subject site, and which compares the results with established federal standards. If, upon review, the City finds that the facility does not meet federal standards, the City may require corrective action within a reasonable period of time, and if not corrected, may require removal of the WCF pursuant to paragraph (F) below. Any reasonable costs incurred by the City, including reasonable consulting costs to verify compliance with these requirements, shall be paid by the Applicant. 
(C)  Signal Interference. All WCFs shall be designed and sited so as not to cause interference with the normal operation of radio, television, telephone and other communication services utilized by adjacent residential and non-residential properties; nor shall any such facilities interfere with any public safety communications. The applicant shall provide a written statement from a qualified radio frequency engineer, certifying that a technical evaluation of existing and proposed facilities indicates no potential interference problems and shall allow the City to monitor interference levels with public safety communications during this process. Additionally, the applicant shall notify the City at least ten calendar days prior to the introduction of new service or changes in existing service, and shall allow the City to monitor interference levels with public safety communications during the testing process. 
(D)  Legal Access. In all applications for WCFs an applicant must warrant and represent that it has the written agreement of the owner of the property which is the subject of the application for legal access to and from the WCF and the applicant must also warrant and represent that it will have legal access to the utilities to operate and maintain the WCF. 
(E)  Operation and Maintenance. To ensure the structural integrity of WCFs, the owner of a WCF shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building and safety codes. If upon inspection, the City concludes that a WCF fails to comply with such codes and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon written notice being provided to the owner of the WCF, the owner shall have 30 days from the date of notice to bring such WCF into compliance. Upon good cause shown by the owner, the City's Chief Building Official may extend such compliance period not to exceed 90 days from the date of said notice. If the owner fails to bring such WCF into compliance within said time period, the City may remove such WCF at the owner's expense. 
(F)  Abandonment and Removal. If a WCF has not been in use for a period of three months, the owner of the WCF shall notify the City of the non-use and shall indicate whether re-use is expected within the ensuing three months. Any WCF that is not operated for a continuous period of six months shall be considered abandoned. The City, in its sole discretion, may require an abandoned WCF to be removed. The owner of such WCF shall remove the same within 30 days of receipt of written notice form the City. Upon removal, the land shall be restored and re-landscaped, at the operator's expense, to the level of finish of the adjacent landscaped area. If such WCF is not removed within said 30 days, the City may remove it at the owner's expense and any approved permits for the WCF shall be deemed to have expired. With respect to any WCF in the Right-of-Way, such WCF shall be removed within 120 days after notification by the City that the Right-of-Way is needed by the City for the expansion, construction, or reconstruction of a street or highway or other use by the City for any City project. Such removal shall be at the sole expense of the WCF owner and if the WCF owner fails to remove the WCF within the said 120 days, the City may remove the WCF and charge the costs to the WCF owner. 
( Ord. No. 3891, § 6, 6-26-2017 ) 
11-16-5. - Design Standards. 
(A)  The requirements set forth in this Section shall apply to the location and design of all WCFs governed by this Section as specified below; provided, however, that the City may waive these requirements it if determines that the goals of this Section are better served thereby. To that end, WCFs shall be designed and located to minimize the impact on the surrounding neighborhood and to maintain the character and appearance of the City, consistent with other provisions of this Code. 
(1)  Camouflage/Concealment. All WCFs and any transmission equipment shall, to the extent possible, use camouflage design techniques including, but not limited to the use of materials, colors, textures, screening, undergrounding, landscaping, or other design options that will blend the WCF to the surrounding natural setting and built environment. Design, materials and colors of WCFs shall be compatible with the surrounding environment. Designs shall be compatible with structures and vegetation on the same parcel and adjacent parcels. 
(a)  Camouflage design may be of heightened importance where findings of particular sensitivity are made (e.g., proximity to historic or aesthetically significant structures, views, and/or community features). In such instances where WCFs are located in areas of high visibility, they shall (where possible) be designed (e.g., placed underground, depressed, or located behind earth berms) to minimize their profile. 
(b)  The camouflage design may include the use of alternative tower structures should the determined that such design meets the intent of this Code and the community is better served thereby. 
(c)  All WCFs, such as antennas, vaults, equipment rooms, equipment enclosures, and tower structures shall be constructed out of non-reflective materials (visible exterior surfaces only). 
(2)  Hazardous Materials. No hazardous materials shall be permitted in association with WCFs, except those necessary for the operations of the WCF and only in accordance with all applicable laws governing such materials. 
(3)  Siting. 
(a)  No portion of any WCF may extend beyond the property line. 
(b)  Collocation. WCFs may be required to be designed and constructed to permit the facility to accommodate WCFs from at least two wireless service providers on the same WCF unless the City approves an alternative design. No WCF owner or operator shall unfairly exclude a competitor from using the same facility or location. 
(c)  WCFs shall be sited in a location that does not reduce the parking for the other principal uses on the parcel below Code standards. 
(4)  Lighting. WCFs shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable governmental authority, or the WCF is mounted on a light pole or other similar structure primarily used for lighting purposes. If lighting is required, the City may require available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. Lighting shall be shielded or directed to the greatest extent possible so as to minimize the amount of glare and light falling onto nearby properties, particularly residences. 
(5)  Landscape Requirements. 
(a)  WCFs shall be sited in a manner that does not reduce the landscaped areas for the other principal uses on the parcel, below Code standards. 
(b)  WCFs shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screen the view of the WCF from adjacent residential property. The standard buffer shall consist of the front, side, and rear landscaped setback on the perimeter of the site. 
(c)  In locations where the visual impact of the WCF would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived altogether by the City Manager or assigned designee. 
(d)  Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as WCFs sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the site perimeter may be sufficient to buffer. 
(e)  No trees larger than four inches in diameter measured at four and one-half feet high on the tree may be removed, unless authorized by the City Manager. To obtain such authorization the applicant shall show that tree removal is necessary, the applicant's plan minimizes the number of trees to be removed and any trees removed are replaced at a ratio of two to one. 
(6)  Noise. Noise generated on the site must not exceed the levels permitted in the City Code, except that a WCF owner or operator shall be permitted to exceed City Code noise standards for a reasonable period of time during repairs, not to exceed two hours without prior authorization from the City. 
(7)  Urban Renewal Areas. If the built environment is anticipated to change significantly during the usable life of a WCF, such as within an urban renewal district, the WCF shall be compatible with the anticipated future built environment. 
(8)  Additional design requirements shall be applicable to the various types of WCFs as specified below: 
(a)  Base Stations. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, such as a base station (including, but not limited to the antennas and accessory equipment) it shall be of a neutral, non-reflective color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure, or uses other camouflage/concealment design techniques so as to make the antenna and related facilities as visually unobtrusive as possible, e.g., positioned behind an RF transparent screen wall designed to look like an integrated part of the structure with all exposed surfaces painted or colored and finished to match the design, finish, and color of the surrounding building elements. 
(b)  Alternative Tower Structures and Small Cell Facilities. An ATS or Small Cell Facility shall be designed and constructed to look like a building, facility, or structure typically found in the area. 
(c)  Alternative Tower Structures Located in the Right-of-Way. In addition to the other criteria contained in this Section, an ATS located in the right-of-way shall be consistent with the following: 
(i)  With respect to its pole-mounted components, be located on or within an existing utility pole serving another utility; 
(ii)  Be camouflaged/concealed consistent with other existing natural or manmade features in the right-of-way near the location where the ATS will be located; 
(iii)  With respect to its pole components, be located on or within a new utility pole where other utility distribution lines are aerial, if there are no reasonable alternatives, and the applicant is authorized to construct the new utility pole; 
(iv)  To the extent reasonably feasible, be consistent with the size and shape of the pole-mounted equipment installed by communications companies on utility poles near the ATS; 
(v)  Be sized to minimize the negative aesthetic impacts to the right-of-way; 
(vi)  Be designed such that antenna installations on traffic signal standards are placed in a manner so that the size, appearance, and function of the signal will not be considerably altered; 
(vii)  Require that any ground mounted equipment shall be located in a manner necessary to address both public safety and aesthetic concerns in the reasonable discretion of the City Manager, and may, where appropriate, require a flush-to-grade underground equipment vault; 
(viii)  Not alter vehicular circulation or parking within the right-of-way or impede vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian access or visibility along the right-of-way. The ATS must comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act and every other local, state, and federal law and regulation. No ATS may be located or maintained in a manner that causes unreasonable interference. Unreasonable interference means any use of the right-of-way that disrupts or interferes with its use by the City, the general public, or other person authorized to use or be present upon the right-of-way, when there exists an alternative that would result in less disruption or interference. Unreasonable interference includes any use of the right-of-way that disrupts vehicular or pedestrian traffic, any interference with public utilities, and any other activity that will present a hazard to public health, safety, or welfare. 
(d)  Towers. 
(i)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish, or, subject to any applicable FAA standards, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness as determined by the City; 
(ii)  Tower structures should use existing land forms, vegetation, and structures to aid in screening the facility from view or blending in with the surrounding built and natural environment; 
(iii)  Monopole support structures shall taper from the base to the tip; 
(iv)  All towers shall be enclosed by security fencing or wall at least six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; and 
(v)  Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, no towers located in the public right-of-way shall exceed the height limit for the maximum structure (non-building) height for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(e)  Related Accessory Equipment. Accessory equipment for all WCFs shall meet the following requirements: 
(i)  All buildings, shelter, cabinets, and other accessory components shall be grouped as closely as technically possible. If accessory equipment is to be ground-mounted, it shall be enclosed in an enclosure that is clad with the same primary cladding material of the nearest building located on the same property, or with materials and colors complimentary with the immediate surroundings of the enclosure in the absence of a nearby building. The enclosure shall screen all equipment to its full height. If back-up generators or other equipment that will potentially generate noise are located in the enclosure, the enclosure shall be constructed of a masonry material such as concrete, cinder block, or CMU and then clad as previously described. The enclosure should have a secure metal door painted in a color compatible to the nearby building or surrounding area. The enclosure shall be protected by curbs, bollards, or similar devices, if placed in close proximity to where vehicular traffic is expected. Equipment (existing or new) may also be placed in underground vaults, negating the need for above-ground enclosures. Alternate screening or enclosure designs may be considered for approval, on a case-by-case basis, by the Planning Manager; 
(ii)  The total footprint coverage area of the WCF's related accessory equipment shall not exceed 350 square feet; 
(iii)  No related accessory equipment shall exceed 12 feet in height; 
(iv)  Accessory equipment, such as, by way of example and not limitation, remote radio units, shall be located out of sight whenever possible by locating behind parapet walls or within equipment enclosures. Where such alternate locations are not available, the accessory equipment shall be camouflaged or concealed. 
( Ord. No. 3891, § 6, 6-26-2017 ; Ord. No. 3981 , § 2, 4-8-2019) 
11-16-6. - Application, Review Procedures and Requirements. 
(A)  No new WCF shall be constructed and no collocation or modification to any WCF, including WCFs approved as part of an existing ODP, may occur except after a written request from an applicant, reviewed and approved by the City in accordance with this Chapter. All WCFs, except eligible facilities requests that are reviewed under Paragraphs (5) and (8) of this Subsection, shall be reviewed pursuant to the following procedures: 
(1)  Submittal Requirements. In addition to an application form, Signal Interference Letter, Proof of Owner Authorization, Proof of Agent Authorization (from the carrier), and submittal fees, each applicant shall submit a scaled site plan, photo simulation, scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate qualified professionals, showing the location and dimension of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, drainage, and other information deemed by the City Manager to be necessary to assess compliance with this Section. 
(2)  Inventory of Existing Sites. Each applicant for a WCF shall provide to the City Manager a narrative and map description of the applicant's existing or then currently proposed WCFs within the City, and outside of the City within one mile of its boundaries. In addition, the applicant shall inform the City generally of the areas of the City in which it believes WCFs may need to be located within the next three years. The inventory list should identify the site name, site address or general vicinity if no address is known, and a general description of the facility (e.g., rooftop antennas and ground mounted equipment). This provision is not intended to be a requirement that the applicant submit its business plan, proprietary information, or make commitments regarding locations of WCFs within the City. Rather, it is an attempt to provide a mechanism for the City and all applicants for WCFs to share general information, assist in the City's comprehensive planning process, and promote collocation by identifying areas in which WCFs might be appropriately constructed for multiple users. 
The Community Development Department may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or permits under this Chapter or other organizations seeking to locate WCFs within the jurisdiction of the City, provided however, that the Community Development Department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(3)  Applications for base stations, alternative tower structures and alternative tower structures within right-of-way, shall be reviewed by the City Manager or his or her designee to determine that the requirements of this Chapter have been met. If the review determines that one or more of the conditions required by this Chapter have not been met, the City will notify the applicant in writing describing the reasons therefor or the conditions that have not been satisfied. 
(4)  All applications for towers shall demonstrate that other alternative design options such as base stations or alternative tower structures are not viable options as determined by the City. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, no towers located in the public right-of-way shall exceed the height limit for the maximum structure (non-building) height for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(5)  Alternative Review Procedures for Eligible Facilities Requests. 
(a)  Application. The City shall prepare, and from time to time revise and make publicly available, an application form which shall be limited to the information necessary for the City to consider whether an application for collocation is an eligible facilities request. Such application will not require the applicant to demonstrate a need or business case for the proposed modification or collocation. Such information may include, without limitation, whether the project: 
(i)  Would result in a substantial change; 
(ii)  Violates a generally applicable building, structural, electrical, or safety codes, or other rule codifying objective standards related to public health and safety, or results in non-compliance with any relevant federal requirements. 
(b)  Type of Review. Upon receipt of an application for an eligible facilities request pursuant to this Section, the City Manager shall review such application to determine whether the application so qualifies. 
(c)  Timeframe for Review. Subject to the tolling provisions of Subparagraph (d) below, within 60 days of the date on which an applicant submits an application seeking approval under this Section, the City shall approve the application unless it determines that the application is not covered by this Section. 
(d)  Tolling of the Timeframe for Review. Given the City's electronic application system, the 60-day review period begins to run when the application is filed or the first day thereafter that the City is open for business, whichever is later, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement of the City and the applicant, or in cases where the City Manager or designee determines that the application is incomplete: 
(i)  To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City must provide written notice to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application; 
(ii)  The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental written submission in response to the City's notice of incompleteness; and 
(iii)  Following a supplemental submission, the City will notify the applicant within ten days that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in Subparagraph (d)(i). In the case of a second or subsequent notice of incompleteness, the City may not specify missing documents or information that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness. 
(e)  Failure to Act. In the event the City fails to approve or deny a request seeking approval for an eligible facilities request under this Section within the timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted. The deemed grant becomes effective when the applicant notifies the City in writing after the review period has expired (accounting for any tolling) that the application has been deemed granted. 
(f)  Remedies. Applicants and reviewing authorities may bring claims related to Section 6409(a) to any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(g)  Interaction with Telecommunications Act Section 332(c)(7). If the City determines that the applicant's request is not an eligible facilities request as delineated in this Chapter, the presumptively reasonable timeframe under Section 332(c)(7), as prescribed by the FCC's shot clock order, will begin to run from the issuance of the City's decision that the application is not a covered request. To the extent such information is necessary, the City may request additional information from the applicant to evaluate the application under Section 332(c)(7) reviews. 
(6)  Abandonment and Removal. Prior to approval, affidavits shall be required from the owner of the property and from the applicant acknowledging that each is responsible for the removal of a WCF that is abandoned or is unused for a period of six months. 
(7)  Decision. Any decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a WCF, shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. The Applicant shall receive a copy of the decision. 
(8)  Compliance with Applicable Law. Notwithstanding the approval of an application for new WCFs or collocation as described herein, all work done pursuant to WCF applications must be completed in accordance with all applicable building, structural, electrical, and safety codes and any other applicable laws or regulations. In addition, all WCF applications shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Comply with any permit or license issued by a local, state, or federal agency with jurisdiction of the WCF; 
(b)  Comply with easements, covenants, conditions and/or restrictions on or applicable to the underlying real property; 
(c)  Be maintained in good working condition and to the standards established at the time of application approval; and 
(d)  Remain free from trash, debris, litter, graffiti, and other forms of vandalism. Any damage shall be repaired as soon as practicable, and in no instance more than ten calendar days from the time of notification by the City or after discovery by the owner or operator of the site. 
(9)  Compliance Report. Upon request by the City, the applicant shall provide a compliance report within 45 days after installation of a WCF, demonstrating that as installed and in operation, the WCF complies with all conditions of approval, applicable Code requirements and standard regulations. 
(10)  Permit Expiration. Any active permit application that is not acted upon by the applicant within 180 days of receiving review comments from the City or any approved permit that has not been acted upon within 180 days of approval shall be deemed abandoned, and shall become null and void, with no fees refunded. In the event that an application or approved permit becomes null and void under this Section, a new permit must be separately applied for, reviewed, and approved before any work may commence on the project site. 
( Ord. No. 3891, § 6, 6-26-2017 ; Ord. No. 3981 , § 3, 4-8-2019) 
11-16-7. - Standards for Approval. 
(A)  It is the intent of the City to provide for approval of WCFs administratively in cases where visual impacts are minimized, view corridors are protected, WCFs utilize appropriate camouflage/concealment design techniques to avoid adverse impacts on the surrounding area, and WCFs are designed, maintained, and operated at all times to comply with the provisions of this Section and all applicable law. Notwithstanding the approval of an application for collocation as described herein, all work done pursuant to WCF applications must be completed in accordance with all applicable building and safety requirements as set forth in City Code and any other applicable regulations. 
(B)  Wireless communication facilities, which are not eligible facilities requests, shall be evaluated for approval subject to compliance with the design standards of Section 11-16-5 and the following criteria: 
(1)  Base Stations: 
(a)  Such facilities shall be architecturally compatible with respect to attachments, and colored to match the building or structure to which they are attached; 
(b)  The maximum protrusion of such facilities from the building or structure face to which they are attached shall be four feet; 
(c)  Wall mounted WCFs shall not extend above the roofline; and 
(d)  Wall mounted WCFs shall be approved only where an applicant demonstrates a roof mounted WCF is inadequate to provide service and evaluated for approval based upon the following criteria. By filing an application for a roof mounted WCF, an applicant is certifying agreement to the City's determination that the height extensions described in sub Subparagraph (i) and (ii) below are the maximum height that will allow the WCF to be camouflaged, and that any additional increase in height will undermine the camouflaged nature of the site: 
(i)  Roof mounted whip antennas shall extend no more than 12 feet above the parapet of any flat roof or ridge of a sloped roof or penthouse to which they are attached; 
(ii)  Roof mounted panel antennas shall extend no more than seven feet above the parapet of a flat roof or ridge of a sloped roof to which they are mounted; and 
(iii)  Other roof mounted accessory transmission equipment shall extend no more than seven feet above any parapet of a flat roof upon which they may be placed, and shall not be permitted on a sloped roof. 
(iv)  All WCFs installed on a rooftop shall be concealed by a screen wall. Such screen wall shall be designed to appear integrated into the building architecture. 
(2)  Alternative Tower Structures. 
(a)  Such structures shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding area; 
(b)  Height and size of the proposed alternative tower structure should be minimized as much as possible; 
(c)  WCFs shall be sited in a manner that evaluates the proximity of the facility to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
(d)  WCFs should take into consideration the uses on adjacent and nearby properties and the compatibility of the facility to these uses; 
(e)  Compatibility with the surrounding topography; 
(f)  Compatibility with the surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
(g)  Compatibility of the design of the site, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; and 
(h)  Impact on the surrounding area of the proposed ingress and egress, if any. 
(3)  Wireless Communication Facilities within Public Rights-of-Way. An ATS or small cell facility may be deployed in the public rights-of-way including utilization of a street light pole or similar structure within a public right-of-way. Such facilities shall remain subject to the alternative tower structures standards of approval noted above and subject to the City of Westminster's Small Cell Infrastructure Guidelines document and the following criteria below: 
(a)  The pole or structure is not more than ten feet higher (as measured from the ground to the top of the pole) than any existing utility or traffic signal within 500 feet of the pole or structure. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, no towers located in the public right-of-way shall exceed the height limit for the maximum structure (non-building) height for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(c)  When placed in a residential zone, the WCF shall be placed adjacent to the common side yard property line between adjoining residential properties, so that the WCF minimizes visual impacts equitably among adjacent properties. In the case of a corner lot, the WCF may be placed adjacent to the common side yard property line between adjoining residential properties or on the corner formed by two intersecting streets. 
(d)  Collocations are strongly encouraged and the number of poles within the right-of-way should be limited as much as possible. 
(e)  Equipment enclosures shall follow all City of Westminster Small Cell Guideline requirements. 
(f)  If the pole or structure is not owned by the City, the applicant must provide the appropriately authorized written permission from the owner of the pole or structure at the time that the initial application is submitted. 
(4)  All Other Towers. The City shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue an approval, although the City may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant if one or more of these criteria if the City concludes that the goals of this Section are better served thereby. 
(a)  Height or size of the proposed tower; 
(b)  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
(c)  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(d)  Compatibility with the surrounding topography: 
(e)  Compatibility with the surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
(f)  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
(g)  Proposed ingress and egress; 
(h)  No new towers shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the City that no existing WCFs can accommodate the needs that the applicant proposes to address with its tower application. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing WCF can accommodate these needs may consist of the following: 
(i)  No existing WCFs with a suitable height are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
(ii)  Existing WCFs do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed WCF; 
(iii)  The applicant's proposed WCFs would cause electromagnetic interference with the WCFs on the existing WCFs or the existing WCF would cause interference with the applicant's proposed WCF; and 
(iv)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing WCFs unsuitable for collocation. 
(j)  Setbacks and Separation. A tower shall meet the greater of the following minimum setbacks from all property lines: 
(i)  The setback for a principal building within the applicable zoning; 
(ii)  Twenty-five percent of the facility height, including WCFs and related accessory equipment; 
(iii)  The tower height, including antennas, if the tower is in or adjacent to a residential zoning district. 
( Ord. No. 3891, § 6, 6-26-2017 ; Ord. No. 3981 , § 4, 4-8-2019) 
11-16-8. - Locations on City Property. 
    A request to locate a telecommunications facility, a tower, a base station, or a small cell wireless facility on property owned by the City that is not public right-of-way, shall be reviewed by the City Manager pursuant to the procedures adopted by City Council Resolution 2009-8, as amended from time to time, for the review of uses on public lands. 
( Ord. No. 3891, § 6, 6-26-2017 ) 
Title XIII. - PARKS, RECREATION, AND LIBRARIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3930 , § 1, adopted Apr. 23, 2018, retitled Tit. XIII from "Parks and Recreation" to read as herein set out. 

CHAPTER 1. - PARKS, OPEN SPACE, AND COMMUNITY BUILDING REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3838, § 4, adopted September 12, 2016, repealed the former chapter 1, §§ 13-1-1-13-1-9, and enacted a new chapter 1 as set out herein. The former chapter 1 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 2016 Republication. 

13-1-1. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of the City's parklands, open space properties, and community buildings, in order that all persons may enjoy and make use of such resources and to protect the rights of those in the surrounding areas. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 4, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-1-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this title, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Amplified sound shall mean speech or music projected or transmitted by electronic equipment, including amplifiers, loudspeakers, microphones, bull horns or similar devices or combinations of devices that are intended to increase the volume, range, distance or intensity of speech or music and are powered by electricity, battery or combustible fuel. 
    Bicycle shall mean and include bicycles and electrical assisted bicycles, as those terms are defined in § 42-1-102, C.R.S. 
    Body of water shall mean any lake, pond, reservoir, or stream, or any portion thereof, owned or operated by the City. 
    Charge-out shall mean any library item checked out and recorded against an individual's library card and library records. 
    City shall mean the City of Westminster, Colorado. 
    Community building shall mean one or more of those structures, buildings, or any portion thereof, under the supervision of the Westminster Department of Parks, Recreation and Libraries; and any other publicly owned building or structure used for recreational purposes within the City. 
    Director shall mean the Director of the Department of Parks, Recreation and Libraries or that person's designated agent or employee. 
    Library material includes, but is not limited to, any book, magazine, periodical, microfilm, or reproduction, plate, picture, engraving, map, newspaper, pamphlet, manuscript, film, phonograph record or audio and video recordings, computer software, or other items belonging to the Westminster public libraries. 
    Open space properties shall mean the parcels of land comprising the open space program, as described in Chapter 13-5, W.M.C., including all properties acquired for open space, donated to the Open Space Program, or designated or redesignated as open space by the City Council. 
    Other power driven mobility device or OPDMD shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Regulation 29 C.F.R. §35.104, as amended from time to time, currently defined to mean any mobility device powered by batteries, fuel, or other engines-whether or not designated primarily for use by individuals with mobility disabilities-that is used by individuals with mobility disabilities for the purpose of locomotion, including golf cars, electronic personal assistance mobility devices (EPAMDS), such as the Segway PT, or any mobility device designed to operate in areas without defined pedestrian routes, but that is not a wheelchair within the meaning of this section. 
    Park or parks shall mean all grounds, roadways, avenues, parklands, open space properties, parking lots and areas and recreation facilities therein under the supervision of the Westminster Department of Parks, Recreation and Libraries; and all other publicly owned or operated parks and recreation facilities within the City, including Standley Lake and the land around it (Standley Lake Recreation Area), the publicly owned areas of the Westminster Promenade, the property on which City Hall is located, and the property on which the Public Safety Center is located. "Parklands" shall mean a subset of "Parks," traditionally understood to be developed parcels of land improved with recreational facilities or community buildings, formally planted with turfgrass and other vegetation, and designed and maintained for active recreational uses. 
    Persons shall mean natural persons, associations, partnerships, firms, organizations, or corporations. 
    Recreation facilities shall mean those specialized recreation facilities, such as swimming pools, tennis courts, ball fields, picnic shelters, and similar facilities under the supervision of the Westminster Department of Parks, Recreation and Libraries. 
    Unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) shall mean an aircraft operated without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft. This includes drones, model aircrafts, rockets and other similar devices. 
    Use permit shall mean a permit for the exclusive use of parks, open space properties, buildings and recreation facilities, or a portion thereof, as provided for in Chapter 13-2, W.M.C., and does not include a special alcoholic beverage permit. 
    Vehicle means any device which is capable of moving itself, or of being moved, from place to place upon wheels or endless tracks. "Vehicle" includes any bicycle, any off-highway vehicle, snowmobile, farm tractor, or any implement of husbandry designed primarily or exclusively for use and used in agricultural operations or any device moved by muscular power or moved exclusively over stationary rails or tracks or designed to move primarily through the air. "Vehicle" shall not include a wheelchair. 
    Watercraft shall mean any boat or other vessel intended, used, or capable of transporting persons or property on the water. 
    Watercraft equipment shall mean water skis, aquaplanes, surfboards, inner tubes, flotation devices, and any similar device. 
    Yielding order shall mean all users yield to equestrians. Bicyclists and all other allowed wheeled modes of travel yield to pedestrians. Trail users traveling downhill yield to like trail users traveling uphill. Yielding the right-of-way requires bikers to slow down, to communicate, and to pass safely. If unable to establish communication, bikers are required to stop. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 4, 9-12-2016 ; Ord. No. 3930 , § 2, 4-23-2018) 
13-1-3. - Enforcement of Regulations. 
(A)  The Director may make and publish, pursuant to the procedure outlined in Section 13-1-12, W.M.C., such regulations, not inconsistent with the terms of this title, as needed, for the orderly use and management of the City's parks, recreation facilities, and buildings. 
(B)  The Director and any law enforcement officer acting in the line of duty shall enforce the provisions of this chapter, including the authority to eject from any park or community building any person acting in violation of any regulation contained in this chapter or the regulations of the Director adopted pursuant hereto. Further, the Director shall have the authority to deny use of parks or community buildings to individuals or groups who act in violation of these regulations and where either the conduct is criminal in nature, or the conduct is part of a repeated pattern of violating these regulations, or the conduct presents a threat to the public safety. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 4, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-1-4. - Enforcement of Applicable Laws and Ordinances. 
(A)  All persons entering parks or community buildings shall abide by the regulations of the City, as provided herein, and the instructions and directions of duly authorized agents, employees or law enforcement officers of the City in their line of duty. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter or any regulation promulgated by the Director. A person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or of a regulation promulgated by the Director shall be fined as provided in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 4, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-1-5. - Use Regulations at All Parks, Recreation, Libraries and Open Space Properties. 
(A)  Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Trespass: Enter, be or remain in any park or community building of the City unless he or she complies with this title and regulations promulgated hereunder and any rules posted in such park or building. 
(2)  Commercial activities: Conduct commercial activities in any park or community building, except when authorized by the City, as permitted by a concession contract with the City, or as part of a City-sponsored program. 
(3)  Distribution of materials: Distribute any item or materials in any community building, except as authorized by the Director in accordance with the written policies of the City. 
(4)  Posting materials: Post or affix any item or material to any tree, fence, or structure in any park or post or affix any item or material in any community building except as authorized by the Director in accordance with the written policies of the City. 
(5)  Disturbances : Disturb the peace and quiet of other users with unreasonable noise, indecent behavior, or offensive conduct. 
(6)  Golf: Drive, putt, or in any other fashion play or practice golf or use golf balls or golf clubs in any area of a park except in areas set aside and posted for that purpose or with the written consent of the Director. 
(7)  Model crafts and unmanned aircraft systems: Fly an unmanned aircraft system in any park unless it is flown by a City staff member or a licensed contractor of the City as part of the performance of their duties. Fly or operate model craft of any kind or description in any area of a park or in any body of water, except in areas set aside and posted for that purpose. 
(8)  Parking vehicles: Park any vehicle within a park, except upon areas designated for such use. Vehicles in violation of this section shall be subject to being towed away at owner's expense. 
(a)  Overnight Parking, or Vehicle Abandonment: Park, abandon, or otherwise allow vehicles to remain in parks or community building parking lots between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except as follows: 
(i)  During attendance at a function conducted under the auspices of the City. 
(ii)  During attendance at a function that has been issued an exclusive use permit. 
(iii)  As a City employee in the performance of that person's duty. 
(iv)  With the written consent of the Director. 
(v)  In areas as otherwise posted. 
(9)  Washing or Repairing Vehicles: Wash, wax, repair or service any vehicle within any park or City-owned parking facility, except with the written consent of the Director. 
(10)  Vehicle Use: Operate, drive, or ride upon any vehicle in any park, except when posted specifically for such use or with the written consent of the Director, provided that bicycles shall be permitted to use pathways within any park, unless such use is specifically prohibited and signs are posted giving notice of such prohibition. This prohibition of OPDMDs or non-motorized vehicles will not apply to a vehicle determined to qualify for use by persons with disabilities pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(11)  Control of Dogs, Cats and Other Household Pets: Bring or maintain in or upon any park any dog, cat, or other household pet, unless such dog, cat or other household pet is kept at all times on a leash, not to exceed 15 feet in length, and under full control of its owner or custodian, except with the written consent of the Director. Persons shall not leave or deposit dogs, cats, fowl, fish, or other animals, whether dead or alive, in any park, lake, or community building, except with the written consent of the Director. 
(12)  Other Animal Restrictions: Bring or maintain in or upon any golf course any animal or to bring or maintain any animal in or upon any park property where signs are posted prohibiting their presence. These restrictions shall not apply to service animals under the ADA. It shall also be unlawful to ride upon any animal capable of being ridden, in any park, except in areas designated and posted specifically for such use, or if the animal is a service animal under the ADA, or with the expressed written consent of the Director. When riding is permitted, the animal shall be ridden off the trail (but within ten feet of the side of the trail) unless the terrain requires otherwise, a manure bag must be used, and the rider must maintain a safe speed when considering other users in the same area. No cattle, sheep, goats, horses or any animal shall graze in any park, except in areas designated and posted specifically for such use or with the expressed written consent of the Director. 
(13)  Littering Prohibited: Leave any garbage, trash, cans, bottles, papers, or other refuse elsewhere than in the receptacles provided therefor or immediately next to the receptacle if full. Items commonly thrown or released during gatherings, including but not limited to birdseed, rice, confetti, and latex balloons, as well as decorations and floral arrangements shall be considered litter for purposes of this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to use the receptacles provided for in this section for the purpose of depositing yard clippings or other garbage or trash generated on private property. 
(14)  Alcoholic Beverage: Possess, distribute, use or consume any alcoholic beverages or 3.2 beer in parks or community buildings, except by a special alcoholic beverage permit issued by and at the discretion of the Director, and then only in conformance with the statutes of the State of Colorado and ordinances of the City regarding the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages or 3.2 beer. 
(15)  Interference: Use or attempt to use or interfere with the use of any table, space or facility within said park or community building that at the time is reserved for any other person or group that has received a use permit from the Director therefor. Unless the actual use of table, space, area, building, or facility referred to in any such permit is commenced within one hour after the period covered by such permit begins, such permit shall terminate. 
(16)  Disturbance: Engage in boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace and enjoyment of the facility. 
(17)  Weapons: Discharge, fire, or shoot any firearm, air gun, slingshot or bow and arrow or other projectile or projectile launching device on any park, except at places designated and posted specifically for such purposes. 
(18)  Fauna-Disturbing Wildlife: Take, seize, molest, injure or hunt any bird, reptile, fish or animal in any park or community building, or portion thereof, unless posted specifically for that purpose or with the express written consent of the Director, and in compliance with the game, fish and wildlife laws of the State of Colorado. 
(19)  Flora, including Turf and Soil: Dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut any tree, plant, shrub, bloom or flower, or any portion thereof, growing in any park or area of a community building, or to remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel from any park. Duly authorized City employees in the performance of their duties or persons participating in City-sponsored activities are excepted from the foregoing provisions. Metal detectors may not be used without the specific authorization of the Director. 
(20)  Marking, Injuring or Disturbing any Structure: Cut, break, injure, mark, write or print upon or otherwise deface or disturb any rock, building, cage, pen, monument, sign, fence, bench, structure, apparatus, equipment or property in a park or community building. Duly authorized City employees in the performance of their duties or persons authorized by the Director shall be excepted from the foregoing provisions. 
(21)  Fires: Light or maintain a fire in any park, unless such fire is lighted and maintained only in a stove, fire circle, device or place intended for such purpose. 
(22)  Fireworks: Ignite any fireworks, as defined in Section 6-8-1, W.M.C., in any park or community building without the written consent of the Director. 
(23)  Park Use Restricted to Age Groups: Enter, be or remain in any park, or a designated area within a park, the use of which is restricted to members of a specific age group, if not a member of such age group, or to refuse to depart from such restricted area upon request of a police officer or other duly authorized employee, provided: 
(a)  The age restriction has been imposed by order of the Director or his authorized employee; and 
(b)  Signs are posted in such restricted park or area giving public notice of such restriction. 
Parents and other persons having responsibility for care and custody of one or more members of the age group authorized to use the park or area shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(24)  Park Hours: Enter or remain in any park, excluding open space, or community building between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, or between such hours posted at the facility as closed, other than a City employee in the performance of that person's duty or persons participating in City-sponsored activities, or with the written consent of the Director. Exceptions will be made for those who are walking, cycling, or otherwise passing through without delay in either a park or trail. 
(25)  Traveling Speed: Significantly exceed the speed of similar users in the same area. Traffic flow and individuals using outdoor spaces shall maintain a safe speed at all times. Traffic flow of individuals using or approaching community buildings shall not exceed speeds of five miles per hour. Users shall not violate the yielding order described in Section 13-1-2, W.M.C. 
(B)  Other Use Regulations: 
(1)  Service Animals: Service animals are allowed in City Parks, Open Space Properties, and Community Buildings under the following circumstances: 
(a)  The service animal is a service animal as provided in the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(b)  The service animal is under control of the owner at all times. 
(c)  The service animal is harnessed, leashed, or tethered - unless the guest is unable to do so because of a disability or because it would interfere with the animal's ability to perform. 
(d)  The service animal must not show aggression towards people or other animals; 
(e)  The service animal must be house-broken to enter Community Buildings; and 
(f)  The service animal must be trained and utilized for a specific disability approved by ADA regulations. 
(2)  Use of OPDMDs: Individuals with mobility disabilities may use OPDMDs in City Community Buildings and in Parks and Open Space subject to the following safety requirements and criteria: 
(a)  The OPDMD is for use by persons with disabilities who use the device as a mobility aid. 
(b)  The OPDMD is under the control of the operator at all times. 
(c)  An OPDMD must have an appropriate width for the conditions where it is operated, but in no circumstances may be more than 32 inches wide. 
(d)  An OPDMD must have an appropriate length for the conditions where it is operated, but in no circumstances may be more than six feet long. 
(e)  An OPDMD may weigh up to 150 pounds (excluding the user's weight). 
(f)  An OPDMD must be electric-powered. 
(g)  An OPDMD must be operated at a safe speed. In Community Buildings, speed cannot exceed three mph. 
(h)  All City Rules and Regulations apply to the use of OPDMDs including those that may restrict their use in closed areas and areas subject to natural resource protection closures; and the use of OPDMDs may not damage natural and/or cultural resources or wildlife habitats. 
(i)  The OPDMD is considered personal property of the individual operating it and the City is not responsible for any loss or damage. 
(3)  Use of OPDMDs on Open Space Properties: In addition to the requirements in subsection (B)(2), above, the following additional restrictions shall apply to uses of OPDMDs on Open Space Properties: 
(a)  An OPDMD must remain on trails except to the extent necessary to comply with the yielding requirements set forth above. An OPDMD must be capable of being turned around within the trail tread in a safe manner. 
(b)  An OPDMD may only be operated on trails with grades (slopes) of 12 percent or less. 
(c)  On trails when other users are present, an OPDMD shall not be operated at a significantly higher speed than the other users. Safe speeds must be maintained at all times. 
(d)  An OPDMD must have the capacity to safely negotiate pedestrians, features and obstructions such as steps and other vertical displacements, water dams, loose gravel, and rocks. 
(e)  An OPDMD user must comply with the yielding order set forth in the Definitions, above. 
(f)  The City may restrict OPDMD operation on trails at times of heavy traffic. An OPDMD user may be informed by the City that specific trails at specific times are not available for OPDMD use due to heavy traffic. 
(g)  Due to varying conditions on City Open Space Properties and to ensure safety and/or natural resource protection, the City recommends that an OPDMD user contact the Parks, Recreation and Libraries administrative staff to confirm that an OPDMD is permitted on a particular trail. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 4, 9-12-2016 ; Ord. No. 3930 , §§ 3, 4, 4-23-2018) 
13-1-6. - Use Regulations on Open Space Properties. 
    In addition to the requirements in Section 13-1-5, W.M.C., the following additional restrictions shall apply to Open Space properties: 
(A)  Open space will be open from sunrise to sunset seven days a week, unless otherwise posted. 
(B)  Trails will be open to those passing through 24 hours a day, seven days a week unless otherwise posted. 
(C)  Lighting or maintaining a fire is prohibited in open space unless specifically posted otherwise. 
(D)  Hunting or trapping is prohibited in open space. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 4, 9-12-2016 ; Ord. No. 3930 , § 5(1), 4-23-2018) 
13-1-7. - Use Regulations at Off-Leash Dog Sites. 
    Notwithstanding the prohibition in subsection 13-1-5(A)(11) above, the Director is authorized to establish or discontinue off-leash dog park sites. At such sites, owners may allow dogs to run without a leash, subject to the following conditions: 
(A)  The site will be open from sunrise to sunset seven days a week. 
(B)  Dogs must be leashed when entering or leaving off-leash site and owners must have a visible leash at all times. 
(C)  Dogs are not allowed to chase or harass wildlife or other dogs. 
(D)  Owners may not leave dogs unattended. 
(E)  Animals must be spayed or neutered. 
(F)  Owners must remove dog's waste. 
(G)  The following dogs are not allowed in the off-leash site: 
(1)  Aggressive dogs. 
(2)  Female dogs in heat. 
(3)  Dogs without current vaccination tag attached to collar, worn by the dog. 
(4)  Dogs too young to vaccinate against rabies. 
(5)  Dogs known to be ill or exhibiting signs of illness. 
(6)  Dogs not under voice command. 
(H)  For purposes of this section, "owner" shall be the person who brings the dog to the site or as defined in Section 6-7-1, W.M.C. 
(I)  All provisions of the Animal Control Code, Chapter 7 of Title VI of this Code, shall be in force at the off-leash site unless specifically changed by this paragraph (13-1-3(B)). 
(J)  The owner assumes the legal responsibility for any damage, disease, or injury to persons, other dogs, or property caused by the dog. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 4, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-1-8. - Fishing, Hunting, Wildlife and Boating Regulations. 
(A)  Statutes and Regulations: The following are adopted by this reference: 
(1)  Article 13 (Vessels) of Title 33 (Wildlife and Parks and Outdoor Recreation) of the Colorado Revised Statutes; 
(2)  The Rules and Regulations promulgated by the State of Colorado pursuant to Section 33-1-106 C.R.S., regulating the taking, possession and use of wildlife and fish; and 
(3)  The Rules and Regulations promulgated by the State of Colorado pursuant to Section 33-1-106 C.R.S., regulating the use, operation and equipment of vessels. 
(B)  Fishing, Hunting, Wildlife Regulations: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the following: 
(1)  Any person 16 years of age or over who fishes for or takes fish, amphibians, mollusks or crustaceans shall have a proper and valid fishing license, issued by the State of Colorado on his or her person. Persons under 16 years of age are not required to have a fishing license but shall be entitled to only one-half bag or possession limit set by the State. 
(2)  Any person, regardless of age, who hunts or takes wildlife shall procure a proper and valid license therefor, issued by the State of Colorado, and shall have the valid license on his or her person when exercising the benefits it confers. 
(3)  No person shall alter, transfer, sell, loan, or assign his or her own or another person's lawfully acquired license to another person. 
(4)  No person shall hunt, take, or have in such person's possession any wildlife that is the property of the State as provided in Section 33-1-101, C.R.S., except as permitted by statutes or Rule and Regulation. 
(5)  No person shall hunt or take any wildlife or fish outside the season established by or in an area closed by Rule or Regulation. 
(6)  No person shall fail to immediately dress or care for and provide for human consumption the edible portions of any game wildlife, including fish. 
(7)  Colorado Rules and Regulation for the taking, possession or use of wildlife or fish. 
(C)  Regulation of the Use, Operation, and Equipment of Vessels: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the following: 
(1)  Colorado Rules and Regulations for the use, operation, and equipment of vessels. 
(2)  Colorado statutes regulating the use, operation, and equipment of vessels. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 4, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-1-9. - Policies for Non-Park Use of Parks. 
    From time to time, the City may find it desirable and in the public interest to permit certain municipal non-park and non-open space uses, and, in limited circumstances, certain private uses on, in, or under parks or open space lands. The City Council will adopt, by resolution, such policies to address when and under what circumstances such additional uses of parks and open space may occur. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 4, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-1-10. - Use Regulations Specific to Libraries. 
    In addition to the requirements in 13-1-5, the following additional restrictions shall apply to library properties: 
(A)  Pursuant to Section 2-4-3, W.M.C., the Parks, Recreation, Libraries and Open Space Advisory Board shall recommend and the City Council shall adopt a schedule of fines and penalties to be imposed for the failure of any person to return materials in a period prescribed by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries, or damaging any books, periodicals, other materials or library facilities. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to write in, injure, deface, tear or destroy any book, plate, picture, engraving, map, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, periodical, manuscript, film or audio and video recordings, or computer software belonging to the Westminster public libraries. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface the grounds, building, furniture, fixtures, equipment or other property of the Westminster public libraries. 
(D)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or to assist in the removal from the Westminster public libraries any library material belonging to the public library without first having the same charged or checked out by the proper agent or employee of the public library in accordance with the guidelines, policies and procedures of the Westminster public libraries. 
(E)  It shall be unlawful for any person to retain any charged out library material or other property belonging to the Westminster public libraries for more than 30 days after written notice to return said property is sent to the borrower's address as recorded in the library records. Such written notice shall be given after the expiration of the time allowed to retain such property, as prescribed by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries, and shall be effective upon sending. 
(F)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to pay any fine or penalty imposed pursuant to the schedule of fines and penalties adopted by City Council following 30 days written notice to borrower that such fines or penalties are due. Such written notice shall be sent to the borrower's address as recorded in the library records and shall be effective upon sending. 
(G)  Any person found guilty of a violation of the provisions of 13-1-8 shall be punished by a fine or a jail sentence or by both fine and jail sentence pursuant to the limits specified in Section 1-8-1, W.M.C. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 4, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-1-11. - Reciprocal Agreements to Protect Library Resources; Mechanisms to Prevent Abuse of Library Resources. 
(A)  The City is authorized to enter into agreements with jurisdictions or individual libraries with reciprocal borrowing privileges with City libraries to prevent abuse of library resources by users who accumulate excessive overdue books and fines. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, provisions that would authorize the disclosure, in confidence, of names of library users who have excessively abused library privileges and failed to make restitution, the refusal to extend borrowing privileges to such users until all outstanding fines are paid, and the confiscation of library cards from such users and their return to the library of origin. These agreements are declared to be necessary for the reasonable operation of the libraries. 
(B)  The Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries may adopt rules to prevent the use of the Westminster libraries by users with library cards from another jurisdiction who have been identified by that jurisdiction as having excessive numbers of overdue materials and outstanding fines. These rules may include provisions for confiscating the cards of such persons and the return of the cards to the library. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 4, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-1-12. - Adopting Regulations. 
(A)  The Director may prepare and adopt regulations as necessary by dating and signing the regulations after consultation with the City Attorney. The regulations shall become effective upon the signature of the Director or at such later date as specified by the Director. 
(B)  Within ten days following adoption, the Director shall cause notice of the adoption of a regulation to be published, along with the complete text of the regulation as follows: On the City's official website where it shall remain available, posted in a prominent location in City Hall for 30 days following adoption, and on file at the City Clerk's office for public inspection. 
(C)  Regulations in existence prior to the adoption of this section shall become valid and enforceable under this section if published in full on the City's website and made available for inspection and copying at the office of the City Clerk within 60 days following adoption of this section. 
(D)  The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the Director's regulations and shall maintain an official copy available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours, upon payment of a fee for such copies in accordance with the law. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 4, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-1-13. - Redesignation, Sale, or Trade of Parklands. 
(A)  In certain cases, it may be determined by the City Council that a property originally acquired for park purposes may be better utilized for another public purpose, including, but not limited to, open space. In such cases, the General Capital Improvement or Parks, Open Space Tax (POST) Fund, depending upon which is more appropriate, shall be reimbursed the current market value of the affected property at the time of its conversion or the cost of that land at the time of its original acquisition, whichever is higher. 
(B)  In certain cases, it may be necessary to acquire a total property in order to preserve a portion of the property as parklands. In such cases, the City Council may dispose of the remainder, and the General Capital Improvement Fund-Parks or the POST Fund, depending on which is more appropriate, shall be reimbursed the current market value of the disposed land at the time of its sale or the cost of that land at the time of its original acquisition, whichever is higher. 
(C)  The City Council may approve land trades of parklands for other lands. In such cases, for the purpose of reimbursing the General Capital Improvement Fund-Parks or the POST Fund, depending on which is more appropriate, the relative current market values of the lands traded shall be as determined by the City Council as part of the approval of the trade, but in no event shall a value be placed on the parklands that is lower than its cost at the time of its original acquisition. 
(D)  Once a property is designated as parkland, it shall be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 13-2, W.M.C. Property that is subject to restrictions limiting its use to parkland purposes may not be redesignated without approval of the restricting grantor. 
(E)  For the purposes of determining the "current market value" under subsections (A), (B), and (C) above, the City Manager may rely on an MAI or AIA appraisal of the property or, for parcels less than five acres in size, may rely on publicly verifiable information concerning recent sales of substantially similar properties. 
(F)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the redesignation by the City Council of parklands, open space property, or other City-owned lands that were acquired through the public land dedication requirements of Section 11-6-8, W.M.C., will not require reimbursement from one City fund to another. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 4, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-1-14. - Library Acquisition Policy. 
    The Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries, with the approval of the City Manager, shall establish an acquisition policy for the purchase of all books and audiovisual materials for the Westminster public libraries. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 4, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-1-15. - Use Regulations of Bodies of Water. 
    Unless specifically posted otherwise, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(A)  Enter or remain in any body of water except by permit issued by the Director or as part of a City-sponsored activity or maintenance operation. 
(B)  Use watercraft or watercraft equipment on any body of water except by permit issued by the Director or as part of a City-sponsored activity or maintenance operation. 
(C)  Ice skate, walk or otherwise enter upon a frozen body of water. 
( Ord. No. 3930 , § 5(2), 4-23-2018) 
13-1-16. - Regulations at Standley Lake Regional Park. 
    In addition to the requirements in Sections 13-1-5, 13-1-6 and 13-1-8, the following additional restrictions shall apply to Standley Lake Regional Park for the purpose of protecting and promoting the public interest in preventing the spread of aquatic nuisance species, including but not limited to zebra and quagga mussels: 
(A)  All watercraft and watercraft equipment must enter Standley Lake Regional Park through the main gate. 
(B)  No watercraft or watercraft equipment shall enter Standley Lake or the Standley Lake shoreline area prior to being inspected, tagged for quarantine (drying) purposes and/or spray washed as may be determined by Standley Lake Regional Park staff. 
(C)  Any watercraft and watercraft equipment that is determined to have circumvented the inspection, tagging and/or spray washing will be impounded to ensure proper decontamination and to comply with applicable Colorado State statutes and regulations. It shall be unlawful for anyone to resist or interfere with any Standley Lake Regional Park staff in the impoundment of any watercraft or watercraft equipment. 
(D)  No watercraft or watercraft equipment may be launched onto Standley Lake until it has met the required quarantine period or spray washing or both, as specified by Standley Lake Regional Park staff. 
(E)  The possession or use of any aquatic bait within Standley Lake Regional Park whether live, dead or frozen is prohibited. "Aquatic bait" means and includes any form of bait that typically lives in water. Examples of aquatic bait include salamanders, minnows, leeches, crayfish, frogs, and others. 
(F)  Standley Lake Regional Park shall be closed to the public from sunset to sunrise except for authorized camping. Fishing is prohibited from sunset to sunrise. Anyone in violation of this provision shall also be subject to being cited for trespassing pursuant to Section 6-3-5, W.M.C. 
(G)  Swimming and wading by persons and animals is prohibited in Standley Lake, except that persons engaged in waterskiing, wake boarding, and tubing may enter, swim in and exit Standley Lake to the limited extent necessarily associated with said activities. All equipment used in such activities shall be considered watercraft equipment and subject to these regulations and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(H)  Quiet hours are from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. All generators, music, radios or other loud noises that may disturb the peace are not permitted during these hours. Outside of these hours, no noise registering above 60 dB at 50 feet is permitted in order to reduce disturbances to other visitors as well as wildlife except with the express written consent of the Director. 
( Ord. No. 3930 , § 5(2), 4-23-2018) 
CHAPTER 2. - PERMITTED USE OF PARKS, TRAILS, OPEN SPACE, COMMUNITY BUILDINGS AND RECREATION FACILITIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3838, § 5, adopted September 12, 2016 , repealed the former chapter 2, §§ 13-2-1-13-2-11, and enacted a new chapter 2 as set out herein. The former chapter 2 pertained to exclusive use of parks, community buildings and recreation facilities and derived from the 2016 Republication. 

13-2-1. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The City's community buildings and recreation facilities shall be made available for the exclusive use of persons and groups who have been issued a use permit by the Director (hereinafter, "Director" shall refer to the Director of Parks Recreation and Libraries or his/her designee) and paid the applicable fees therefor. The Director shall also have discretion to grant special event permits for events on City parks, trails and open space that are open to the public or expected to draw 25 or more persons. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 5, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-2-2. - Compliance Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize City buildings or recreation facilities on an exclusive basis unless that person complies with this chapter and Chapter 1 of Title XIII of the Westminster Municipal Code and the regulations promulgated thereunder. It shall be unlawful to hold any special event within any park, trail or open space of the City unless and until a special event permit therefor has been issued. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 5, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-2-3. - Permit Application. 
(A)  Use Permit: Any person applying for a use permit hereunder shall file an application for such permit with the Director not less than 20 days nor more than one year prior to the proposed use of said building or facility. The Director may waive the 20-day period at his/her discretion, but such waiver shall be conditioned on the applicant waiving all appeal rights. 
(B)  Special Event Permit: Any person applying for a special event permit hereunder shall file an application for such permit with the Director not less than 45 days nor more than one year prior to the proposed event. The Director may waive the 45-day period at his/her discretion, but such waiver shall be conditioned on the applicant waiving all appeal rights. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 5, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-2-4. - Contents of Permit Application. 
    An application for a use permit or a special event permit shall submit a completed, signed application to the Director on a form furnished by the Department of Parks, Recreation and Libraries. All permit applications must be signed or co-signed by some person at least 21 years of age who shall agree to be responsible for payment for any damage that occurs during said use or special event. The permit application shall contain, but not be limited to, the following: 
(A)  Name of each applicant, sponsoring organization and the person or persons who are in charge of, or responsible for, the proposed activity; 
(B)  The business and residence address and telephone numbers of each person and entity named in subsection (A), above; 
(C)  The park, trail, open space, building, recreation facility or portion thereof being applied for; 
(D)  The starting time of the proposed activity; 
(E)  The finishing time of the proposed activity; 
(F)  The number of persons expected to attend the activity; 
(G)  Additional City facilities or equipment requested, such as personnel, tables, chairs, etc.; 
(H)  The nature of the proposed activity or activities, including equipment and vehicles to be brought into the park, trail, open space, building or recreation facility, the nature and duration of the use of such equipment, and the nature and duration of the use of any amplified sound, whether speech or music; 
(I)  Any fees, charges or donations to be collected; and 
(J)  Estimated number of parking spaces required. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 5, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-2-5. - Action on Permit Application. 
(A)  The Director will grant or deny such application on or before 14 days after the filing of a completed application, unless the time for such granting or denial of the permit has been waived by the applicant in writing. The decision granting or denying said application will either be delivered in person or mailed to the applicant by first-class mail. 
(B)  The Director may grant the application if the proposed use complies with all applicable ordinances and regulations and, upon granting any permit, may impose reasonable requirements and conditions concerning the use of the park, trail, open space, building or recreation facility by applicant. 
(C)  The Director, upon the advice in writing of the Chief of Police or that person's designee that the size and activity of the expected crowd will draw from other areas of the City so much police personnel for crowd control that other areas of the City will be left unprotected, shall impose a requirement of one crowd control monitor per 100 persons expected to attend the proposed activity. The Director shall require a one hour training program to be conducted by the Chief of Police or that person's designee for the crowd control monitors at a reasonable time and place prior to the proposed activity, which time and place shall be set by the Chief of Police or that person's designee. The applicant shall, within two days of the receipt of the Director's decision, supply to the Director a list of the proposed crowd control monitors, including their names, addresses and telephone numbers. The applicant may, at his option, provide police reserve personnel or duly licensed private patrolmen instead of crowd control monitors in the numbers approved by the Director and Chief of Police. In the event the applicant provides police reserve personnel or duly authorized patrolmen, no training session will be required. 
(D)  The Director may grant the application for use of a park, trail, open space, building or recreation facility for a location other than the location applied for in the event that a permit has already been issued for the original location for the date and time requested, or the requested location does not meet the needs of the applicant, or the approved location is more appropriate for the requested use or the requested location is otherwise unsuitable for the use requested. In the event that more than one application is received for one park, trail, open space, building or recreation facility for use on the same day, the Director shall consider the following priorities in determining which application to grant: 
First - Uses sponsored or cosponsored by the City. 
Second - Uses sponsored by the school districts within the boundaries of the City. 
Third - Groups composed primarily of City residents. 
Fourth - Groups composed primarily of nonresidents. 
(E)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Director may revoke any previously issued permit if the City requires the park, trail, open space, building or recreational facility for a City function, upon giving the permit holder notice 14 days prior to the scheduled use. 
(F)  The Director shall deny the application or revoke a permit. Reasons for denial or revocation shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The City has no park, trail, open space, building, or recreation facility that will accommodate the activity of applicant. 
(2)  The proposed activity is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the City to properly police the areas that police protection to the City will be impaired. 
(3)  The applicant has failed or refused to provide a reasonable means of informing all of the persons participating in the proposed activity of the terms and conditions of such permit. 
(4)  The applicant refuses or fails to comply with all conditions in the permit. 
(5)  The applicant fails to file a timely application. 
(6)  The application contains false information. 
    Such denial or revocation shall specify the grounds therefor. 
(G)  No permit shall be granted for use of a park, trail, open space, building or other facility for any activity involving more than 25 participants during any of the time between one hour before sunset and one hour after sunrise, unless the park, trail, open space or facility has the appropriate program lighting, and the desired park, trail, open space or facility is large enough to accommodate the anticipated number of participants. Special requests, such as for Easter sunrise services, will be considered on an individual basis by the Director. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 5, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-2-6. - Right of Appeal. 
    With respect to use permits and special event permits, an applicant may appeal the decision of the Director to the City Manager (hereinafter "City Manager" shall refer to the City Manager or his/her designee). Applicant must file said appeal with the City Manager within five days of the Director's mailing of such decision. The City Manager shall hold a hearing following the filing of said appeal within two weeks of the date of the filing of said appeal, at which time applicant may present any and all evidence, testimony and information relevant to the application. The City Manager shall, within 24 hours of said appeal hearing, issue a decision, either affirming the denial of the application or directing the Director to issue a permit as applied for, subject to any reasonable terms and conditions. The decision of the City Manager shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 5, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-2-7. - Fees and Deposits. 
(A)  Upon application of a permit under this chapter, any fees or deposits required for the use of City personnel, parks, community building, equipment, or recreational facility shall be included with the permit application. Fees and deposits required shall be set by the Director, subject to the approval of the City Council. Fees for special equipment and/or personnel unknown at time of application will be billed after the activity when computation thereof is accomplished. 
(B)  The City Council hereby finds that, from time to time, changes in fees for use of City property, equipment and facilities must be made in response to fees charged by other entities for similar equipment and facilities and the need for the costs of such property, equipment and facilities; such fees may increase or decrease rapidly in response to market conditions and citizen requests; and flexibility in setting the changing fees is necessary to remain competitive and responsive to citizen needs. It is the intent of Council to establish a flexible and responsive system of setting and changing fees. 
(C)  The City Manager is hereby authorized to adjust park, recreation and library usage policies and adjust fees in amounts that are reasonable and necessary to preserve, maintain, and manage such activities or facilities. The City Manager may establish discounted fees for group rates and promotional purposes. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 5, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-2-8. - Liability. 
    All persons to whom a permit has been granted under this chapter, must agree in writing to hold the City, its employees or agents harmless and indemnify same from any and all liability for injury to persons or property occurring as a result of the activity sponsored by permittee, and said person shall be liable to the City for any and all damage to parks, facilities, buildings, and equipment owned by same that results from or during the activity of permittee or is caused by any participant in said activity. The Director may, in his discretion, require evidence of liability insurance covering both the applicant and City in an amount the Director deems adequate. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 5, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-2-9. - Violation of Permit. 
    Violation of any of the terms and conditions of the permit by the permittee shall be grounds for revocation of said permit. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 5, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-2-10. - Enforcement of Rules. 
    The Director and any law enforcement officer acting in the line of duty shall diligently enforce the provisions herein and shall have the authority to eject from any park, trail, open space, community building, or recreation facility any person acting in violation of the provisions of this title or any posted rules or regulations promulgated hereunder. Further, the Director shall have the authority to deny use of parks, trails, open space, community buildings, or recreational facilities to individuals or groups who refuse to comply with the provisions of this title and regulations promulgated hereunder. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 5, 9-12-2016 ) 
13-2-11. - Enforcement of Applicable Laws and Ordinances. 
    All persons entering parks, trails, open space, community buildings, or recreational facilities shall abide by the rules and regulations of the City, as provided in Title XIII of the Westminster Municipal Code, and the instructions and directions of duly authorized agents, employees or law enforcement officers of the City in their line of duty. 
( Ord. No. 3838, § 5, 9-12-2016 ) 
CHAPTER 3. - TREES AND SHRUBBERY 

13-3-1. - Director's Power to Adopt Rules and Specifications. 
    The Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries shall have the power to promulgate rules, regulations, and specifications for the trimming, spraying, removal, planting, pruning, and protection of trees, shrubs, vines, and other plants upon the public right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk, or any other public place in the City. 
13-3-2. - Director's Power to Trim Trees and Collect Costs. 
(A)  The Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries or his authorized representatives shall have the power to trim, spray, remove, plant, and protect all trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, and other plants upon the public right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place or to require the owner or occupant of the property, or their agent, abutting on the right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place to trim, remove or protect any tree, shrub, vine, hedge, or other plant that may project beyond the property line of such owner, occupant, or agent, onto or over public property in a manner that interferes with the safe use of the right-of-way at the expense of such owner. 
(B)  If the property owner, occupant or agent refuses or neglects to trim, protect, or remove any such tree, shrub, vine, hedge, or other plant within ten days after receipt of a written notice from the Director to do so, the Director may do or cause to be done the necessary work incident thereto, and the expenses thereof shall be collected from the owner, occupant, or agent of such property and shall be a lien against said property until paid or may be assessed and collected pursuant to Subsection 8-4-5(B), W.M.C. 
(792 1634) 
13-3-3. - Removal of Dead or Dangerous Trees. 
(A)  It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or agent of any property to remove any dead trees or dead, overhanging boughs dangerous to life, limb, or property located on the premises of such owner, occupant or agent, or upon public property abutting the premises of such owner, occupant, or agent, upon receipt of written notice from the Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries to do so and within such reasonable time as specified in said notice. 
(B)  If such owner, occupant, or agent fails to remove same within the time required, the Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries or his authorized representative is authorized to remove or cause to be removed such trees or branches at the expense of such owner, occupant or agent and the cost of such removal shall be a first and prior lien on the property as provided by Title I, Chapter 31 of this Code, and may be assessed and collected pursuant to Subsection 8-4-5(B), W.M.C. 
(792 1634 1680 1889 A1889) 
13-3-4. - Removal or Treatment of Infected or Infested Trees. 
(A)  The department of parks, recreation and libraries has discovered the existence of Dutch Elm and Emerald Ash Borer disease in trees at various locations within the City, and such trees must be treated or disposed of immediately to prevent the spread of that disease to uninfected trees. The Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries or his authorized representatives are empowered to inspect any trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, plants, logs or branches existing or growing upon any property within the City. The Director or his authorized representatives shall from time to time conduct surveys to determine if any destructive or communicable disease or other pestilence exists that may be detrimental or endanger the good health and well-being of trees or other plant life in the City. 
(B)  Upon discovery of any destructive or communicable disease or other pestilence that endangers the growth, health, life, or well-being of other trees or plants, or that is capable of causing an epidemic spread of communicable disease or insect infestation, such as Dutch Elm and Emerald Ash Borer disease, the Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries or his authorized representatives shall at once notify in writing the owner, occupant or agent of the premises whereon the same are located, or the owner, occupant or agent of the premises abutting on public property whereon the same are located, of the condition thereof, and direct such owner, agent or occupant to eradicate, remove, or otherwise control such condition within a reasonable time to be specified in said written notice. 
(C)  Should the owner, occupant or agent of said premises fail or refuse to comply with the terms of the written notice provided for in Subsection 13-3-4(B), W.M.C., the Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries or his authorized representatives may enter upon the premises and cause to be removed, treated or otherwise care for such infected or infested trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, plants, logs, or branches, in order to eradicate or control disease or insect infestation. The expense thereof shall be a first and prior lien upon the property, shall be collected from the owner, occupant or agent and may be assessed and collected pursuant to Subsection 8-4-5(B), W.M.C., and Title I, Chapter 31 of this Code. 
(792 1634 1680 1889 3711) 
13-3-5. - Compliance Required; Unlawful Acts. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or agent of any premises to fail or refuse to comply with the requirements set forth in any notice issued under any section of this chapter within the time specified in said notice, or to fail or refuse to comply with any rule or regulation promulgated by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries under the authority granted in this chapter. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful to plant or place upon any public right-of-way or other public place in the city any trees, shrubs or other plants, other than as prescribed in rules and regulations promulgated by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Libraries. 
(792 1889 A1889 3711) 
CHAPTER 5. - OPEN SPACE PROGRAM 

13-5-1. - Policy Statement. 
    The objective of the open space program is to promote quality of life for citizens of Westminster through the preservation and protection of the quality of the natural environment that has given Westminster much of its character. This natural environment includes many spectacular views to the foothills and mountains, which can be enjoyed from the hills and sloping sites that make up the City's predominant land form. The natural streams and man-made canals and ponds and related plant and animal communities complement the scenic vistas and remind us of the area's early history. These natural areas, water bodies, tremendous vistas and panoramas, characteristic terrains and native flora and fauna are intended to be preserved and protected for the enjoyment of this and future generations by the judicious use of those sales tax dollars designated for the open space program. 
    As Westminster continues to grow, open spaces should be provided and woven into the fabric of the City. These open spaces may define developed areas within the community, and in certain areas may define the boundary of the City. They are intended to obtain a balance and harmony between physical development and open space for the benefit of Westminster citizens. Preservation of open space in all parts of the City will foster appreciation of the natural environment, provide increased opportunities for passive recreation, and improve the quality of life. 
(1855 3455) 
13-5-2. - Criteria for Acquisition. 
    The following six major criteria shall guide the selection of specific sites for possible acquisition and preservation. Prospective open space property shall satisfy at least one of these criteria: 
(A)  Aesthetics: Unique or dramatic visual impact; protection of scenic view corridors; visual enhancement of primary transportation corridors; unique view from site; natural features that enhance quality of life (e.g., rock formation, body of water, trees). 
(B)  Protection and Preservation: Protection of environmentally sensitive features (e.g., wetlands, trees, native grasses, wildlife and wildlife habitat, floodplain). 
(C)  Location: Spatial definition of urban area; protection of sole remaining undeveloped land within large developed area of City; geographical distribution throughout City; key link or extension/addition to existing park/open space area; proximity to existing or proposed urban shaping and open space buffers; access; large number of potential beneficiaries. 
(D)  Use Potential: Ability of the land to be used for passive recreational purposes, including trail linkages; potential secondary benefit to community (e.g., watershed protection, drainage, or regional detention areas, water wells, erosion control, public safety, floodplain preservation, solitude, noise buffer, ancillary historic preservation); continued agricultural production. 
(E)  Need for Immediate Action: Development pressure; development status; potential to remain as open space; attitude of property owner. 
(F)  Acquisition Consideration: Availability of land; ease of acquisition; price of land; significance of economic loss to City; potential for increase in price in the near future; potential for acquiring other sources of funds. 
(1855 3455) 
13-5-3. - Preservation of Land and Other Open Space Uses. 
(A)  Generally, lands acquired with open space funds shall be preserved and managed in a natural condition. Such lands might include scenic vistas, floodplains, trail corridors, farm lands, highly visible natural areas along arterial streets and open space buffers at the City's perimeter. Open spaces will generally be open for passive public use and enjoyment, and trails will be developed where possible to provide access. Examples of compatible passive recreation include hiking, nature study and photography. 
(B)  Additional activities that may be allowed on certain open space property, or portions thereof, after the City Manager determines such activities will not have a detrimental effect on the natural qualities for which the open space was originally acquired, include fishing, biking, horseback riding, boating, and the development of off-leash dog exercise areas, restrooms, trailhead parking lots, and limited structures that enhance the passive recreational experience. "Limited structures" may include ponds or other water bodies designed to enhance wildlife habitat, benches, fishing piers, signs, and educational displays. 
(C)  Development of traditional active recreational facilities, such as athletic fields, swimming pools, tennis courts and formal picnic areas, is precluded. The use of motorized vehicles by the public for any recreational purpose is prohibited, except as may be required by the Americans With Disabilities Act. 
(D)  Certain open space properties may be leased for continued agricultural uses, such as farming or grazing, or for short- or long-term residential uses of structures that were located on the properties at the time of acquisition. This approach can provide a glimpse of Westminster's past, protect the land from development, and/or shift some maintenance costs to the lessee. Generally, the leased properties will continue to afford public access for passive enjoyment, to the extent such access is consistent with the lease. 
(E)  Properties acquired with funds derived from the open space portion of the parks, open space and trails sales tax and properties donated to the open space program, pursuant to Section 13-5-8, W.M.C., shall not be used for transportation corridors or the installation of underground or above ground utilities, except in accordance with the policies promulgated under Section 13-5-9, W.M.C. 
(1855 3455) 
13-5-4. - Redesignation, Sale, or Trade of Open Space Property. 
(A)  In certain cases, it may be determined by the City Council that a property originally acquired for open space purposes may be better utilized for another public purpose, including, but not limited to, an active park. In such cases, the open space land acquisition account shall be reimbursed the current market value of the affected property at the time of its conversion, or the cost of that land at the time of its original acquisition, whichever is higher. 
(B)  In certain cases, it may be necessary to acquire a total property in order to preserve a portion of the property as open space. In such cases, the city council may dispose of the remainder, and the open space land acquisition account shall be reimbursed the current market value of the disposed land at the time of its sale, or the cost of that land at the time of its original acquisition, whichever is higher. 
(C)  In certain cases, it may be determined by the City Council that a property originally acquired for park purposes may be better utilized for open space. In such cases, the parks and recreation capital reserve fund shall be reimbursed the current market value of the affected property at the time of its conversion, or the cost of that land at the time of its original acquisition, whichever is higher. 
(D)  The City Council may approve land trades of open space property for other lands. In such cases, for the purpose of reimbursing the open space land acquisition account, the relative current market values of the lands traded shall be determined by the City Council as part of the approval of the trade, but in no event shall a value be placed on the open space property that is lower than its cost at the time of its original acquisition. 
(E)  In certain cases, it may be determined by the City Council that a property originally acquired for utility purposes may be better utilized for open space. In such cases, the current market value of the affected property at the time of its conversion will be determined, and the utility enterprise fund will receive a credit in that amount against future utility-related uses of open space, pursuant to subsection (A), above. Payment in cash or a land trade pursuant to subsection (D), above, may also occur. 
(F)  Once a property is designated as open space, it shall be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter. Property that is subject to restrictions limiting its use to open space purposes may not be redesignated without approval of the restricting grantor. 
(G)  For the purposes of determining the "current market value" under subsections (A), (B) and (C), above, the city manager may rely on an MAI or AIA appraisal of the property or, for parcels less than five acres in size, may rely on publicly verifiable information concerning recent sales of substantially similar properties. 
(H)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the redesignation by the City Council of parklands, open space property, or other city-owned lands that were acquired through the public land dedication requirements of Section 11-6-8, W.M.C., will not require reimbursement from one city fund to another. 
(1855 3455) 
13-5-5. - Usage of Open Space Funds. 
    Generally, funds derived from the open space portion of the parks, open space and trails sales tax shall be expended only for acquisition of lands or interests in lands, for improvements to restore or enhance the land's natural or historic resources, to afford public access and safety, and to remove improvements that are incompatible or hazardous. Fencing may be installed to delineate and protect certain properties. Examples of improvements to open space properties include natural or native plantings, wetland enhancements, natural surfaced and, where appropriate, paved trails, signage for directional and educational purposes, and construction of items approved under Subsection 13-5-3(B), W.M.C., herein. 
(1855 3455) 
13-5-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3930 , § 6, adopted Apr. 23, 2018, repealed § 13-5-6, which pertained to management of open space property and derived from Ords. 1855, 3455, 3729; and Ord. No. 3838 , § 6, adopted Sept. 12, 2016. 
13-5-7. - Maintenance of Open Space Property. 
    The Department of Parks, Recreation and Libraries shall be responsible for the regular maintenance and operation of the open space properties, with funds made available in the City's general operating budget and funds derived from the open space portion of the parks, open space and trails sales tax. 
(1855 1889 3455) 
13-5-8. - Donations to Open Space Program. 
    The City encourages residents of this community and other concerned persons or parties to donate certain lands or monies for use in the open space program. City Council may by resolution accept such donated properties into the open space program. 
(1855 3455) 
13-5-9. - Utilities and Rights-of-Way. 
    The City expresses its awareness that extension of major roadways and water and sewer service are frequently the forerunners of new urban development, and intends that every effort should be made to coordinate proposals for extension of these utilities, so as not to defeat the objectives of the open space program. 
(1855 3455) 
13-5-10. - Statement on Deed. 
    Any deed conveying to the City open space property that was purchased using open space sales tax funds shall contain the notation "This land was purchased with Open Space Sales Tax Funds." 
(1855) 
Title XIV. - EMPLOYEE PENSION PLANS AND TRUST AGREEMENTS 
CHAPTER 1. - POLICE PENSION PLAN 

14-1-1. - Name and Purpose of Plan; History. 
(A)  The City of Westminster (the "city" or the "employer") does hereby establish its police pension plan (the "plan"), which is a qualified money purchase pension plan. The plan is created for the exclusive benefit of the City's eligible employees who qualify as participants and their beneficiaries. The plan is intended to qualify under Code Section 401(a) and the trust created pursuant to the plan is intended to be exempt under Code Section 501(a), and all provisions of the plan shall be construed in accordance with this intention. Since this is a governmental plan, it is not the intention of the City to have the plan comply with the provisions of the code after the enactment of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, except to the extent that changes to the code apply to governmental plans. 
(B)  Prior coverage under other City-funded pension plans: Upon the approval of the plan by at least 65 percent of the participants, any employee who was formerly a participant in the employee's pension plan and trust agreement, general employee pension plan or the police and fire pension plan shall automatically have such interest in such plan, whether held by investment agents, the trustee, or the City, transferred to the plan upon becoming eligible to be a participant in the plan. Upon transfer of the employee's interest without a break in municipal service, the employee shall have the same participant status as the employee had under the other plan. Any contributions due from the city, or withheld from the employee for the pay period ending January 5, 1986, will be paid directly into the plan. 
(C)  On September 1, 2004, the city transferred the assets of the firefighter's pension plan to the Fire and Police Pension Association ("FPPA") of Colorado defined benefit system and the firefighter's pension plan was terminated. Participants in the firefighter's pension plan became participants in the FPPA defined benefit system. Assets in the retirement medical savings account in the firefighter's pension plan were transferred to the general employee's pension plan for use as defined in Section 14-1-8, W.M.C. 
(D)  On October 2, 2017, the City shall transfer assets of the Police Pension Plan for those participants that elect to affiliate to the Fire and Police Pension Association ("FPPA") of Colorado defined benefit system. Assets remaining in the Police Pension Plan shall be merged to the General Employee Pension Plan, renamed the Employee 401(a) Defined Contribution Plan by Ordinance 3897. Assets in the retirement medical savings accounts shall be merged with the Employee 401(a) Defined Contribution Plan for use as defined in Section 14-2-8, W.M.C. Police Officers hired on or after October 2, 2017 are participants in the FPPA statewide defined benefit plan. 
(2464 3319 3447 3704; Ord. No. 3896, § 1, 8-14-2017 ) 
14-1-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise and further provided that the masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural. 
    Beneficiary shall mean any person or entity that, pursuant to Subsection 14-1-6(B), W.M.C., becomes entitled to receive all or any part of a participant's interest upon the participant's death. 
    Board shall mean the police pension plan board established in this Chapter. 
    City shall mean the City of Westminster, Colorado. The city also may be referenced in the plan as the "employer." 
    Civil union partner shall mean an employee's lawful civil union partner, as determined by the laws of the jurisdiction where the union occurred until the entry of a dissolution of the union. 
    Code shall mean the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as it may be amended, or re-enacted or replaced. Reference to a specific section of the Code shall mean the section in effect at the date of adoption of the plan, or any successor section to such section. 
    Compensation shall mean the base pay of a participant for services rendered to the City, excluding overtime pay, bonuses, insurance premiums, pension and retirement benefits, and all contributions by the City to the plan, to any health, accident or welfare fund or plan, or any similar benefit. Compensation shall be computed prior to any salary reduction for mandatory contributions picked up by the City or amounts deferred under a deferred compensation plan or a salary reduction plan or pre-tax medical plan. Compensation for part-time employees is the pay earned for the amount of FTEs budgeted for their positions. For purposes of determining the compensation applicable to the limitations on annual contributions in Section 14-1-5, W.M.C., compensation shall be as defined in Subsection 14-1-5(B)(5), W.M.C. 
Effective January 1, 2009, (A) an individual receiving a differential wage payment (as defined by Code Section 3401(h)(2)) shall be treated as an employee of the employer making the payment, (B) the differential wage payment shall be treated as compensation for purposes of Code Section 415 and any other code section that references the definition of compensation under Code Section 415, and (C) the plan shall not be treated as failing to meet the requirements of any provision described in Code Section 414(u)(1)(C) by reason of any contribution or benefit which is based on the differential wage payment. 
    Contributing participant shall mean any eligible employee who is making contributions to the plan, whether or not the city is contributing to the plan on behalf of such eligible employee. 
    C.R.S. shall mean the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
    Current annual base salary shall mean compensation annualized for the current calendar year. 
    Direct rollover shall mean a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
    Distributee shall mean an eligible employee or former eligible employee. in addition, the eligible employee's or former eligible employee's surviving spouse and the eligible employee's or former eligible employee's spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a QDRO are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or former spouse. 
    Eligible employee shall mean any employee who fills a City-authorized position of police officer as defined in this Chapter that is in a 0.5 FTE or greater, excluding individuals employed as temporary employees, elected officials, independent contractors, volunteers and non-benefited full-time and part-time employees. 
    Eligible retired public safety officer shall mean a police officer who is separated from service with the City as a public safety officer by reason of disability or is separated from service with the City as a public safety officer and separated from service after normal retirement age, as defined in Subsection 14-1-6(A)(1), W.M.C. 
    Eligible retirement plan shall mean (A) an individual retirement account described in Code Section 408(a), (B) an individual retirement annuity described in Code Section 408(b), (C) an annuity plan described in Code Section 403(a), (D) a qualified trust described in Code Section 401(a), (E) an eligible plan under Code Section 457(b) that is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state, (F) an annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b) and (G) a Roth IRA described in Code Section 408A(b). The preceding definition of eligible retirement plan shall also apply in the case of a distribution from the plan to a surviving spouse or to a spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a QDRO. In the case of an eligible rollover distribution from the plan to a non-spouse beneficiary, an eligible retirement plan shall mean an individual retirement account described in Code Section 408(a), individual retirement annuity described in Code Section 408(b), or a Roth IRA described in Code Section 408A(b). 
    Employee shall mean a person who receives monetary compensation from the city in return for present services or work performed on a non-contractual basis, or who is on a leave of absence without pay that has been approved by the general services director or designee. This definition shall include all full-time and part-time regular, administrative officers, temporary, provisional, seasonal, substitute, hourly, instructor, indexed, intern, special project, short-term disability and emergency employees. This definition shall exclude elected municipal officials, volunteer firefighters, all other volunteer personnel, and retirees from the City. The determination of whether an individual is an employee, an independent contractor or any other classification of worker or service provider and the determination of whether an individual is classified as a member of any particular classification of employees shall be made solely in accordance with the classifications used by the employer and shall not be dependent on, or change due to, the treatment of the individual for any purposes under the Code, common law or any other law, or any determination made by any court or government agency. 
    Employer shall mean the City. 
    FTE shall mean full-time equivalents. 
    Full participant shall mean any eligible employee who is qualified to receive employer contributions under the plan. 
    Highest annual base salary shall mean the largest amount of compensation as calculated for any calendar year of employment. 
    Inactive participant shall mean any person who has been a contributing participant to the plan or a preceding pension plan of the City and who is no longer an eligible employee, but who has not received full distribution of all respective interest. 
    Interest shall mean the amount of a participant's share in the trust fund, including City contributions, employee contributions, and earnings thereon. 
    Investment advisor shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Subsection 14-1-10(B)(1), W.M.C. 
    OASDI shall mean old age survivors and disability insurance. 
    Participant shall mean any contributing participant or inactive participant. 
    Plan shall mean the police pension plan established in this chapter and all subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Plan administrator shall mean the person appointed by the City Manager to administer the plan. 
    Plan year shall mean the City's fiscal year, which is the calendar year and which shall also be the fiscal year of the trust fund established pursuant to the plan. 
    Police officer shall mean any person who is employed by the City as a police officer, as defined by Title III of W.M.C., and who either is the Chief of Police or reports to the Chief of Police. 
    QDRO shall mean a qualified domestic relations order as defined in Code Section 414(p). 
    Qualified health insurance premiums shall mean premiums for coverage of the eligible retired public safety officer, their spouse, and dependents, by an accident or health insurance plan or qualified long-term care insurance contract as defined in Code Section 7702B(b). 
    Qualified military service shall mean service in the uniformed services of the United States (as defined in Chapter 43 of Title 38 of the United States Code) by any individual if, such individual is entitled to re-employment rights with respect to such service. 
    Retirement medical savings accounts shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Subsection 14-1-8(a)(1), W.M.C. 
    Termination of employment shall mean the cessation of a person's status as an "employee" as defined in this Section. Termination due to dismissal shall become effective on the date after the employee's grievance rights, if any, have lapsed or, if a grievance is filed, on the date of the final decision by the City. 
    Total disability shall mean a disability that permanently renders a contributing participant unable to perform satisfactorily the participant's usual duties of employment with the City as determined by the City and that results in the participant's termination of employment with the City. 
    Trust fund shall mean the assets of the trust established pursuant to the plan, out of which the benefits under the plan shall be paid, including all income of whatever nature earned by the trust fund and all increases in fair market value. 
    Trustee shall mean the trustee of the trust fund established pursuant to the plan, who shall always be the current acting finance director of the City of Westminster, and any duly qualified corporate co-trustee appointed pursuant to Section 14-1-11, W.M.C., and any duly appointed and qualified successor trustees. 
    W.M.C. shall mean the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(2464 3319 3360 3447 3584 3704 3749) 
14-1-3. - Participation of Eligible Employees. 
(A)  Participants. 
(1)  Contributing Participant. Each eligible employee hired on or after January 6, 1986, shall become a contributing participant in the plan on the date the eligible employee becomes a regular or qualified part-time employee and has attained the age of 18. By accepting employment with the City, each employee shall be deemed to have consented to the terms and provisions of the plan. 
(2)  Full Participant. No matter when an eligible employee becomes a contributing participant, each eligible employee shall become a full participant, eligible to receive employer contributions on the first day of the pay period coinciding with or immediately following the date on which the employee has completed 22 months of service with the City and has attained the age of 18, provided such eligible employee is still employed as an employee on such date and has not severed employment (as provided in subsection (4)(d) of this Section) during such 22-month period. 
(3)  Last Pay Period of Contribution. The City shall not make any contribution for the account of a full participant for the pay period in which such participant's employment by the City shall terminate for any reason, unless such participant is employed by the City on the last date of such pay period. No participant may make contributions to the plan pursuant to Sections 14-1-4, W.M.C., other than changes in the valuation of, or earnings on, the participant's undistributed interest, after termination of employment or loss of status as an employee as defined in this Chapter. 
(4)  Determination of Service. For the purpose of determining eligibility to become a full participant, service shall be determined in accordance with the following rules: 
(a)  Service shall include the continuous period of time an individual is employed by the City as an eligible employee, commencing on the date the individual is categorized as an eligible employee. 
(b)  A leave of absence without pay, other than for military service, shall be considered a break in continuous municipal service, unless municipal service is extended. Neither the City nor the eligible employee shall be required to contribute to the participant's account during a leave of absence without pay. 
(c)  Any eligible employee who has entered or enters the armed forces of the United States shall be presumed to be on a leave of absence, regardless of the length of such service, and such leave of absence shall not be considered as a break in continuity of service or a termination of employment, provided the individual returns to the employ of the City within 90 days (or such other length of time required by applicable law) of the date on which the individual shall have the right to release from military service or from the hospital in the event of service-caused disability, without intervening employment elsewhere. 
(d)  Dismissal or voluntary termination of employment with the City shall be considered as a break in continuity of service; regardless of the length of the break in continuity of service, subsequent re-employment shall be deemed to be new employment, and the employee will be subject to the eligibility requirements as if such employee were a new employee, whether or not such employee was formerly a full participant. However, if the City reinstates an employee subsequent to dismissal, this paragraph shall not apply. 
(e)  The provisions of this paragraph (4) shall be applied to all eligible employees and participants in a like manner. 
(B)  Board to Determine Participants: 
(1)  Obligations of the City. The City shall deliver to the board in writing such information from the City's records with respect to employees and their compensation as the board may require, in order to determine the identity and interests of the participants, and otherwise to perform its duties hereunder. 
(2)  Information Provided by the City. Any information given by the city to the board pursuant to subsection (B) of this Section shall, for all purposes of this Chapter, be binding on all parties in interest; provided that, whenever any employee proves to the satisfaction of the City that such employee's period of employment with the City or such employee's compensation as so given is incorrect, the City shall correct such information and so advise the board. 
(3)  Determination of the Board. The determination of the board as to the identity of the respective participants and as to their respective interests shall be binding upon the City and trustee, all employees, all participants and all beneficiaries. 
(2464 3319 3447 3704 3749) 
14-1-4. - Contributions by the City, the State of Colorado and Participants. 
(A)  Contributions by the City: 
(1)  Determination of Contribution by the City. On and after January 6, 1986, each pay period the City shall contribute to the credit of each full participant's account, ten and one-quarter percent of each full participant's compensation for that pay period; provided that, during any period in which the City is required to make contributions on behalf of participants under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act or the Social Security Act, the contribution to the plan for each participant shall be offset by the amount of the OASDI portion of the social security taxes paid by the City for such participant. This offset shall not exceed the City contribution. 
(2)  Time and Method of Payment of Contribution by the City. The contributions of the City shall be made every pay period and shall be credited to the plan each pay period. 
(B)  Contributions by State of Colorado: All monies from the State of Colorado contributed on behalf of police officers each year will be credited to the account of each police officer in the ratio that such police officer's full months of service as a police officer for the City relates to the full months of service of all other police officers who are participants in the plan for that year. 
(C)  Contributions by Contributing Participants: 
(1)  Mandatory Employee Contributions. 
(a)  Each contributing participant must contribute to the trust fund a percentage of such participant's compensation for each pay period as follows: for the pay periods commencing January 1, 1997, eight percent and for the pay periods commencing January 1, 1998, and thereafter, ten percent or, if greater, the percentage at least equal to the OASDI tax rate. During any period in which the contributing participant is required to make contributions under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act or the Social Security Act, the mandatory contribution to the plan by each contributing participant shall be offset by the OASDI taxes paid by the Participant, except that no offset for OASDI taxes shall reduce the mandatory contribution to the plan for a participant to less than two and one-half percent of that contributing participant's compensation for that pay period. 
(b)  For the pay period commencing December 21, 1987, and thereafter, the contribution provided by this paragraph shall be picked up and paid by the City, as employer, as provided in Code Section 414(h), and the participant's gross income shall be reduced by the amount of the contributions picked up by the City. 
(c)  Each participant, as a condition to such participant's employment with the City, shall be deemed to have authorized the City to reduce the participant's compensation by such amount from each paycheck and to transmit such amount directly to the plan custodian, according to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(d)  Separate accounts shall be maintained for the mandatory contributions of the employees, prior to the pick up of such contributions by the City and the contributions picked up by the City. 
(2)  Voluntary Contributions. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of Subsection 14-1-5(B), W.M.C., each contributing participant may elect to contribute to the trust fund an amount that, when combined with the mandatory contributions required in paragraph (1) of this subsection (C), does not exceed the amount described in subsection 14-1-5(B)(1), W.M.C. 
(b)  The amount, if any, which a contributing participant voluntarily contributes to the trust fund, must be contributed through payroll deductions on an after tax basis. A contributing participant may have the option of increasing, decreasing or terminating voluntary contributions at any time. No participant shall have any obligation to make any voluntary contribution. 
(c)  For purposes of this Section, amounts representing the participant's interest in another qualified pension plan transferred in accordance with Subsection 14-1-4(G), W.M.C., shall not be considered voluntary contributions. 
(3)  Payment of Participant Contributions. The contributions of the contributing participant shall be withheld every pay period and shall be credited to the plan each pay period. 
(D)  Retirement Medical Savings Accounts: See Section 14-1-8, W.M.C., for the terms and conditions relating to retirement medical savings accounts. 
(E)  City's Obligations: 
(1)  No Contract of Employment. The adoption and continuance of the plan, as set forth in this Chapter, shall not be deemed to constitute a contract between the City and any employee or participant, nor to be consideration for, or an inducement or condition of, the City's employment of any person. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to give any employee or contributing participant the right to be retained in the employ of the City, or to interfere with the right of the City to discharge any employee or contributing participant at any time, nor shall it be deemed to give the City the right to require the employee or contributing participant to remain in its employ, nor shall it interfere with the right of any employee or contributing participant to terminate employment at any time. 
(2)  No Liability. The City shall not incur any liability whatsoever to the trust fund, any participant or any beneficiaries, the trustee, or any other person, for anything done or omitted by the trustee, or for the loss or depreciation, in whole or in part, of the trust fund. 
(F)  Contributions for Periods of Qualified Military Service: The employer shall make all contributions to the plan required by Code Section 414(u) that are attributable to periods of qualified military service. In addition, the employer shall allow any participant to make mandatory employee contributions and voluntary contributions for periods of qualified military service as required by Code Section 414(u). The employer may elect to make additional contributions based upon such qualified military service, based upon employer contributions made during the applicable period, provided such election by the employer is made on a nondiscriminatory basis applicable to all similarly-situated employees who have qualified military service. Any contributions made under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of Code Section 414(u) and the provisions of the plan shall be applied considering any such contributions as having been made during the plan year to which the contributions relate. 
(G)  Rollover Contributions: A participant may transfer to the participant's interest all or any portion of the participant's vested interest in the assets, including after-tax employee contributions, held under any other eligible retirement plan (but excluding Roth IRAs described in Code Section 408A), subject to acceptance of such rollover contribution by the board. The rollover contribution must be transferred to the plan either (1) in a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer from the other eligible retirement plan or (2) by the participant within 60 days after the participant has received the vested interest from such other eligible retirement plan. In such event, the assets so received shall be (a) fully vested, (b) held in a separate account and (c) administered and distributed pursuant to the provisions of the plan concerning employer contributions. No rollover contribution shall (x) include assets from any plan that the board determines, in its sole discretion, would impose upon the plan requirements as to form of distribution that would not otherwise apply hereunder or (y) contain nondeductible contributions made to such other eligible retirement plan by the participant unless the transfer to the participant's interest is directly from the funding agent of such other eligible retirement plan. An inactive participant may make a rollover contribution from an eligible retirement plan that is a Code Section 457(b) plan only if it is the city's Code Section 457(b) plan. 
(2464 3319 3360 3447 3704 3749) 
14-1-5. - Determination and Vesting of Participants' Interests. 
(A)  Allocation of Employer Contributions: The contributions made by the employer to the credit of the account of each full participant shall be allocated to the account of each such participant as of the end of each pay period. Any allocation shall be subject to the limitations set forth in subsection (B) of this Section. 
(B)  Limitations on Allocations: 
(1)  General Rule. In no event may a participant receive an allocation for any plan year that, when combined with contributions allocated to the participant's retirement medical savings account (if any) and a participant-related allocation under any other defined contribution plan established by the City, exceeds the lesser of (a) 100 percent of the participant's compensation for such year or (b) $51,000.00 (for the 2013 plan year), provided that such figure shall be adjusted as provided in Code Section 415(d). For purposes of clarification, the compensation limit referred to in clause (a) in the preceding sentence shall not apply to any contribution allocated to the participant's retirement medical savings account, which is otherwise treated as an annual addition. For the purpose of applying the foregoing limitation, the limitation year shall be the plan year. If a short limitation year is created as a result of a change in the limitation year, the dollar limitation for such short limitation year shall be the dollar limitation set forth in this subsection multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months in such short year and the denominator of which is 12. 
(2)  Allocations. For the purpose of applying the limitations of this section, the allocation to the participant shall include the following amounts allocated to the account of a participant for a limitation year: Employer contributions, forfeitures, and nondeductible contributions made by the participant, provided that, for years beginning before 1987, only nondeductible contributions in excess of six percent of the participant's compensation for the year, or one-half of the nondeductible contributions made by the participant, whichever shall be less, shall be counted as an allocation. Except that, for the plan years beginning on or after January 1, 1994, allocations may not be based on compensation in excess of the annual limitation of $255,000.00 (for the 2013 plan year), subject to adjustment as provided for by law or regulation, for the account of any individual participant. For the purpose of applying the limitations of this Section, compensation from and allocations received under any retirement plan maintained by any other employer that is a common member with the employer of either a controlled group of businesses or an affiliated service group, as prescribed by law or regulation, shall be counted. 
(3)  Excluded Amounts. Any amount not mentioned in paragraph (2) of this subsection shall not be considered an allocation. The amounts not considered as allocations include deductible participant contributions, rollover contributions and transfers from other qualified plans allocated to the account of a participant. 
(4)  Treatment of Excess. With respect to any limitation year beginning on or after July 1, 2007, in the event an allocation would otherwise exceed the limitations of this section (an "excess allocation") with respect to a participant, the plan shall only correct the excess allocation in accordance with the employee plans compliance resolution system ("EPCRS"), as set forth in revenue procedure 2013-12 or any superseding guidance, including, but not limited to, the preamble of the final Section 415 Regulations. 
(5)  Compensation. For the purposes of applying the limitations of this subsection (B), compensation means the total amount paid by the employer to a participant for services rendered to the employer that are included in the taxable income of the participant, including any amounts paid to the participant by the later of (x) two and one-half months after the participant's separation from employment or (y) the end of the limitation year that includes such date of the participant's separation from employment if, absent such separation from employment, such amounts would have been paid to the participant while the participant continued in employment with the employer. For limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, compensation for the purposes of this section shall not be reduced by voluntary salary deferrals or reductions for a participant under a plan established under Code Section 125, 132(f)(4), 402(g)(3), 457, 401(k) or 403(b). The "annual compensation" of each participant taken into account in determining allocations for any plan year beginning after December 31, 2012, shall not exceed $255,000.00, as adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with Code Section 401(a)(17)(b). "Annual compensation" means compensation during the plan year or such other consecutive 12-month period over which compensation is otherwise determined under the plan (the determination period). The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins with or within such calendar year. 
(C)  Allocation of Earnings, Losses, Charges and Changes in Fair Market Value of the Net Assets of the Trust Fund: Earnings and losses of the trust fund and changes in the fair market value of the net assets of the trust fund shall be allocated under the direction of the trustee at least quarterly to the participants as of each regular evaluation date, in the ratio that the total dollar value of the interest of each such participant bears to the aggregate dollar value of all of such interests of all such participants. Third party and administrative charges shall be allocated in the ratio that the total dollar value of the interest of each such participant bears to the aggregate dollar value of all of such interests of all such participants or equally to all participants. 
(D)  Participant's Accounts: The board shall maintain, or cause the city or trustee to maintain, an account for each participant showing the dollar value of such participant's current interest resulting from any contributions made by the City, which account shall be known as the City contributions account. Separate accounts to be known as participants' contributions accounts shall also be kept, showing the contributions of each participant and the earnings, losses and changes in fair market value thereof. 
(E)  Evaluation Dates: The regular evaluation dates of the trust fund shall be at least the last bank business day of each calendar quarter, at which time the board shall determine, or cause the trustee to determine, the value of the net assets of the trust fund, i.e., the value of all of the assets of the trust fund at fair market value thereof, less all liabilities, both as known to the trustee, including the value of the contributions of the city, the state, and the participants for that quarter. If an event described in Subsection 14-1-7(A), W.M.C., occurs between regular evaluation dates requiring a distribution of any part of a participant's interest, the dollar value of such participant's interest shall be adjusted to reflect the contributions made after the last evaluation date without any earnings, losses or other changes. The dollar value of a participant's interest as so adjusted shall be the amount that shall be distributed to such participant or such participant's beneficiary. 
(F)  Vesting of Participants' Interests: 
(1)  Fully Vested. A participant's interest in the contributions made by him, and the earnings, losses and changes in fair market value thereof, shall be fully vested at all times. The interest of a participant in the contributions made by the City, and the earnings, losses and changes in fair market value thereof, shall be fully vested at all times. 
(2)  Distribution of a Participant's Interest. Any interest shall be and become payable to a participant or such participant's beneficiaries only as and to the extent provided in this Chapter; and a participant who dies having designated a beneficiary shall cease to have any interest hereunder or in the participant's separate trust account, and the participant's beneficiary shall become entitled to distribution thereof as herein provided by virtue of the terms of this Chapter and not as a result of any transfer of said interest or account. 
(G)  Vesting Upon Termination of Plan or Discontinuance of Contributions: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (F) of this section, upon the termination of the plan or upon the complete discontinuance of contributions under the plan to the trust fund, the interest of all participants shall become fully and completely vested and nonforfeitable for all purposes. 
(H)  Investment of Participant's Interest: A participant's interest shall be invested in the investment options in accordance with the investment elections specified by the participant. A participant may change the investment of contributions and may reallocate amounts in such participant's interest among the investment options in a manner determined by the plan custodian and subject to such provisions as the plan administrator may adopt. Allocation of assets among investment options is solely the responsibility of each participant. The fact that an investment option is available for investment to participants under the plan shall not be construed as a recommendation for investment in that investment option. 
(2464 3319 3447 3584 3704) 
14-1-6. - Retirement Date; Designation of Beneficiary. 
(A)  Retirement Date: 
(1)  Normal Retirement. For the purposes of Subsection 14-1-7(L), payment for qualified health insurance premiums, the normal retirement age for each participant shall be age 55 and, on the last day of the month in which the participant attains normal retirement age, the participant shall be entitled to retire voluntarily. 
(B)  Beneficiaries: 
(1)  Designation of Beneficiaries. Each participant shall have the right to designate one or more beneficiaries and one or more contingent beneficiaries to receive the participant's interest upon the participant's death, such designation to be made in the form prescribed by and delivered to the board. The participant shall have the right to change or revoke any such designation from time to time by filing a new designation or notice of revocation with the board, and no notice to any beneficiary nor consent by a beneficiary shall be required to effect any such change or revocation. Any beneficiary designation shall be effective when received by the board. 
(2)  Determination of a Beneficiary When There is No Designated Beneficiary. If a participant shall fail to designate a beneficiary before the participant's death, or if all designated beneficiaries or contingent beneficiaries should die, cease to exist before the participant's death, or if all designated beneficiaries or contingent beneficiaries disclaim their interests or die prior to distribution, the board shall direct the trustee to pay the participant's entire interest to the participant's surviving spouse or civil union partner (as applicable), if any, or, if none, then to the personal representative of the participant's estate. If, however, no personal representative shall have been appointed, and no actual notice thereof has been given to the board within 120 days after the participant's death, the board may direct the trustee to pay the participant's entire interest to such person or persons as may be entitled thereto under the intestate laws of Colorado and, in such case, the board may require such proof of right or identity from such person or persons as the board may deem necessary. 
(3)  Insurance Policies. The beneficiary of any insurance on a participant's life shall be determined and designated as provided in Subsection 14-1-9(A), W.M.C. 
(2464 3319 3360 3447 3584 3704) 
14-1-7. - Distribution from the Trust Fund. 
(A)  When Interests Become Distributable and Effect Thereof: When a participant dies, suffers total disability, retires or experiences a termination of employment for any other reason, the participant's interest shall thereupon become distributable. When a participant's interest shall have become distributable, such participant's interest shall remain a part of the trust fund until it is distributed. 
(B)  Information to be Furnished to the Board: For the purpose of enabling the board to determine the participant's distributable interest, the board shall be entitled to rely upon information provided to the board by the City with respect to the date of the participant's termination of employment and other such information as is needed and requested. 
(C)  Distribution of Interests: 
(1)  Insurance. If there has been an investment in life insurance for the benefit of any participant whose interest becomes distributable for any reason other than death, such participant may, subject to any limitation set forth elsewhere in the plan, obtain an absolute assignment of any such life insurance by informing the board of such election. If said election is not exercised within 30 days after the participant's termination of employment and the conversion election provided for is not made, the board shall cause said contract to be surrendered no later than the end of the policy year and shall add the proceeds of such surrender to the interest of said participant. After December 31, 1996, no new life insurance contracts may be adopted as pension investments under the plan. 
(2)  Election to Defer Benefits. A participant may elect to defer the commencement of distribution of the participant's benefit, but in no event shall the commencement of distribution be later than the required distribution commencement date specified in subsection (F) of this Section. 
(3)  Distribution of Participant's Interest. Any other provision of this subsection (C) to the contrary notwithstanding, a participant, in the event of a termination of employment for any reason, shall be entitled to receive payment in one lump sum of the participant's interest, provided the participant makes written demand therefor upon the board. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary, if the amount of a participant's interest (including any rollover contributions that were made to the plan pursuant to Subsection 14-1-4(G) W.M.C.) does not exceed $1,000.00 at the time of a participant's termination of employment for any reason, such participant's interest shall be automatically distributed in a cash lump sum as soon as administratively practicable after the participant's termination of employment for any reason. For purposes of this subsection (C)(3), if such amount is zero, the participant will be deemed to have received a distribution of such amount. 
(D)  Transfers From the Plan into an Eligible Retirement Plan: The trustee is authorized, at the direction of the plan custodian and at the request of the participant, to transfer the portion of such participant's vested interest that is an eligible rollover distribution and has become distributable under subsection (A) of this Section directly to another eligible retirement plan for the benefit of such participant, provided such transfer satisfies the requirements under law for such transfers and rollover contributions and the transferee plan accepts the participant's eligible rollover distribution from the plan. 
(1)  The trustee is authorized, at the direction of the plan custodian and at the request of the participant, to transfer the portion of such participant's vested interest that is an eligible rollover distribution and has become distributable under subsection (A) of this Section directly to another eligible retirement plan for the benefit of such participant, provided such transfer satisfies the requirements under law for such transfers and rollover contributions and the transferee plan accepts the participant's eligible rollover distribution from the plan. 
(2)  If a participant becomes eligible to participate in the City's general employee pension plan without a break in municipal service, that employee's vested interest may be transferred to the general employee pension plan and the employee shall become a participant of the general employee pension plan pursuant to Title XIV, Chapter 2. 
(3)  If a participant becomes eligible to participate in the FPPA system without a break in municipal service, the participant may elect to have his/her vested interest transferred to the FPPA system, as permitted by FPPA. 
(E)  Withdrawals While Employed: A participant may elect to receive a distribution while still employed by the City as follows: 
(1)  Age 62 Withdrawal. A participant who has attained age 62 may elect to begin distributions from the trust fund according to the rules described in this Section 14-1-7, W.M.C., while employed by the City, if the participant's current annual base salary at the time of election is at least 25 percent less than the participant's highest annual base salary. 
(2)  Age 591/2 Withdrawal. Effective January 1, 2014, a participant who has attained age 591/2 may elect to receive a distribution of up to 15 percent of the participant's interest according to the rules described in this Section 14-1-7, W.M.C., provided that the participant irrevocably agrees to terminate employment with the City within five years from receipt of this distribution. 
(F)  Required Distribution Commencement Date: Distribution of a participant's interest must begin no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the year the participant attains the age of 701/2 or the year the participant retires. 
(G)  Spendthrift Provisions: 
(1)  General Rule. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all amounts payable pursuant to this chapter by the trustee shall be paid only to the person or persons entitled thereto, and all such payments shall be paid directly into the hands of such person or persons and not into the hands of any other person or corporation whatsoever, and such payments shall not be liable for the debts, contracts or engagements of any such person or persons, or taken in execution by attachment or garnishment or by any other legal or equitable proceedings; nor shall any such person or persons have any right to alienate, anticipate, commute, pledge, encumber or assign any such payments or the benefits, proceeds or avails thereof. 
(2)  QDRO. Paragraph (1) of this subsection shall not apply to the creation, assignment or recognition of a right to any benefit payable with respect to a participant or alternate payee pursuant to a QDRO setting forth the agreement of the parties with respect to the division of benefits in compliance with Code Section 414(p) and Section 14-10-113, C.R.S. The QDRO must specifically address the division of any retirement medical savings account, if applicable. A lump sum distribution will be made pursuant to such QDRO within 120 days after the date on which a certified court order approving such an agreement permitting such a distribution has been submitted to and received by the board. Procedures for submitting a QDRO may be obtained from the board or its delegate. 
The board shall establish such reasonable procedures as are necessary to determine the compliance of a domestic relations order with the requirements of Section 14-10-113, C.R.S., and to administer distributions under such qualified order. Such procedures may be at the discretion of the board, including standardized forms to be used for such marital agreements and orders. A person who obtains a right to a benefit payable to a participant pursuant to a qualified domestic relations order shall have no rights to vote in elections held pursuant to the plan. 
(H)  Manner of Distribution: A participant's interest may be distributed by one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Lump Sum Distribution. The participant's interest may be paid to the participant or the participant's beneficiary by the distribution of the total balance of the participant's interest in one lump sum. The participant, or the participant's beneficiary in the event of the participant's death, shall have the right to have the distribution made in a lump sum by filing a written election with the trustee within such time as the board shall prescribe. 
(2)  Installments. The participant's interest may be paid to the participant or the participant's beneficiary in substantially equal periodic installments over a period of time not to exceed the joint life expectancy of the participant and the participant's beneficiary (or until the interest is exhausted) and not in installment frequency greater than monthly. This maximum period shall be determined under the applicable IRS tables at the time the initial monthly installment payment becomes payable. The participant, or the participant's beneficiary in the event of the participant's death, shall have the right to have the distribution made in this manner by filing a written election with the trustee within such time as the board shall prescribe. 
(3)  Other Methods. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, any interest that has become distributable for any reason may be distributed at such time or times, in such amount or amounts, and in such manner, as the board and the recipient of such distribution may mutually determine, including a transfer to another qualified plan or individual retirement account. 
(I)  Limitation on Duration of Payments: 
(1)  General Rule. No distribution shall be made over a period exceeding the joint life expectancy of the participant and the participant's beneficiary. To the extent distribution is made after the participant attains the age of 701/2, if not paid in a lump sum, the distribution must be made in substantially equal periodic installments at least annually over the period prescribed in this subsection subject to a once yearly change that may accelerate payment at the election of the participant or beneficiary. The present value of the benefits payable solely to the participant under any elected method must exceed 50 percent of the total benefits payable to the participant and the participant's beneficiaries, unless distribution is in the form of a qualified joint and survivor annuity. 
(2)  Compliance with Code Section 401(a)(9). Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, all distributions from the plan shall conform to the final regulations issued under Code Section 401(a)(9), including the incidental death benefit provisions of Code Section 401(a)(9)(G). 
(J)  Withdrawals: Except as provided in Subsection 14-1-7(E), W.M.C., a participant may not at any time withdraw any part of the participant's interest, except upon death, total disability, retirement or termination of employment as provided in this Chapter. 
(K)  Special Rules for Distributions After the Participant's Death: 
(1)  Distributions Commencing Prior to Death. If distribution of a participant's interest has commenced in accordance with subsection (I) of this section and the participant dies before his or her entire interest has been distributed to him or her, the remaining interest of the participant shall be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution being used as of the date of the participant's death. 
(2)  Distributions commencing after death. If a participant dies before his or her interest commences, the entire interest of the participant shall be distributed within five years after the death of the participant, provided that a distribution commencing within one year after the participant's death to or for the benefit of a designated beneficiary over the longer of the life or the life expectancy of the designated beneficiary will be treated as having been distributed within such five-year period. If the surviving spouse of the participant is the designated beneficiary, distribution is not required to commence until the date on which the participant would have attained the age of 701/2 and, if distribution had not commenced as of the date of death of such surviving spouse, the provisions of this paragraph shall be applied as if such spouse were the participant. 
(3)  Beneficiaries. If a participant should die after receiving some part, but not all, of the participant's interest, the remaining balance thereof shall be distributed to the participant's beneficiary in a manner determined pursuant to this subsection. If the beneficiary of the participant should die, cease to exist, or disclaim an interest in the participant's interest prior to the completion of distribution of the participant's interest, the remaining distribution shall be made to the contingent beneficiary designated by the participant, if any. If any contingent beneficiary should die or disclaim an interest in the participant's interest prior to the completion of distribution of the participant's interest, the remaining distribution shall be made in a manner determined pursuant to this subsection to the recipient determined pursuant to Section 14-1-6, W.M.C. 
(4)  Distribution to IRA of Nonspouse Beneficiary. A Participant's nonspouse beneficiary may elect payment of the portion of the deceased participant's interest to which the beneficiary is entitled in a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer to an individual retirement account described in Code Section 402(c)(8)(B)(i), an individual retirement annuity described in Code Section 402(c)(8)(B)(ii), or a Roth IRA described in Code Section 408A that is established to receive the Plan distribution on behalf of the Beneficiary and such transfer shall be treated as an eligible rollover distribution and such individual retirement account, annuity or Roth IRA shall be treated as an inherited individual retirement account, individual retirement annuity, or Roth IRA (within the meaning of Code Sections 408(d)(3)(C) and 408A). For purposes of this Section, a trust maintained for the benefit of one or more designated beneficiaries may be the beneficiary to the extent provided in rules prescribed by the secretary of treasury. If the participant dies after the participant's required beginning date, as defined in Subsection 14-1-7(F), W.M.C., the required minimum distribution in the year of death may not be transferred according to this Section. The requirements of Code Section 402(c)(11) apply to distributions under this Section. 
(L)  Payment for Qualified Health Insurance Premiums: A participant who has separated from service as a public safety officer with the City due to disability for attainment of normal retirement age, as defined in Subsection 14-1-6(A), W.M.C., may elect to have amounts not yet paid from the plan paid directly to a provider of an accident or health insurance plan or a qualified long-term insurance contract to cover the cost of up to $3,000.00 per year of "qualified health insurance premiums" for the participant and the participant's spouse and dependents, in accordance with Code Section 402(l). The requirements of Code Section 402(l) apply to payments under this section. 
(2464 3319 3360 3447 3584 3704 3749) 
14-1-8. - Contributions to Retirement Medical Savings Accounts. 
(A)  Contributions to Retirement Medical Savings Accounts: 
(1)  General. Each participant shall have the option of designating up to 25 percent of the participant's combined mandatory and city contributions made to the trust fund pursuant to Subsections 14-1-4(A) and (C)(1), W.M.C., to be used for future medical care expenses as provided for in Code Section 401(h). Contributions designated by a participant for future health benefits under Code Section 401(h) as described in this subsection (A)(1) shall be maintained in a separate account (the "retirement medical savings accounts"). 
(2)  Subordinate; Taxation. It is intended that the benefits provided by the retirement medical savings accounts shall at all times be subordinate to the retirement benefits provided by the plan. Contributions to the retirement medical savings accounts will not be taxed upon a participant's retirement, termination of employment, death or total disability nor upon use for medical expenses upon a participant's retirement, termination of employment, death or total disability. 
(3)  No Refunds. No refunds of contributions to a participant's retirement medical savings account shall be made to the participant or the participant's spouse or dependents. 
(4)  Non-Transferrable. Except as provided in subsection (B)(5) of this Section, all contributions to a participant's retirement medical savings account shall not be transferred and shall remain in the retirement medical savings account until such contributions are used for medical care expenses for the participant and the participant's spouse and dependents. 
(5)  Other Rules and Requirements. The retirement medical savings accounts will be subject to the rules and requirements issued by the City Manager, which can be changed from time to time. 
(B)  Distributions from Retirement Medical Savings Accounts: 
(1)  Contributions Upon Retirement, Termination of Employment, Death and Total Disability. Contributions to a participant's retirement medical savings account may be distributed only upon the participant's retirement, termination of employment, death or total disability. 
(2)  Exclusive Use. Contributions to a participant's retirement medical savings account shall be used exclusively to pay or reimburse qualifying medical care expenses under Code Section 213(d)(1) for the participant and the participant's spouse and dependents. 
(3)  Reimbursement Application. Distributions from a participant's retirement medical savings account shall only be paid pursuant to a reimbursement application, which contains the provisions for determining the amount of benefits that will be paid from the retirement medical savings account and specifies the time period with respect to which benefits will be paid. 
(4)  Other Sources. Distributions from a participant's retirement medical savings account may not be made for any expense for which the participant or the participant's spouse or dependents receive, or are eligible to receive, payment or reimbursement from another source. 
(5)  Reversion to the Employer. If, with respect to a participant's retirement medical savings account, there is any balance remaining upon the death of the last to die of the participant or the participant's spouse, if any, and the satisfaction of all liabilities under the plan to provide benefits payable from the retirement medical savings account with respect to the participant and the participant's spouse, then any such balance shall be returned to the employer to be used as determined by the employer. 
(6)  Distribution. Any interest in a participant's retirement medical savings account shall be and become payable to the participant, the participant's spouse, or the participant's dependent only as and to the extent provided in this Chapter. In order to receive benefits from the retirement medical savings account, the participant must agree to provide appropriate documentation of the medical care expenditures 
(C)  Vesting of Retirement Medical Savings Accounts: A participant's interest in the contributions made by the participant pursuant to Subsection 14-1-8(A), and the earnings, losses and changes in fair market value thereof, shall be fully vested at all times, subject to reversion in accordance with Subsection 14-1-8(B)(5), W.M.C. 
(D)  Investment of Retirement Medical Savings Accounts: A participant's retirement medical savings account shall be invested in the investment options in accordance with the investment elections specified by the participant. A participant may change the investment of contributions and may reallocate amounts in such participant's account among the investment options in a manner determined by the plan custodian and subject to such provisions as the Plan Administrator may adopt. Allocation of assets among investment options is solely the responsibility of each participant. The fact that an investment option is available for investment to participants under the plan shall not be construed as a recommendation for investment in that investment option. 
(E)  Termination of the Plan: Upon the termination of the plan, the interests of all participants in the retirement medical savings accounts shall be returned to the employer. 
(3704) 
14-1-9. - Insurance Company Contracts. 
(A)  Insurance or Annuity Contracts: 
(1)  Previously Purchased Contracts. If a participant has, under the provisions of the prior City retirement plan, already purchased an ordinary life or retirement income insurance contract, the account of the participant on whose life the contract is obtained shall be charged with the amount of all premiums thereon. The trustee shall continue to have the right to receive each payment that may be due during the participant's lifetime. Any death benefit shall be payable directly to the beneficiary named in any such contract on the participant's life and the participant shall have the right, either directly or through the trustee, to change the beneficiary from time to time on any such contract and to elect settlement options thereunder for the benefit of the beneficiary. The trustee shall have the right to exercise all other options and privileges contained in the contract. 
(2)  No Right to Purchase Contracts Through the Plan. A participant may not purchase any individual insurance or annuity contract through the plan. 
(3)  No New Group Contracts. After December 31, 1996, the City shall not purchase any new group insurance or annuity contracts for pension participants. 
(B)  Limitations on Life Insurance or Annuity Contracts for Participants' Benefit: All investments in life insurance or annuity contracts (other than "key man insurance") shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  The aggregate premiums for such life insurance or annuity contracts, in the case of each participant, shall be no more than 35 percent of the aggregate of the City's contributions allocated to him at any particular time; 
(2)  The board shall direct the trustee to convert the entire value of any such life insurance contract at or before the participant's actual retirement to provide either cash value or periodic income, or the board may direct the trustee to distribute the insurance contract directly to the participant at retirement; 
(3)  In the event payment of any premium would cause aggregate premiums to exceed the limitation set forth in paragraph (1) of this subsection, then such payment shall not be made, but, on the contrary, each insurance or annuity contract pertaining thereto shall be thereupon converted to a paid up contract, or the face amount of such contract shall be reduced to a face amount, the premium payments on which would not exceed the limitation prescribed in paragraph (1) of this subsection; and 
(4)  If the board directs the trustee to invest any portion of the trust fund in such insurance or annuity contracts, such investment shall be made in such a manner that the operation of this Chapter shall be fair and equitable (and nondiscriminatory) in its application to all participants. 
(C)  Dividends: If dividends are paid on any contract issued by the insurer, they shall, in the discretion of the board, either be used to provide additional benefits under such contract or used and applied in reduction of the next premium due and payable thereon. 
(D)  Limitation of Participant's Rights in Insurance or Annuity Contracts: The fact that any contract is issued or based on the life of a participant shall not vest any right, title or interest in such contract in such participant, except at the time or times and upon the terms and conditions especially set forth in this Chapter. Subject to the provisions of Subsection 14-1-9(A), W.M.C., the trustee shall be the sole owner of all right, title and interest in and to each such contract, but the board shall nevertheless direct the trustee as to the exercise of all rights, options and privileges in each such contract. 
(E)  Protective Provisions for Life Insurance Company: No life insurance company shall be deemed to be a party to the plan nor shall it be responsible for the validity of the plan. The certificate of the trustee as to any matter may be relied upon by any life insurance company as conclusive evidence of any matters mentioned therein, and such company shall be fully protected in taking or permitting any action on the faith thereof and shall incur no liability or responsibility for so doing. No such company shall be required to examine the provisions of this chapter or to question any act of the trustee or the board, nor shall such company be required to ascertain that any act of the trustee or the board is authorized by this Chapter. 
(2464 3447 3704) 
14-1-10. - Police Pension Board. 
(A)  Appointment of Board: 
(1)  General Rule. The board shall consist of five members: one shall be the current City Finance Director; one shall be appointed by the City Manager to serve at the City Manager's pleasure; and three shall be contributing participants elected by a majority of the voting participants. One of the three elected members shall be an exempt employee as defined in the City's personnel policies and rules. The trustee shall serve as Chairperson of the Board. 
(2)  Procedures for Electing the Three Members. The three members to be elected shall be elected for three-year staggered terms, with the term of one such member expiring in December of each year. The procedure to be followed in initially electing such members shall be established by the trustee. After the first year of the election, procedures shall be established by the board. 
(B)  Duties and Powers of the Board: The board shall be charged with the administration of the plan and shall decide all questions arising in the administration, interpretation and application of the plan, including all questions relating to eligibility, vesting and distribution, and to supply omissions and to resolve inconsistencies and ambiguities arising under the plan. The decisions of the board shall be conclusive and binding on all parties. In addition to the other duties and powers set forth elsewhere in the plan, the board also shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Payments From and Investments of the Trust Fund; Investment Advisor. The board shall, from time to time, direct the trustee concerning the payments to be made out of the trust fund pursuant to this Chapter. The board shall also have the power to direct the trustee with respect to all investments and reinvestments of the trust fund, and shall have such other powers respecting the administration of the trust fund as may be conferred upon it in this chapter. The board may employ for the trust fund an investment advisor ("investment advisor") and may rely on such investment advisor's recommendations with respect to the investment of all or a portion of the trust fund. If the board shall employ an investment advisor, it shall execute any letters or agreements necessary for the employment of such investment advisor or it may direct the trustee to execute any such letters or agreement. The fees of such investment advisor shall be paid from the trust fund as an expense of the trust. The trustee shall be fully protected from any action of such investment advisor and shall not be liable to any person or organization for any investments made by such investment advisor or for any acts or omissions made upon the direction or recommendation of such investment advisor. 
(2)  Enter Into, Execute, and Terminate Contracts. The board shall have the power to direct the trustee to enter into and execute contracts as investment vehicles for the trust funds. The board shall have the further power to direct the trustee to terminate any such contract at any time, subject to the provisions of such contract. 
(3)  Investment Options. If the trustee enters into a contract at the direction of the board that permits the right of participants to direct the investment of their interest in forms of investments offered, the board shall provide the opportunity to participants to make options as to investments. The board shall adopt various investment options for the investment of contributions by the participant and shall monitor and evaluate the appropriateness of the investment options offered by the plan. The board may remove or phase out an investment option, if the investment option has failed to meet the established evaluation criteria or for other good cause as determined by the board. Neither the trustee, the board, the Plan Administrator nor the City shall be held liable for any losses or changes to a participant's interest that result from that participant's choice of investment options. 
(C)  Organization and Operation of Board: The board may adopt such rules and procedures as it deems desirable for the conduct of its affairs, appoint one of its own members chairman, and appoint a secretary or other agents, none of whom need be a member of the board, but any of whom may be, but need not be, an officer or employee of the City. It may delegate to any agent such duties and powers, both ministerial and discretionary, as it deems appropriate, excepting only that all matters involving investment of funds, interpretation of the plan and settlement of disputes shall be determined by the board. Any determination of the board may be made by a majority of the board at a meeting thereof, or without a meeting by a resolution or memorandum signed by all members, and shall be final and conclusive on the City, the trustee, all participants and beneficiaries claiming any rights under this Chapter, and as to all third parties dealing with the board or with the trustee. All notices, directions, information and other communications from the board to the trustee shall be in writing. 
(D)  Matters Affecting Board Members: In any matter affecting any member of the board in an individual capacity as a participant under this Chapter, separate and apart from such individual's status as a member of the group of participants, such interested member shall have no authority or vote as a member of the board in the determination of such matter, but the board shall determine such matter as if said interested member were not a member of the board; provided, however, that this shall not be deemed to take from said interested member any rights as a participant. In the event that the remaining members of the board should be unable to agree on any matter so affecting an interested member because of an equal division of voting, the matter shall be deemed to have been defeated. 
(E)  Compensation and Expenses of Board: The members of the board shall serve without compensation in addition to their regular City compensation. All members shall be reimbursed by the City for any necessary expenditures incurred in the discharge of their duties as members of said board. Such reimbursement, and the compensation of all agents, counsel or other persons retained or employed by the board, shall be fixed by the board and shall be paid from the trust fund or, in the discretion of the City Manager, by the City. 
(F)  Records of the Board: The board shall keep a record of all of its proceedings and shall keep or cause to be kept all such books of account, records and other data as may be necessary or advisable in its judgment for the administration of this Chapter and properly to reflect the affairs thereof, and to determine the amount of vested and/or forfeitable interests of the respective participants, and the amount of all plan benefits. As a part thereof, it shall maintain or cause to be maintained separate accounts for each participant as provided for in Subsection 14-1-5(D), W.M.C. Any person dealing with the board may rely on, and shall incur no liability in relying on, a certificate or memorandum in writing signed by the secretary of the board or by a majority of the members of the board as evidence of an action taken or resolution adopted by the board. 
(G)  Immunity from Liability: No bond or other security shall be required of any member of the board, except as may be otherwise required by law. No member of the board shall be liable or responsible to any person or party for any matter or thing whatsoever, except only for such member's own gross negligence or willful misconduct. 
(H)  Resignation and Removal of Members; Appointment of Successors: 
(1)  Resignation From the Board. Any member of the board may resign at any time by giving written notice to the other members and to the City Manager, effective as therein stated, otherwise, upon receipt of such notice. 
(2)  Termination of Employment with the City. Whether or not the board member remains a participant, no board member may remain on the board if the individual terminates employment with the City for whatever reason. 
(3)  Ceasing to Hold a Designated Position. No appointed board member may remain on the board if the individual ceases to hold one of the positions designated. 
(4)  Transfer. No elected board member may remain on the board as an elected member if the individual transfers, for whatever reason, to a department in which another elected board member works. 
(5)  Successor Board Member. Upon the death, resignation or removal of any elected board member, a successor to complete the board member's term shall be elected within 30 days in the manner set forth in subsection (A) of this section. 
(6)  Removal From the Board. A member of the board may be removed from the board in the manner defined in the City of Westminster Police and General Employee Pension Plan Bylaws. 
(2464 3319 3447 3704) 
14-1-11. - Powers and Duties of the Trustee. 
(A)  Investment of the Trust Fund: 
(1)  Duty of the Trustee. It shall be the duty of the trustee to hold the funds from time to time received from the City and the participants and, subject to the direction of the board, to manage, invest and reinvest the trust fund and the income therefrom pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, without distinction between principal and income. The trustee shall be responsible only for such sums as shall actually be received. The trustee shall have no duty to collect any sums from the City or the participants. 
(2)  Power of the Trustee. The trustee shall have the power to invest and/or reinvest any and all money or property of any description at any time held by it and constituting a part of the trust fund without previous application to, or subsequent ratification of, the City Council, the City Manager, any court, tribunal or commission, or any federal or State governmental agency, in accordance with the following powers: 
(a)  The trustee may invest in real property and all interests therein, in bonds, notes, debentures, mortgages, commercial paper, preferred stocks, common stocks, or other securities, rights, obligations or property, real or personal, including shares or certificates of participation issued by regulated investment companies or regulated investment trusts, shares or units of participation in qualified common trust funds or qualified pooled funds, and in life insurance and annuity contracts. In making investments or reinvestments, the trustee shall not be limited by the proportion to which the investments to be made, either alone or with any property of the same or similar character then held or acquired, may bear to the entire amount of the trust fund, and the trustee shall not be bound as to the character of any investment provided by any constitutional provision, statute, rule of court or custom governing the investment of trust funds, providing only that the trustee shall exercise the judgment and care, under the circumstances then prevailing, that people of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs. 
(b)  The trustee, in the matter of the investment of the trust fund, shall be held harmless in every respect in exercising its discretion as to how much of the trust fund shall remain uninvested and in cash temporarily awaiting investment or for the expected cash distributions out of the trust fund in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(c)  If directed by the board, the trustee shall enter into contracts as investment vehicles for the plan, which contracts shall then become a part of the plan. The trustee shall then be authorized to sign such other documents and take such other actions as might be necessary or appropriate to carry out the terms of such contracts. The trustee may enter into such contracts as trustee of the plan alone, or as trustee of the plan and as trustee of the City's general employee pension plan in which case the funds of the two plans may be co-mingled for investment purposes. 
(d)  To the extent the trustee is directed by the board to make a particular investment, the trustee shall be held harmless from any loss or other liability arising therefrom. 
(B)  Administrative Powers of the Trustee: The trustee shall have all powers necessary or advisable to carry out the provisions of the plan and all inherent, implied and statutory powers now or hereafter provided by law, including specifically the power to do any of the following: 
(1)  To cause any securities or other property to be registered and held in its name as trustee or in the name of one or more of its nominees, without disclosing the fiduciary capacity, or to keep the same in unregistered form payable to bearer. 
(2)  To sell, grant option to sell, exchange, pledge, encumber, mortgage, deed in trust or use any other form of hypothecation, or otherwise dispose of the whole or any part of the trust fund on such terms and for such property or cash, or part cash and credit, as it may deem best, and it may retain, hold, maintain or continue any securities or investments that it may hold as part of the trust fund for such length of time as it may deem advisable. 
(3)  To abandon, compromise, contest and arbitrate claims on demand; to institute, compromise and defend actions at law (but without obligation to do so), all at the risk and expense of the trust fund. 
(4)  To borrow money for this trust, with the approval of the board, upon such terms and conditions as the trustee shall deem advisable, and to secure the repayment thereof by the mortgage or pledge of any asset of the trust fund. 
(5)  To vote in person or by proxy any shares of stock or rights held in the trust fund; to participate in reorganization, liquidation or dissolution of any corporation, the securities of which are held in the trust fund and to exchange securities or other property in connection therewith. 
(6)  To pay any amount due on any loan or advance made to the trust fund, all taxes of any nature levied, assessed or imposed upon the trust fund, except for any taxes imposed with respect to any prohibited transaction, as defined in Code Section 4975(c), and all reasonable expenses and attorney fees necessarily incurred by the trustee with respect to any of the foregoing matters. 
(C)  Immunity of Trustee: No bond or other security shall be required of the trustee or any successor trustee, except as otherwise provided by law. The trustee shall not be liable for any mistake of judgment or other action taken in good faith or for any loss to the trust fund, unless such loss results from its gross negligence, willful misconduct or bad faith. 
(D)  Advice of Board or Counsel: 
(1)  Advice or Direction of the Board. If, at any time, the trustee is in doubt concerning any action that it should take in connection with the administration of the trust, it may request the board to advise it with respect thereto and shall be protected in relying upon the advice or direction of the board. 
(2)  Advice of Counsel. The trustee may also consult with legal counsel, who may be counsel for the City, or trustee's own counsel, with respect to the meaning or construction of this Chapter or trustee's obligations or duties, and the trustee shall be fully protected from any responsibility with respect to any action taken or omitted by the trustee in good faith pursuant to the advice of such counsel. 
(E)  Taxes, Expenses and Fees of the Trustee: The trustee shall charge against and pay from the trust fund any taxes that may be imposed upon the trust fund or the income thereof, or upon or with respect to the interest of any person therein that the trustee is required to pay; provided that the trust fund shall not pay or assume any taxes imposed with respect to any prohibited transaction as defined in Code Section 4975(c). 
(1)  Reasonable Expenses; Attorney's Fees. The reasonable expenses of the trustee incurred in the administration of the plan, including the fees of any corporate co-trustee that might be appointed as may be mutually agreed upon from time to time by the trustee and the board, and attorney's fees incurred by the trustee, shall be chargeable to and paid by the trust fund, provided that the City may pay all or part of such expenses and fees in the discretion of the City Manager. 
(2)  All expenses incurred in the preparation and adoption of the plan shall be paid by the City. 
(F)  Records and Accounts of the Trustee: The trustee shall keep all such records and accounts that may be necessary in the administration and conduct of this Chapter. The trustee's records and accounts shall be open to inspection by the City, the board, and the participant of the participant's own accounts, during business hours. 
(1)  Commingled Trust Fund. All income, profits, recoveries, contributions, forfeitures, and any and all moneys, securities and properties of any kind at any time received or held by the trustee shall be held for investment purposes as a commingled trust fund. Separate accounts or records may be maintained for operational and accounting purposes, but no such account or record shall be considered as segregating any funds or property from any other funds or property contained in the commingled fund, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. 
(2)  Accounting of the Trust Fund. After the close of each year of the trust, the trustee shall render to the City and the board an accounting of the trust fund for such year. If no objections to any such accounting are filed within a period of 60 days after it has been delivered to the City and the board, it shall be deemed to have been approved and shall constitute a full and complete discharge and release to the trustees from the City and the board and all other persons having or claiming any interest in the trust fund. 
(G)  Resignation and Removal of Trustee: The City, by action of the City Manager, may, in its discretion, appoint an additional non-voting trustee to act as co-trustee with the City Finance Director, which may, but need not, be a bank or trust company organized under the laws of Colorado or the United States authorized by law to administer trusts and maintaining and operating a full-time trust department. 
(1)  Resignation. Any trustee, other than the City Finance Director, may resign from serving as a trustee at any time by filing with the City Manager an appropriate written resignation. No such resignation shall take effect until 30 days from the date thereof, provided that if a successor trustee shall have been appointed prior to the expiration of said period, the resignation shall be effective immediately. 
(2)  Removal. Any trustee, other than the City Finance Director, may be removed by the City, by action of the City Manager at any time by giving 30 days notice in writing to such trustee. Such removal shall be effected by delivering to such trustee written notice of removal, executed by the City Manager. 
(3)  All the provisions set forth in this Chapter with respect to the trustee shall relate to all successor trustees and if more than one trustee is then acting, reference to the term "trustee" shall mean "trustees." 
(4)  Corporate Co-Trustee. In the event any Corporate Co-Trustee at any time acting hereunder shall be merged, or consolidated with, or shall sell or transfer substantially all of its assets and business to another corporation, whether state or federal, or shall be in any manner reorganized or reincorporated, then the resulting or acquiring corporation shall thereupon be substituted ipso facto for such corporate co-trustee hereunder without the execution of any instrument and without any action upon the part of the City, any participant or beneficiary of any deceased participant, or any other person having or claiming to have an interest in the trust fund or under the plan. 
(2464 3319 3447 3584 3704) 
14-1-12. - Continuance, Termination and Amendment of Plan. 
(A)  Continuance of the Plan not a Contractual Obligation of the City. It is the expectation of the City that it will continue the plan indefinitely, but the continuance of the plan is not assumed as a contractual obligation by the City, and the right is reserved to the City by action of its City Council to discontinue the plan at any time. The discontinuance of the plan by the City shall, in no event, have the effect of re-vesting any part of the trust fund in the City. 
(B)  Transfer of Trust Fund. The right is reserved to the City by action of its City Council to transfer or merge the assets of the trust fund to be administered on behalf of the participants by a successor pension plan. 
(C)  Termination of Plan. The plan shall continue in full force and effect until terminated or discontinued by the City by action of its City Council. Notice of such termination shall be given to the Trustee by an instrument in writing executed by the City Manager pursuant to the action of its City Council. 
(D)  Distribution of the Trust Fund on Termination of Plan. If the plan shall, at any time, be terminated by the terms of this section, the Trustee shall immediately convert the entire Trust Fund, other than insurance and annuity contracts, to cash. The value of the interest of each respective participant or interest of each respective beneficiary in the trust fund shall be vested in its entirety as of the date of the termination of the Plan. The Trustee shall, as soon as possible, distribute to each participant or beneficiary outright, in a lump sum cash payment, such participant's entire interest or beneficiary's entire interest in the trust fund. 
(E)  Amendments to the Plan. 
(1)  General rule. The City, by action of its City Council, may at any time amend this chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall: 
(a)  Divert the trust fund to purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of the participants and their beneficiaries; 
(b)  Divert or use any part of the corpus or income of the retirement medical savings accounts for any purpose other than paying medical benefits under Code Section 401(h) (other than as provided in Section 14-1-8(B)(5), W.M.C.); 
(c)  Decrease any participant's interest; 
(d)  Discriminate in favor of Employees who are officers, persons whose principal duties consist in supervising the work of other Employees, or highly compensated employees; or 
(e)  Fail to comply with State statutes for voting for police pension plans. 
(2)  No participant approval required. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, this Chapter may be amended, if necessary, without requiring the approval of the participants to conform to the provisions and requirements of the Code or any amendments thereto, and no such amendment shall be considered prejudicial to the interest of any participant or beneficiary hereunder. 
(2464 3447 3704; Ord. No. 3896, § 2, 8-14-2017 ) 
14-1-13. - Miscellaneous. 
(A)  Benefits to be Provided Solely From the Trust Fund: All benefits payable under the plan shall be paid or provided for solely from the trust fund, and the City assumes no liability or responsibility therefor. 
(B)  Notices From Participants to be Filed With the Plan Administrator, the Board or the Trustee: Whenever provision is made that a participant may exercise any option or election or designate any beneficiary, the action of each participant shall be evidenced by a written notice therefor signed by the participant on a form furnished by the Plan Administrator, the board or the trustee, as may be applicable, for such purpose and filed with the Plan Administrator, the board or the trustee, as applicable, which shall not be effective until received by the Plan Administrator, the board or the trustee, as applicable. 
(C)  Text to Control: The headings of sections and subsections are included solely for convenience or reference. If there be any conflict between such headings and the text of this Chapter, the text shall control. 
(D)  Law Governing: The plan shall be construed under the laws of the State of Colorado and the trustee shall be liable to account only in the courts of Colorado. All contributions received by the trustee pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed to have been received in Colorado. 
(E)  Severability: In the event any provision of this Chapter shall be held illegal or invalid for any reason, said illegality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions. On the contrary, such remaining provisions shall be fully severable and this Chapter shall be construed and enforced as if said illegal or invalid provisions had never been inserted herein. 
(F)  Plan for Exclusive Benefit of Participants; Reversion Prohibited: The plan has been entered into for the exclusive benefit of the participants and their beneficiaries. Other than as provided in Subsection 14-1-8(B)(5), W.M.C., under no circumstances shall any funds contributed to or held by the trustee hereunder at any time revert to or be used by or enjoyed by the City, nor shall any such funds or assets at any time be used other than for the exclusive benefit of the participants or their beneficiaries. 
(2464 3319 3447 3704) 
CHAPTER 2. - EMPLOYEE 401(a) DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLAN 

14-2-1. - Name and Purpose of the Plan; History. 
(A)  The City of Westminster (the "City" or the "Employer") does hereby establish its Employee 401(a) Defined Contribution Plan (the "Plan"), which is a qualified money purchase pension plan. The Plan is created for the exclusive benefit of the City's eligible Employees who qualify as Participants and their Beneficiaries. The Plan is intended to qualify under Code Section 401(a) and the Trust created pursuant to the Plan is intended to be exempt under Code Section 501(a), and all provisions of the Plan shall be construed in accordance with this intention. Since this is a governmental plan, it is not the intention of the City to have the Plan comply with the provisions of the Code after the enactment of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, except to the extent that changes to the Code apply to governmental plans. 
(B)  On October 1, 1977, the City merged the assets of the Police Pension Fund and the Firefighter's Pension Fund into the restated Employee's Pension Plan. Effective January 6, 1986, the City withdrew all employees who were not police officers or firefighters from the Employee's Pension Plan by a transfer of their aggregate interest into the Plan created in this Chapter. The original plan, formerly known as the Employee's Pension Plan and Trust Agreement, was then renamed the Police and Fire Pension Plan. 
(C)  Prior Coverage Under Other City-Funded Pension Plans. Any Employee who was formerly a participant in the Employee's Pension Plan and Trust Agreement or the Police and Fire Pension Plan shall automatically have such interest in such plan, whether held by investment agents, the Trustee, or the City, transferred to the Plan upon becoming eligible to be a Participant in the Plan. Upon transfer of the Employee's interest without a break in municipal service, the Employee shall have the same Participant status as the Employee had under the other plan. 
(D)  On September 1, 2004, the City transferred the assets of the Firefighter's Pension Plan to the Fire and Police Pension Association ("FPPA") of Colorado defined benefit system and the Firefighter's Pension Plan was terminated. Participants in the Firefighter's Pension Plan became participants in the FPPA defined benefit system. Assets in the retirement medical savings account in the Firefighter's Pension Plan were transferred to the Plan for use as defined in Section 14-2-8, W.M.C. 
(E)  On October 2, 2017, the City transferred assets of the Police Pension Plan, for those Participants that elected to affiliate, to the Fire and Police Pension Association ("FPPA") of Colorado defined benefit system. Assets remaining in the Police Pension Plan were merged to the Plan. Assets in the retirement medical savings accounts were merged with the Plan for use as defined in Section 14-2-8, W.M.C. Police Officers hired on or after October 2, 2017 are participants in the FPPA defined benefit system. 
(2464 3319 3447 3704; Ord. No. 3897, § 1, 8-14-2017 ) 
14-2-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise; and further provided that the masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural. 
    Beneficiary shall mean any person or entity that, pursuant to Subsection 14-2-6(A), W.M.C., becomes entitled to receive all or any part of a participant's interest upon the participant's death. 
    Board shall mean the Employee Board established in this Chapter. 
    City shall mean the City of Westminster, Colorado. The City also may be referenced in the plan as the "employer." 
    Civil union partner shall mean an employee's lawful civil union partner, as determined by the laws of the jurisdiction where the union occurred until the entry of a dissolution of the union. 
    Code shall mean the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as it may be amended, or re-enacted or replaced. Reference to a specific section of the Code shall mean the section in effect at the date of adoption of the plan, or any successor section to such section. 
    Compensation shall mean the base pay of a participant for services rendered to the City, excluding overtime pay, bonuses, insurance premiums, pension and retirement benefits, and all contributions by the City to the plan, to any health, accident or welfare fund or plan, or any similar benefit. Compensation shall be computed prior to any salary reduction for mandatory contributions picked up by the City or amounts deferred under a deferred compensation plan or a salary reduction plan or pre-tax medical plan. Compensation for part-time employees is the pay earned for the amount of FTEs budgeted for their positions. For purposes of determining the compensation applicable to the limitations on annual contributions in Section 14-2-5, W.M.C., Compensation shall be as defined in Subsection 14-2-5(B)(5), W.M.C. 
Effective January 1, 2009, (A) an individual receiving a differential wage payment (as defined by Code Section 3401(h)(2)) shall be treated as an employee of the employer making the payment, (B) the differential wage payment shall be treated as compensation for purposes of Code Section 415 and any other code section that references the definition of compensation under Code Section 415, and (C) the plan shall not be treated as failing to meet the requirements of any provision described in Code Section 414(u)(1)(C) by reason of any contribution or benefit which is based on the differential wage payment. 
    Contributing participant shall mean any eligible employee who is making contributions to the plan, whether or not the City is contributing to the plan on behalf of such eligible employee. 
    C.R.S. shall mean the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
    Direct rollover shall mean a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
    Distributee shall mean an eligible employee or former eligible employee. In addition, the eligible employee's or former eligible employee's surviving spouse and the eligible employee's or former eligible employee's spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a QDRO are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or former spouse. 
    Eligible employee shall mean an Employee who fills a City-authorized position or temporary intern position in a 0.5 FTE or greater, excluding individuals employed as firefighters and Police Officers who elected to join the FPPA system on October 2, 2017 and Police Officers hired on or after October 2, 2017, temporary employees, elected officials, independent contractors, volunteers and non-benefited full-time and part-time employees. 
    Eligible Retired Public Safety Officer shall mean a Police Officer who is separated from service with the City as a public safety officer by reason of disability or is separated from service with the City as a public safety officer and separated from service after normal retirement age, as defined in Section 14-2-6(A)(1), W.M.C. 
    Eligible retirement plan shall mean (A) an individual retirement account described in Code Section 408(a), (B) an individual retirement annuity described in Code Section 408(b), (C) an annuity plan described in Code Section 403(a), (D) a qualified trust described in Code Section 401(a), (E) an eligible plan under Code Section 457(b) that is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state, (F) an annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b) and (G) a Roth IRA described in Code Section 408A(b). The preceding definition of 
Eligible retirement plan shall also apply in the case of a distribution from the plan to a surviving spouse or to a spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a QDRO. In the case of an eligible rollover distribution from the plan to a non-spouse beneficiary, an eligible retirement plan shall mean an individual retirement account described in Code Section 408(a), individual retirement annuity described in Code Section 408(b), or a Roth IRA described in Code Section 408A(b). 
    Eligible rollover distribution shall mean any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: (A) any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal period payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; (B) any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under Code Section 401(a)(9); and (C) the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income. A portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax employee contributions that are not includable in gross income; provided that such portion is transferred in a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer (1) to a qualified trust or to an annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b) and such trust or contract agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution that is includable in gross income and the portion of such distribution that is not so includable or (2) to an individual retirement account or annuity described in Code Section 408(a) or 408(b). 
    Employee shall mean a person who receives monetary compensation from the City in return for present services or work performed on a non-contractual basis, or who is on a leave of absence without pay that has been approved by the Human Resources Director or Designee. This definition shall include all full-time and part-time regular, administrative officers, temporary, provisional, seasonal, substitute, hourly, instructor, indexed, intern, special project, short-term disability and emergency employees. This definition shall exclude elected municipal officials, volunteer firefighters, all other volunteer personnel, and retirees from the City. The determination of whether an individual is an Employee, an independent contractor or any other classification of worker or service provider and the determination of whether an individual is classified as a member of any particular classification of employees shall be made solely in accordance with the classifications used by the Employer and shall not be dependent on, or change due to, the treatment of the individual for any purposes under the Code, common law or any other law, or any determination made by any court or government agency. 
    Employer shall mean the City. 
    FTE shall mean full-time equivalents. 
    Full participant shall mean any eligible employee who is qualified to receive City contributions under the plan. 
    Inactive participant shall mean any person who has been a contributing participant to the plan or a preceding pension plan of the City and who is no longer an eligible employee, but who has not received full distribution of all respective interest. 
    Interest shall mean the amount of a participant's share in the trust fund, including City contributions, employee contributions, and earnings thereon. 
    Investment advisor shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Subsection 14-2-10(B)(1), W.M.C. 
    OASDI shall mean old age survivors and disability insurance. 
    Participant shall mean any contributing participant or inactive participant. 
    Plan shall mean the Employee 401(a) Defined Contribution Plan established in this Chapter and all subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Plan Administrator shall mean the person appointed by the City Manager to administer the plan. 
    Plan year shall mean the City's fiscal year, which is the calendar year, and which shall also be the fiscal year of the trust fund established pursuant to the plan. 
    Police Officer shall mean any person who is employed by the City as a Police Officer, as defined by Title III of W.M.C., and who either is the Chief of Police or reports to the Chief of Police. 
    QDRO shall mean a qualified domestic relations order as defined in Code Section 414(p). 
    Qualified health insurance premiums shall mean premiums for coverage of the eligible retired Public Safety Officer, their spouse, and dependents, by an accident or health insurance plan or qualified long-term care insurance contract as defined in Code Section 7702B(b). 
    Qualified military service shall mean service in the uniformed services of the United States (as defined in Chapter 43 of Title 38 of the United States Code) by any individual, if such individual is entitled to re-employment rights with respect to such service. 
    Retirement medical savings accounts shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Subsection 14-2-8(A)(1), W.M.C. 
    Termination of employment shall mean the cessation of a person's status as an "employee" as defined in this section. Termination due to dismissal shall become effective on the date after the employee's grievance rights, if any, have lapsed or, if a grievance is filed, on the date of the final decision by the City. 
    Total disability shall mean a disability that permanently renders a contributing participant unable to perform satisfactorily the participant's usual duties of employment with the City as determined by the City and that results in the participant's termination of employment with the City. 
    Trust fund shall mean the assets of the trust established pursuant to the plan, out of which the benefits under the plan shall be paid, including all income of whatever nature earned by the trust fund and all increases in fair market value. 
    Trustee shall mean the trustee of the trust fund established pursuant to the plan, who shall always be the current acting finance director of the City of Westminster, and any duly qualified corporate co-trustee appointed pursuant to Section 14-2-11, W.M.C., and any duly appointed and qualified successor trustees. 
    W.M.C. shall mean the Westminster Municipal Code. 
(2464 3319 3447 3584 3704 3749; Ord. No. 3897, § 2, 8-14-2017 ) 

14-2-3. - Participation of Eligible Employees. 
(A)  Participants: 
(1)  Contributing participant. Each eligible employee hired on or after January 6, 1986, shall become a contributing participant in the plan on the date the eligible employee becomes a regular or qualified part-time employee and has attained the age of 18. By accepting employment with the City, each employee shall be deemed to have consented to the terms and provisions of the plan. 
(2)  Full participant. No matter when an eligible employee becomes a contributing participant, each eligible employee shall become a full participant, eligible to receive employer contributions on the first day of the pay period coinciding with or immediately following the date on which the eligible employee has completed 22 months of service with the City and has attained the age of 18, provided such eligible employee is still employed as an employee on such date and has not severed employment (as provided in subsection (4)(d) of this Section) during such 22 month period. 
(3)  Terminated participant. No participant may make contributions to the plan pursuant to Sections 14-2-4, W.M.C., other than changes in the valuation of, or earnings on, the Participant's undistributed Interest, after Termination of Employment or loss of status as an Employee as defined in this Chapter. 
(4)  Determination of Service. For the purpose of determining eligibility to become a full participant, service shall be determined in accordance with the following rules: 
(a)  Service shall include the continuous period of time an individual is employed by the City as an eligible employee, commencing on the date the individual is categorized as an eligible employee. 
(b)  A leave of absence without pay, other than for military service, shall be considered a break in continuous municipal service, unless municipal service is extended. Neither the City nor the eligible employee shall be required to contribute to the participant's account during a leave of absence without pay. 
(c)  Any eligible employee who has entered or enters the armed forces of the United States shall be presumed to be on a leave of absence, regardless of the length of such service, and such leave of absence shall not be considered as a break in continuity of service or a termination of employment, provided the individual returns to the employ of the City within 90 days (or such other length of time required by applicable law) of the date on which the individual shall have the right to release from military service or from the hospital in the event of service-caused disability, without intervening employment elsewhere. 
(d)  Dismissal or voluntary termination of employment with the City shall be considered as a break in continuity of service; regardless of the length of the break in continuity of service, subsequent re-employment shall be deemed to be new employment, and the employee will be subject to the eligibility requirements as if such employee were a new employee, whether or not such employee was formerly a full participant. However, if the City reinstates an eligible employee subsequent to dismissal, this paragraph shall not apply. 
(e)  The provisions of this paragraph (4) shall be applied to all eligible employees and participants in a like manner. 
(B)  Board to Determine Participants: 
(1)  Obligations of the City. The City shall deliver to the board in writing such information from the City's records with respect to employees and their compensation as the board may require, in order to determine the identity and interests of the participants, and otherwise to perform its duties hereunder. 
(2)  Information Provided by the City. Any information given by the City to the board pursuant to subsection (B) of this section shall, for all purposes of this Chapter, be binding on all parties in interest; provided that, whenever any employee proves to the satisfaction of the City that such employee's period of employment with the City or such employee's compensation as so given is incorrect, the City shall correct such information and so advise the board. 
(3)  Determination of the Board. The determination of the board as to the identity of the respective participants and as to their respective interests shall be binding upon the City and trustee, all employees, all participants and all beneficiaries. 
(2464 3319 3447 3704 3749; Ord. No. 3897, § 3, 8-14-2017 ) 
14-2-4. - Contributions by the City and Participants. 
(A)  Contributions by the City: 
(1)  Determination of Contribution by the City. On and after January 6, 1986, each pay period the City shall contribute to the credit of each full participant's account, ten and one-quarter percent of each full participant's compensation for that pay period; provided that, during any period in which the City is required to make contributions on behalf of participants under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act or the Social Security Act, the contribution to the plan for each participant shall be offset by the amount of the OASDI portion of the social security taxes paid by the City for such participant. This offset shall not exceed the City contribution. 
(2)  Time and Method of Payment of Contribution by the City. The contributions of the City shall be made every pay period and shall be credited to the plan each pay period. 
(B)  Contributions by Contributing Participants: 
(1)  Mandatory Employee Contributions. 
(a)  Each contributing participant must contribute to the trust fund a percentage of such participant's compensation for each pay period as follows: for the pay periods commencing January 1, 1997, eight percent and for the pay periods commencing January 1, 1998, and thereafter, ten percent or, if greater, the percentage at least equal to the OASDI tax rate. During any period in which the contributing participant is required to make contributions under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act or the Social Security Act, the mandatory contribution to the plan by each contributing participant shall be offset by the OASDI taxes paid by the participant, except that no offset for OASDI taxes shall reduce the mandatory contribution to the plan for a participant to less than two and one-half percent of that contributing participant's compensation for that pay period. 
(b)  For the pay period commencing December 21, 1987, and thereafter, the contribution provided by this paragraph shall be picked up and paid by the City, as employer, as provided in Code Section 414(h), and the participant's gross income shall be reduced by the amount of the contributions picked up by the City. 
(c)  Each participant, as a condition to such participant's employment with the City, shall be deemed to have authorized the City to reduce the participant's compensation by such amount from each paycheck and to transmit such amount directly to the plan custodian, according to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(d)  Separate accounts shall be maintained for the mandatory contributions of the employees, prior to the pick up of such contributions by the City and the contributions picked up by the City. 
(2)  Voluntary Contributions. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of Subsection 14-2-5(B), W.M.C., each contributing participant may elect to contribute to the trust fund an amount that, when combined with the mandatory contributions required in paragraph (1) of this subsection (B), does not exceed the amount described in Subsection 14-2-5(B)(1), W.M.C. 
(b)  The amount, if any, which a contributing participant voluntarily contributes to the trust fund, must be contributed through payroll deductions on an after-tax basis. A contributing participant may have the option of increasing, decreasing or terminating voluntary contributions at any time. No participant shall have any obligation to make any voluntary contribution. 
(c)  For purposes of this Section, amounts representing the participant's interest in another qualified pension plan transferred in accordance with Subsection 14-2-4(F), W.M.C., shall not be considered voluntary contributions. 
(3)  Payment of Participant Contributions. The contributions of the contributing participant shall be withheld every pay period and shall be credited to the plan each pay period. 
(C)  Retirement Medical Savings Accounts: See Section 14-2-8, W.M.C., for the terms and conditions relating to retirement medical savings accounts. 
(D)  City's Obligations: 
(1)  No Contract of Employment. The adoption and continuance of the plan, as set forth in this Chapter, shall not be deemed to constitute a contract between the City and any employee or participant, nor to be consideration for, or an inducement or condition of, the City's employment of any person. 
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to give any employee or contributing participant the right to be retained in the employ of the City, or to interfere with the right of the City to discharge any employee or contributing participant at any time, nor shall it be deemed to give the City the right to require the employee or contributing participant to remain in its employ, nor shall it interfere with the right of any employee or contributing participant to terminate employment at any time. 
(2)  No Liability. The City shall not incur any liability whatsoever to the trust fund, any participant or any beneficiaries, the trustee, or any other person, for anything done or omitted by the trustee, or for the loss or depreciation, in whole or in part, of the trust fund. 
(E)  Contributions for Periods of Qualified Military Service: The employer shall make all contributions to the plan required by Code Section 414(u) that are attributable to periods of qualified military service. In addition, the employer shall allow any participant to make mandatory employee contributions and voluntary contributions for periods of qualified military service as required by Code Section 414(u). The employer may elect to make additional contributions based upon such qualified military service, based upon employer contributions made during the applicable period, provided such election by the employer is made on a nondiscriminatory basis applicable to all similarly-situated employees who have qualified military service. Any contributions made under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of Code Section 414(u) and the provisions of the plan shall be applied considering any such contributions as having been made during the plan year to which the contributions relate. 
(F)  Rollover Contributions: A participant may transfer to the participant's interest all or any portion of the participant's vested interest in the assets, including after-tax employee contributions, held under any other eligible retirement plan (but excluding Roth IRAs described in Code Section 408A), subject to acceptance of such rollover contribution by the board. The rollover contribution must be transferred to the plan either (1) in a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer from the other eligible retirement plan or (2) by the participant within 60 days after the participant has received the vested interest from such other eligible retirement plan. In such event, the assets so received shall be (a) fully vested, (b) held in a separate account and (c) administered and distributed pursuant to the provisions of the plan concerning employer contributions. No rollover contribution shall (x) include assets from any plan that the board determines, in its sole discretion, would impose upon the plan requirements as to form of distribution that would not otherwise apply hereunder or (y) contain nondeductible contributions made to such other eligible retirement plan by the participant unless the transfer to the participant's interest is directly from the funding agent of such other eligible retirement plan. An inactive participant may make a rollover contribution from an eligible retirement plan that is a Code Section 457(b) plan only if it is the City's Code Section 457(b) plan. 
(2464 3319 3360 3447 3704 3749; Ord. No. 3897, § 4, 8-14-2017 ) 
14-2-5. - Determination and Vesting of Participants' Interests. 
(A)  Allocation of Employer Contributions. The contributions made by the Employer to the credit of the account of each full participant shall be allocated to the account of each such participant as of the end of each pay period. Any allocation shall be subject to the limitations set forth in subsection (B) of this section. 
(B)  Limitations on Allocations. 
(1)  General rule. In no event may a Participant receive an allocation for any plan year that, when combined with contributions allocated to the participant's retirement medical savings account (if any) and a participant-related allocation under any other defined contribution plan established by the City, exceeds the lesser of (a) 100 percent of the Participant's Compensation for such year or (b) $51,000.00 (for the 2013 Plan Year), provided that such figure shall be adjusted as provided in Code Section 415(d). For purposes of clarification, the compensation limit referred to in clause (a) in the preceding sentence shall not apply to any contribution allocated to the participant's retirement medical savings account, which is otherwise treated as an annual addition. For the purpose of applying the foregoing limitation, the limitation year shall be the plan year. If a short limitation year is created as a result of a change in the limitation year, the dollar limitation for such short limitation year shall be the dollar limitation set forth in this subsection multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months in such short year and the denominator of which is 12. 
(2)  Allocations. For the purpose of applying the limitations of this section, the allocation to the participant shall include the following amounts allocated to the account of a participant for a limitation year: Employer contributions, forfeitures, and nondeductible contributions made by the participant, provided that, for years beginning before 1987, only nondeductible contributions in excess of six percent of the participant's compensation for the year, or one-half of the nondeductible contributions made by the participant, whichever shall be less, shall be counted as an allocation. Except that, for the plan years beginning on or after January 1, 1994, allocations may not be based on compensation in excess of the annual limitation of $255,000.00 (for the 2013 plan year), subject to adjustment as provided for by law or regulation, for the account of any individual participant. For the purpose of applying the limitations of this section, compensation from and allocations received under any retirement plan maintained by any other employer that is a common member with the employer of either a controlled group of businesses or an affiliated service group, as prescribed by law or regulation, shall be counted. 
(3)  Excluded amounts. Any amount not mentioned in paragraph (2) of this subsection shall not be considered an allocation. The amounts not considered as allocations include deductible participant contributions, rollover contributions and transfers from other qualified plans allocated to the account of a participant. 
(4)  Treatment of excess. With respect to any limitation year beginning on or after July 1, 2007, in the event an allocation would otherwise exceed the limitations of this section (an "excess allocation") with respect to a participant, the plan shall only correct the excess allocation in accordance with the Employee Plans Compliance Resolution System ("EPCRS"), as set forth in Revenue Procedure 2013-12 or any superseding guidance, including, but not limited to, the preamble of the final Section 415 Regulations. 
(5)  Compensation. For the purposes of applying the limitations of this subsection (B), Compensation means the total amount paid by the employer to a participant for services rendered to the employer that are included in the taxable income of the participant, including any amounts paid to the participant by the later of (x) two and one-half months after the participant's separation from employment or (y) the end of the limitation year that includes such date of the participant's separation from employment if, absent such separation from employment, such amounts would have been paid to the participant while the participant continued in employment with the employer. For limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, Compensation for the purposes of this section shall not be reduced by voluntary salary deferrals or reductions for a participant under a plan established under Code Section 125, 132(f)(4), 402(g)(3), 457, 401(k) or 403(b). The "Annual Compensation" of each Participant taken into account in determining allocations for any Plan Year beginning after December 31, 2012, shall not exceed $255,000.00, as adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with Code Section 401(a)(17)(b). "Annual Compensation" means compensation during the plan year or such other consecutive 12-month period over which compensation is otherwise determined under the plan (the determination period). The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins with or within such calendar year. 
(C)  Allocation of Earnings, Losses, Charges and Changes in Fair Market Value of the Net Assets of the Trust Fund. Earnings and losses of the trust fund and changes in the fair market value of the net assets of the trust fund shall be allocated under the direction of the trustee at least quarterly to the participants as of each regular evaluation date, in the ratio that the total dollar value of the interest of each such participant bears to the aggregate dollar value of all of such interests of all such participants. Administrative charges shall be allocated as a flat fee per participant each quarter with a balance greater than $1,000.00 after completion of one quarter of employment. Third party charges shall be allocated pro-rata across all accounts with balances greater than $1,000.00 who have completed one quarter of employment but capped at $300,000.00. 
(D)  Participant's Accounts. The Board shall maintain, or cause the City or Trustee to maintain, an account for each participant showing the dollar value of such participant's current interest resulting from any contributions made by the City, which account shall be known as the City contributions account. Separate accounts to be known as participants' contributions accounts shall also be kept, showing the contributions of each participant and the earnings, losses and changes in fair market value thereof. 
(E)  Evaluation Dates. The regular evaluation dates of the trust fund shall be at least the last bank business day of each calendar quarter, at which time the board shall determine, or cause the trustee to determine, the value of the net assets of the trust fund, i.e., the value of all of the assets of the trust fund at fair market value thereof, less all liabilities, both as known to the Trustee, including the value of the contributions of the City and the participants for that quarter. If an event described in Section 14-2-7 (A), W.M.C., occurs between regular evaluation dates requiring a distribution of any part of a Participant's Interest, the dollar value of such Participant's Interest shall be adjusted to reflect the contributions made after the last evaluation date without any earnings, losses or other changes. The dollar value of a participant's interest as so adjusted shall be the amount that shall be distributed to such participant or such participant's beneficiary. 
(F)  Vesting of Participants' Interests. 
(1)  Fully vested. A participant's interest in the contributions made by him, and the earnings, losses and changes in fair market value thereof, shall be fully vested at all times. The interest of a participant in the contributions made by the City, and the earnings, losses and changes in fair market value thereof, shall be fully vested at all times. 
(2)  Distribution of a participant's interest. Any interest shall be and become payable to a participant or such participant's beneficiaries only as and to the extent provided in this chapter; and a participant who dies having designated a beneficiary shall cease to have any interest hereunder or in the participant's separate trust account, and the participant's beneficiary shall become entitled to distribution thereof as herein provided by virtue of the terms of this chapter and not as a result of any transfer of said interest or account. 
(G)  Vesting Upon Termination of Plan or Discontinuance of Contributions. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (F) of this section, upon the termination of the plan or upon the complete discontinuance of contributions under the plan to the trust fund, the interests of all participants shall become fully and completely vested and nonforfeitable for all purposes. 
(H)  Investment of Participant's Interest. A participant's interest shall be invested in the investment options in accordance with the investment elections specified by the participant. A participant may change the investment of contributions and may reallocate amounts in such participant's interest among the investment options in a manner determined by the plan custodian and subject to such provisions as the Plan Administrator may adopt. Allocation of assets among investment options is solely the responsibility of each participant. The fact that an investment option is available for investment to participants under the plan shall not be construed as a recommendation for investment in that investment option. 
(2464 3319 3447 3584 3704; Ord. No. 3897, § 5, 8-14-2017 ) 
14-2-6. - Retirement Date; Designation of Beneficiary. 
(A)  Retirement Date. 
(1)  Normal retirement. For the purposes of Section 14-2-7(L), payment for qualified health insurance premiums, the normal retirement age for each participant shall be age 55 and, on the last day of the month in which the participant attains normal retirement age, the participant shall be entitled to retire voluntarily. 
(B)  Beneficiaries. 
(1)  Designation of beneficiaries. Each participant shall have the right to designate one or more beneficiaries and one or more contingent beneficiaries to receive the participant's interest upon the participant's death, such designation to be made in the form prescribed by and delivered to the Board. The participant shall have the right to change or revoke any such designation from time to time by filing a new designation or notice of revocation with the Board, and no notice to any beneficiary nor consent by a beneficiary shall be required to effect any such change or revocation. Any beneficiary designation shall be effective when received by the Board. 
(2)  Determination of a beneficiary when there is no designated beneficiary. If a participant shall fail to designate a beneficiary before the participant's death, or if all designated beneficiaries or contingent beneficiaries should die, cease to exist before the participant's death, or if all designated beneficiaries or contingent beneficiaries disclaim their interests or die prior to distribution, the Board shall direct the Trustee to pay the participant's entire interest to the participant's surviving spouse or Civil Union Partner (as applicable), if any, or, if none, then to the personal representative of the participant's estate. If, however, no personal representative shall have been appointed, and no actual notice thereof has been given to the Board within 120 days after the Participant's death, the Board may direct the Trustee to pay the participant's entire interest to such person or persons as may be entitled thereto under the intestate laws of Colorado and, in such case, the Board may require such proof of right or identity from such person or persons as the Board may deem necessary. 
(3)  Insurance policies. The Beneficiary of any insurance on a participant's life shall be determined and designated as provided in Section 14-2-9(A), W.M.C. 
(2464 3319 3390 3447 3584 3704; Ord. No. 3897, § 6, 8-14-2017 ) 
14-2-7. - Distribution From the Trust Fund. 
(A)  When Interests Become Distributable and Effect Thereof. When a participant dies, suffers total disability, retires or experiences a termination of employment for any other reason, the participant's interest shall thereupon become distributable. When a participant's interest shall have become distributable, such participant's interest shall remain a part of the trust fund until it is distributed. 
(B)  Information to be Furnished to the Board. For the purpose of enabling the Board to determine the participant's distributable interest, the Board shall be entitled to rely upon information provided to the Board by the City with respect to the date of the participant's termination of employment and other such information as is needed and requested. 
(C)  Distribution of Interests. 
(1)  Insurance. If there has been an investment in life insurance for the benefit of any participant whose interest becomes distributable for any reason other than death, such participant may, subject to any limitation set forth elsewhere in the plan, obtain an absolute assignment of any such life insurance by informing the Board of such election. If said election is not exercised within 30 days after the participant's termination of employment and the conversion election provided for is not made, the Board shall cause said contract to be surrendered no later than the end of the policy year and shall add the proceeds of such surrender to the interest of said Participant. After December 31, 1996, no new life insurance contracts may be adopted as pension investments under the Plan. 
(2)  Election to defer benefits . A participant may elect to defer the commencement of distribution of the participant's benefit, but in no event shall the commencement of distribution be later than the required distribution commencement date specified in subsection (F) of this section. 
(3)  Distribution of participant's interest. Any other provision of this subsection (C) to the contrary notwithstanding, a participant, in the event of a termination of employment for any reason, shall be entitled to receive payment in one lump sum of the participant's interest, provided the participant makes written demand therefor upon the Board. Notwithstanding any provision of the Plan to the contrary, if the amount of a participant's interest (including any rollover contributions that were made to the plan pursuant to Section 14-2-4(F), W.M.C.) does not exceed $1,000.00 at the time of a participant's termination of employment for any reason, such participant's interest shall be automatically distributed in a cash lump sum as soon as administratively practicable after the participant's termination of employment for any reason. For purposes of this subsection (C)(3), if such amount is zero, the participant will be deemed to have received a distribution of such amount. 
(D)  Transfers from the Plan into an Eligible Retirement Plan. 
(1)  The Trustee is authorized, at the direction of the plan custodian and at the request of the participant, to transfer the portion of such participant's vested interest that is an eligible rollover distribution and has become distributable under subsection (A) of this Section directly to another eligible retirement plan for the benefit of such participant, provided such transfer satisfies the requirements under law for such transfers and rollover contributions and the transferee plan accepts the participant's eligible rollover distribution from the plan. 
(2)  If a participant becomes eligible to participate in the FPPA system without a break in municipal service, the participant may elect to have his/her vested interest transferred to the FPPA system, as permitted by FPPA. 
(E)  Withdrawals While Employed. A participant may elect to receive a distribution while still employed by the City as follows: 
(1)  Age 62 withdrawal. A Participant who has attained age 62 may elect to begin distributions from the trust fund according to the rules described in this Section 14-2-7, W.M.C., while employed by the City, if the participant's current annual base salary at the time of election is at least 25 percent less than the participant's highest annual base salary. 
(2)  Age 62 withdrawal. Effective January 1, 2014, a participant who has attained age 62 may elect to receive a distribution of up to 15 percent of the participant's interest according to the rules described in this Section 14-2-7, W.M.C., provided that the participant irrevocably agrees to terminate employment with the City within five years from receipt of this distribution. 
(3)  Age 591/2 withdrawal. An active sworn Police Officer who has attained age 591/2) may elect to begin distributions from the trust fund according to the rules described in this Section 14-2-7, W.M.C., while employed by the City, if the participant's current annual base salary at the time of election is at least 25 percent less than the participant's highest annual base salary. 
(4)  Age 591/2 withdrawal. Effective January 1, 2014, an active sworn Police Officer who has attained age 591/2 may elect to receive a distribution of up to 15 percent of the participant's interest according to the rules described in this Section 13-2-7, W.M.C. provided that the participant irrevocably agrees to terminate employment with the City within five years from receipt of this distribution. 
(F)  Required Distribution Commencement Date. Distribution of a participant's interest must begin no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the year the participant attains the age of 701/2 or the year the participant retires. 
(G)  Spendthrift Provisions. 
(1)  General rule. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all amounts payable pursuant to this Chapter by the Trustee shall be paid only to the person or persons entitled thereto, and all such payments shall be paid directly into the hands of such person or persons and not into the hands of any other person or corporation whatsoever, and such payments shall not be liable for the debts, contracts or engagements of any such person or persons, or taken in execution by attachment or garnishment or by any other legal or equitable proceedings; nor shall any such person or persons have any right to alienate, anticipate, commute, pledge, encumber or assign any such payments or the benefits, proceeds or avails thereof. 
(2)  QDRO. Paragraph (1) of this subsection shall not apply to the creation, assignment or recognition of a right to any benefit payable with respect to a Participant or alternate payee pursuant to a QDRO setting forth the agreement of the parties with respect to the division of benefits in compliance with Code Section 414(p) and Section 14-10-113, C.R.S. The QDRO must specifically address the division of any Retirement Medical Savings Account, if applicable. A lump sum distribution will be made pursuant to such QDRO within 120 days after the date on which a certified court order approving such an agreement permitting such a distribution has been submitted to and received by the Board. Procedures for submitting a QDRO may be obtained from the Board or its delegate. 
The Board shall establish such reasonable procedures as are necessary to determine the compliance of a domestic relations order with the requirements of Section 14-10-113, C.R.S., and to administer distributions under such qualified order. Such procedures may be at the discretion of the Board, including standardized forms to be used for such marital agreements and orders. A person who obtains a right to a benefit payable to a participant pursuant to a qualified domestic relations order shall have no rights to vote in elections held pursuant to the plan. 
(H)  Manner of Distribution. A participant's interest may be distributed by one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Lump sum distribution. The participant's interest may be paid to the participant or the participant's beneficiary by the distribution of the total balance of the participant's interest in one lump sum. The participant, or the participant's beneficiary in the event of the participant's death, shall have the right to have the distribution made in a lump sum by filing a written election with the trustee within such time as the Board shall prescribe. 
(2)  Installments. The participant's interest may be paid to the participant or the participant's beneficiary in substantially equal periodic installments over a period of time not to exceed the joint life expectancy of the participant and the participant's beneficiary (or until the interest is exhausted) and not in installment frequency greater than monthly. This maximum period shall be determined under the applicable IRS tables at the time the initial monthly installment payment becomes payable. The participant, or the participant's beneficiary in the event of the participant's death, shall have the right to have the distribution made in this manner by filing a written election with the Trustee within such time as the Board shall prescribe. 
(3)  Other methods. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, any interest that has become distributable for any reason may be distributed at such time or times, in such amount or amounts, and in such manner, as the Board and the recipient of such distribution may mutually determine, including a transfer to another qualified plan or individual retirement account. 
(I)  Limitation on Duration of Payments. 
(1)  General rule. No distribution shall be made over a period exceeding the joint life expectancy of the participant and the participant's beneficiary. To the extent distribution is made after the Participant attains the age of 701/2, if not paid in a lump sum, the distribution must be made in substantially equal periodic installments at least annually over the period prescribed in this subsection subject to a once yearly change that may accelerate payment at the election of the participant or beneficiary. The present value of the benefits payable solely to the participant under any elected method must exceed 50 percent of the total benefits payable to the participant and the participant's beneficiaries, unless distribution is in the form of a qualified joint and survivor annuity. 
(2)  Compliance with Code Section 401(a)(9). Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, all distributions from the plan shall conform to the final regulations issued under Code Section 401(a)(9), including the incidental death benefit provisions of Code Section 401(a)(9)(G). 
(J)  Withdrawals: Except as provided in Section 14-2-7(E) , W.M.C., a participant may not at any time withdraw any part of the participant's interest, except upon death, total disability, retirement or termination of employment as provided in this Chapter. 
(K)  Special Rules for Distributions After the Participant's Death. 
(1)  Distributions commencing prior to death. If distribution of a participant's interest has commenced in accordance with subsection (I) of this Section and the participant dies before his or her entire interest has been distributed to him or her, the remaining interest of the participant shall be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution being used as of the date of the participant's death. 
(2)  Distributions commencing after death. If a participant dies before his or her interest commences, the entire interest of the participant shall be distributed within five years after the death of the participant, provided that a distribution commencing within one year after the participant's death to or for the benefit of a designated beneficiary over the longer of the life or the life expectancy of the designated beneficiary will be treated as having been distributed within such five-year period. If the surviving spouse of the participant is the designated beneficiary, distribution is not required to commence until the date on which the Participant would have attained the age of 701/2 and, if distribution had not commenced as of the date of death of such surviving spouse, the provisions of this paragraph shall be applied as if such spouse were the participant. 
(3)  Beneficiaries. If a participant should die after receiving some part, but not all, of the participant's interest, the remaining balance thereof shall be distributed to the participant's beneficiary in a manner determined pursuant to this subsection. If the beneficiary of the participant should die, cease to exist, or disclaim an interest in the participant's interest prior to the completion of distribution of the participant's interest, the remaining distribution shall be made to the contingent beneficiary designated by the participant, if any. If any contingent beneficiary should die or disclaim an interest in the participant's interest prior to the completion of distribution of the participant's interest, the remaining distribution shall be made in a manner determined pursuant to this subsection to the recipient determined pursuant to Section 14-2-6, W.M.C. 
(4)  Distribution to IRA of nonspouse beneficiary. A participant's nonspouse beneficiary may elect payment of the portion of the deceased participant's interest to which the beneficiary is entitled in a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer to an individual retirement account described in Code Section 402(c)(8)(B)(i), an individual retirement annuity described in Code Section 402(c)(8)(B)(ii), or a Roth IRA described in Code Section 408A that is established to receive the plan distribution on behalf of the beneficiary and such transfer shall be treated as an eligible rollover distribution and such individual retirement account, annuity or Roth IRA shall be treated as an inherited individual retirement account, individual retirement annuity, or Roth IRA (within the meaning of Code Sections 408(d)(3)(C) and 408A). For purposes of this Section, a trust maintained for the benefit of one or more designated Beneficiaries may be the Beneficiary to the extent provided in rules prescribed by the Secretary of Treasury. If the Participant dies after the Participant's required beginning date, as defined in Section 14-2-7(F), W.M.C., the required minimum distribution in the year of death may not be transferred according to this Section. The requirements of Code Section 402(c)(11) apply to distributions under this Section. 
(L)  Payment For Qualified Health Insurance Premiums. An eligible retired Public Safety Officer may elect to have amounts not yet paid from the plan paid directly to a provider of an accident or health insurance plan or a qualified long-term insurance contract to cover the cost of up to $3,000.00 per year of "qualified health insurance premiums" for the participant and the participant's spouse and dependents, in accordance with Code Section 402(l). The requirements of Code Section 402(l) apply to payments under this Section. 
(2464 3319 3390 3447 3584 3704 3749; Ord. No. 3897, § 7, 8-14-2017 ) 
14-2-8. - Retirement Medical Savings Accounts. 
(A)  Contributions to Retirement Medical Savings Accounts. 
(1)  General. Each participant shall have the option of designating up to 25 percent of the participant's combined mandatory and City contributions made to the trust fund pursuant to Sections 14-2-4(A) and (B)(1), W.M.C., to be used for future medical care expenses as provided for in Code Section 401(h). Contributions designated by a participant for future health benefits under Code Section 401(h) as described in this subsection (A)(1) shall be maintained in a separate account (the "Retirement Medical Savings Accounts"). 
(2)  Subordinate; taxation. It is intended that the benefits provided by the retirement medical savings accounts shall at all times be subordinate to the retirement benefits provided by the plan. Contributions to the retirement medical savings accounts will not be taxed upon a participant's retirement, termination of employment, death or total disability nor upon use for medical expenses upon a participant's retirement, termination of employment, death or total disability. 
(3)  No refunds. No refunds of contributions to a participant's retirement medical savings account shall be made to the participant or the participant's spouse or dependents. 
(4)  Non-transferrable. Except as provided in subsection (B)(5) of this section, all contributions to a participant's retirement medical savings account shall not be transferred and shall remain in the retirement medical savings account until such contributions are used for medical care expenses for the participant and the participant's spouse and dependents. 
(5)  Other rules and requirements. The retirement medical savings accounts will be subject to the rules and requirements issued by the City Manager, which can be changed from time to time. 
(B)  Distributions from Retirement Medical Savings Accounts. 
(1)  Contributions upon retirement, termination of employment, death and total disability. Contributions to a participant's retirement medical savings account may be distributed only upon the participant's retirement, termination of employment, death or total disability. 
(2)  Exclusive use. Contributions to a participant's retirement medical savings account shall be used exclusively to pay or reimburse qualifying medical care expenses under Code Section 213(d)(1) for the participant and the participant's spouse and dependents. 
(3)  Reimbursement application. Distributions from a participant's retirement medical savings account shall only be paid pursuant to a reimbursement application, which contains the provisions for determining the amount of benefits that will be paid from the retirement medical savings account and specifies the time period with respect to which benefits will be paid. 
(4)  Other sources. Distributions from a participant's retirement medical savings account may not be made for any expense for which the participant or the participant's spouse or dependents receive, or are eligible to receive, payment or reimbursement from another source. 
(5)  Reversion to the employer. If, with respect to a participant's retirement medical savings account, there is any balance remaining upon the death of the last to die of the participant or the participant's spouse, if any, and the satisfaction of all liabilities under the plan to provide benefits payable from the retirement medical savings account with respect to the participant and the participant's spouse, then any such balance shall be returned to the employer to be used as determined by the employer. 
(6)  Distribution. Any interest in a participant's retirement medical savings account shall be and become payable to the participant, the participant's spouse, or the participant's dependent only as and to the extent provided in this chapter. In order to receive benefits from the retirement medical savings account, the participant must agree to provide appropriate documentation of the medical care expenditures. 
(C)  Vesting of Retirement Medical Savings Accounts: A participant's interest in the contributions made by the participant pursuant to Section 14-2-8(A), and the earnings, losses and changes in fair market value thereof, shall be fully vested at all times, subject to reversion in accordance with Section 14-2-8(B)(5), W.M.C. 
(D)  Investment of Retirement Medical Savings Accounts. A participant's retirement medical savings account shall be invested in the investment options in accordance with the investment elections specified by the participant. A Participant may change the investment of contributions and may reallocate amounts in such participant's account among the investment options in a manner determined by the plan custodian and subject to such provisions as the Plan Administrator may adopt. Allocation of assets among investment options is solely the responsibility of each participant. The fact that an investment option is available for investment to participants under the plan shall not be construed as a recommendation for investment in that investment option. 
(E)  Termination of the Plan: Upon the termination of the plan, the interests of all participants in the retirement medical savings accounts shall be returned to the employer. 
(2464 3447 3704; Ord. No. 3897, § 8, 8-14-2017 ) 
14-2-9. - Insurance Company Contracts. 
(A)  Insurance or Annuity Contracts: 
(1)  Previously purchased contracts. If a participant has, under the provisions of the prior City retirement plan, already purchased an ordinary life or retirement income insurance contract, the account of the participant on whose life the contract is obtained shall be charged with the amount of all premiums thereon. The Trustee shall continue to have the right to receive each payment that may be due during the participant's lifetime. Any death benefit shall be payable directly to the beneficiary named in any such contract on the participant's life and the participant shall have the right, either directly or through the Trustee, to change the beneficiary from time to time on any such contract and to elect settlement options thereunder for the benefit of the beneficiary. The Trustee shall have the right to exercise all other options and privileges contained in the contract. 
(2)  No right to purchase contracts through the plan. A Participant may not purchase any individual insurance or annuity contract through the Plan. 
(3)  No new group contracts. After December 31, 1996, the City shall not purchase any new group insurance or annuity contracts for pension participants. 
(B)  Limitations on Life Insurance or Annuity Contracts for Participants' Benefit. All investments in life insurance or annuity contracts (other than "key man insurance") shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  The aggregate premiums for such life insurance or annuity contracts, in the case of each participant, shall be no more than 35 percent of the aggregate of the City's contributions allocated to him at any particular time; 
(2)  The Board shall direct the Trustee to convert the entire value of any such life insurance contract at or before the participant's actual retirement to provide either cash value or periodic income, or the Board may direct the Trustee to distribute the insurance contract directly to the participant at retirement; 
(3)  In the event payment of any premium would cause aggregate premiums to exceed the limitation set forth in paragraph (1) of this subsection, then such payment shall not be made, but, on the contrary, each insurance or annuity contract pertaining thereto shall be thereupon converted to a paid up contract, or the face amount of such contract shall be reduced to a face amount, the premium payments on which would not exceed the limitation prescribed in paragraph (1) of this subsection; and 
(4)  If the Board directs the Trustee to invest any portion of the trust fund in such insurance or annuity contracts, such investment shall be made in such a manner that the operation of this Chapter shall be fair and equitable (and nondiscriminatory) in its application to all participants. 
(C)  Dividends. If dividends are paid on any contract issued by the Insurer, they shall, in the discretion of the Board, either be used to provide additional benefits under such contract or used and applied in reduction of the next premium due and payable thereon. 
(D)  Limitation of Participant's Rights in Insurance or Annuity Contracts. The fact that any contract is issued or based on the life of a participant shall not vest any right, title or interest in such contract in such participant, except at the time or times and upon the terms and conditions especially set forth in this Chapter. Subject to the provisions of Section 14-2-9(A), W.M.C., the Trustee shall be the sole owner of all right, title and interest in and to each such contract, but the Board shall nevertheless direct the Trustee as to the exercise of all rights, options and privileges in each such contract. 
(E)  Protective Provisions for Life Insurance Company. No life insurance company shall be deemed to be a party to the plan nor shall it be responsible for the validity of the plan. The certificate of the Trustee as to any matter may be relied upon by any life insurance company as conclusive evidence of any matters mentioned therein, and such company shall be fully protected in taking or permitting any action on the faith thereof and shall incur no liability or responsibility for so doing. No such company shall be required to examine the provisions of this Chapter or to question any act of the Trustee or the Board, nor shall such company be required to ascertain that any act of the Trustee or the Board is authorized by this Chapter. 
(2464 3447 3704; Ord. No. 3897, § 9, 8-14-2017 ) 
14-2-10. - Employee Board. 
(A)  Appointment of Board. 
(1)  General rule. The Board shall consist of five members: one shall be the current City Finance Director; one shall be appointed by the City Manager to serve at the City Manager's pleasure; and three shall be contributing participants elected by a majority of the voting full participants. One of the three elected members shall be an exempt employee as defined in the City's Personnel Policies and Rules. In no case shall more than one elected member be from the same department. The Trustee shall serve as Chairperson of the Board. 
(2)  Procedures for electing the three members. The three members to be elected shall be elected for three-year staggered terms, with the term of one such member expiring in December of each year. The procedure to be followed in initially electing such members shall be established by the Trustee. After the first year of the election, procedures shall be established by the Board. 
(B)  Duties and Powers of the Board. The Board shall be charged with the administration of the plan and shall decide all questions arising in the administration, interpretation and application of the plan, including all questions relating to eligibility, vesting and distribution, and to supply omissions and to resolve inconsistencies and ambiguities arising under the plan. The decisions of the Board shall be conclusive and binding on all parties. In addition to the other duties and powers set forth elsewhere in the plan, the Board also shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Payments from and investments of the trust fund; Investment Advisor. The Board shall, from time to time, direct the Trustee concerning the payments to be made out of the trust fund pursuant to this Chapter. The Board shall also have the power to direct the Trustee with respect to all investments and reinvestments of the trust fund, and shall have such other powers respecting the administration of the trust fund as may be conferred upon it in this Chapter. The Board may employ for the trust fund an investment advisor ("Investment Advisor") and may rely on such Investment Advisor's recommendations with respect to the investment of all or a portion of the trust fund. If the Board shall employ an Investment Advisor, it shall execute any letters or agreements necessary for the employment of such Investment Advisor or it may direct the Trustee to execute any such letters or agreement. The fees of such Investment Advisor shall be paid from the trust fund as an expense of the Trust. The Trustee shall be fully protected from any action of such Investment Advisor and shall not be liable to any person or organization for any investments made by such Investment Advisor or for any acts or omissions made upon the direction or recommendation of such Investment Advisor. 
(2)  Enter into, execute, and terminate contracts. The Board shall have the power to direct the Trustee to enter into and execute contracts as investment vehicles for the Trust Funds. The Board shall have the further power to direct the Trustee to terminate any such contract at any time, subject to the provisions of such contract. 
(3)  Investment options. If the Trustee enters into a contract at the direction of the Board that permits the right of participants to direct the investment of their Interest in forms of investments offered, the Board shall provide the opportunity to participants to make options as to investments. The Board shall adopt various investment options for the investment of contributions by the participant and shall monitor and evaluate the appropriateness of the investment options offered by the Plan. The Board may remove or phase out an investment option, if the investment option has failed to meet the established evaluation criteria or for other good cause as determined by the Board. Neither the Trustee, the Board, the Plan Administrator nor the City shall be held liable for any losses or changes to a participant's interest that result from that participant's choice of investment options. 
(C)  Organization And Operation Of Board. The Board may adopt such rules and procedures as it deems desirable for the conduct of its affairs, appoint one of its own members chairman, and appoint a secretary or other agents, none of whom need be a member of the Board, but any of whom may be, but need not be, an officer or Employee of the City. It may delegate to any agent such duties and powers, both ministerial and discretionary, as it deems appropriate, excepting only that all matters involving investment of funds, interpretation of the plan and settlement of disputes shall be determined by the Board. Any determination of the Board may be made by a majority of the Board at a meeting thereof, or without a meeting by a resolution or memorandum signed by all members, and shall be final and conclusive on the City, the Trustee, all Participants and Beneficiaries claiming any rights under this chapter, and as to all third parties dealing with the Board or with the Trustee. All notices, directions, information and other communications from the Board to the Trustee shall be in writing. 
(D)  Matters Affecting Board Members. In any matter affecting any member of the Board in an individual capacity as a participant under this Chapter, separate and apart from such individual's status as a member of the group of participants, such interested member shall have no authority or vote as a member of the Board in the determination of such matter, but the Board shall determine such matter as if said interested member were not a member of the Board; provided, however, that this shall not be deemed to take from said interested member any rights as a participant. In the event that the remaining members of the Board should be unable to agree on any matter so affecting an interested member because of an equal division of voting, the matter shall be deemed to have been defeated. 
(E)  Compensation and Expenses of Board. The members of the Board shall serve without compensation in addition to their regular City compensation. All members shall be reimbursed by the City for any necessary expenditures incurred in the discharge of their duties as members of said Board. Such reimbursement, and the compensation of all agents, counsel or other persons retained or employed by the Board, shall be fixed by the Board and shall be paid from the trust fund or, in the discretion of the City Manager, by the City. 
(F)  Records of the Board. The Board shall keep a record of all of its proceedings and shall keep or cause to be kept all such books of account, records and other data as may be necessary or advisable in its judgment for the administration of this chapter and properly to reflect the affairs thereof, and to determine the amount of vested and/or forfeitable Interests of the respective participants, and the amount of all plan benefits. As a part thereof, it shall maintain or cause to be maintained separate accounts for each participant as provided for in Section 14-2-5(D), W.M.C. Any person dealing with the Board may rely on, and shall incur no liability in relying on, a certificate or memorandum in writing signed by the secretary of the Board or by a majority of the members of the Board as evidence of an action taken or resolution adopted by the Board. 
(G)  Immunity From Liability. No bond or other security shall be required of any member of the Board, except as may be otherwise required by law. No member of the Board shall be liable or responsible to any person or party for any matter or thing whatsoever, except only for such member's own gross negligence or willful misconduct. 
(H)  Resignation and Removal of Members; Appointment of Successors. 
(1)  Resignation from the Board. Any member of the Board may resign at any time by giving written notice to the other members and to the City Manager, effective as therein stated, otherwise, upon receipt of such notice. 
(2)  Termination of employment with the City. Whether or not the Board member remains a participant, no Board member may remain on the Board if the individual terminates employment with the City for whatever reason. 
(3)  Ceasing to hold a designated position. No appointed Board member may remain on the Board if the individual ceases to hold one of the positions designated. 
(4)  Transfer. No elected Board member may remain on the Board as an elected member if the individual transfers, for whatever reason, to a department in which another elected Board member works. 
(5)  Successor Board member. Upon the death, resignation or removal of any elected Board member, a successor to complete the Board member's term shall be elected within 30 days in the manner set forth in subsection (A) of this Section. 
(6)  Removal from the Board. A member of the Board may be removed from the Board in the manner defined in the Employee 401(a) Defined Contribution Plan Bylaws. 
(2464 3199 3447 3704; Ord. No. 3897, § 10, 8-14-2017 ) 
14-2-11. - Powers and Duties of the Trustee. 
(A)  Investment of the Trust Fund: 
(1)  Duty of the Trustee. It shall be the duty of the Trustee to hold the funds from time to time received from the City and the Participants and, subject to the direction of the Board, to manage, invest and reinvest the Trust Fund and the income therefrom pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, without distinction between principal and income. The Trustee shall be responsible only for such sums as shall actually be received. The Trustee shall have no duty to collect any sums from the City or the Participants. 
(2)  Power of the Trustee. The Trustee shall have the power to invest and/or reinvest any and all money or property of any description at any time held by it and constituting a part of the Trust Fund without previous application to, or subsequent ratification of, the City Council, the City Manager, any court, tribunal or commission, or any federal or State governmental agency, in accordance with the following powers: 
(a)  The Trustee may invest in real property and all interests therein, in bonds, notes, debentures, mortgages, commercial paper, preferred stocks, common stocks, or other securities, rights, obligations or property, real or personal, including shares or certificates of participation issued by regulated investment companies or regulated investment trusts, shares or units of participation in qualified common trust funds or qualified pooled funds, and in life insurance and annuity contracts. In making investments or reinvestments, the Trustee shall not be limited by the proportion to which the investments to be made, either alone or with any property of the same or similar character then held or acquired, may bear to the entire amount of the Trust Fund, and the Trustee shall not be bound as to the character of any investment provided by any constitutional provision, statute, rule of court or custom governing the investment of trust funds, providing only that the Trustee shall exercise the judgment and care, under the circumstances then prevailing, that people of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs. 
(b)  The Trustee, in the matter of the investment of the trust fund, shall be held harmless in every respect in exercising its discretion as to how much of the trust fund shall remain uninvested and in cash temporarily awaiting investment or for the expected cash distributions out of the trust fund in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(c)  If directed by the Board, the Trustee shall enter into contracts as investment vehicles for the plan, which contracts shall then become a part of the plan. The Trustee shall then be authorized to sign such other documents and take such other actions as might be necessary or appropriate to carry out the terms of such contracts. The Trustee may enter into such contracts as Trustee of the plan. 
(d)  To the extent the Trustee is directed by the Board to make a particular investment, the Trustee shall be held harmless from any loss or other liability arising therefrom. 
(B)  Administrative Powers of the Trustee. The Trustee shall have all powers necessary or advisable to carry out the provisions of the Plan and all inherent, implied and statutory powers now or hereafter provided by law, including specifically the power to do any of the following: 
(1)  To cause any securities or other property to be registered and held in its name as Trustee or in the name of one or more of its nominees, without disclosing the fiduciary capacity, or to keep the same in unregistered form payable to bearer. 
(2)  To sell, grant option to sell, exchange, pledge, encumber, mortgage, deed in trust or use any other form of hypothecation, or otherwise dispose of the whole or any part of the trust fund on such terms and for such property or cash, or part cash and credit, as it may deem best, and it may retain, hold, maintain or continue any securities or investments that it may hold as part of the trust fund for such length of time as it may deem advisable. 
(3)  To abandon, compromise, contest and arbitrate claims on demand; to institute, compromise and defend actions at law (but without obligation to do so), all at the risk and expense of the trust fund. 
(4)  To borrow money for this Trust, with the approval of the Board, upon such terms and conditions as the Trustee shall deem advisable, and to secure the repayment thereof by the mortgage or pledge of any asset of the trust fund. 
(5)  To vote in person or by proxy any shares of stock or rights held in the trust fund; to participate in reorganization, liquidation or dissolution of any corporation, the securities of which are held in the trust fund and to exchange securities or other property in connection therewith. 
(6)  To pay any amount due on any loan or advance made to the trust fund, all taxes of any nature levied, assessed or imposed upon the trust fund, except for any taxes imposed with respect to any prohibited transaction, as defined in Code Section 4975(c), and all reasonable expenses and attorney fees necessarily incurred by the Trustee with respect to any of the foregoing matters. 
(C)  Immunity of Trustee. No bond or other security shall be required of the Trustee or any successor trustee, except as otherwise provided by law. The Trustee shall not be liable for any mistake of judgment or other action taken in good faith or for any loss to the trust fund, unless such loss results from its gross negligence, willful misconduct or bad faith. 
(D)  Advice of Board or Counsel. 
(1)  Advice or direction of the Board. If, at any time, the Trustee is in doubt concerning any action that it should take in connection with the administration of the Trust, it may request the Board to advise it with respect thereto and shall be protected in relying upon the advice or direction of the Board. 
(2)  Advice of counsel. The Trustee may also consult with legal counsel, who may be counsel for the City, or Trustee's own counsel, with respect to the meaning or construction of this Chapter or Trustee's obligations or duties, and the Trustee shall be fully protected from any responsibility with respect to any action taken or omitted by the Trustee in good faith pursuant to the advice of such counsel. 
(E)  Taxes, Expenses and Fees of the Trustee: The Trustee shall charge against and pay from the trust fund any taxes that may be imposed upon the trust fund or the income thereof, or upon or with respect to the interest of any person therein that the Trustee is required to pay; provided that the trust fund shall not pay or assume any taxes imposed with respect to any prohibited transaction as defined in Code Section 4975(c). 
(1)  Reasonable expenses; attorney's fees. The reasonable expenses of the Trustee incurred in the administration of the Plan, including the fees of any corporate co-trustee that might be appointed as may be mutually agreed upon from time to time by the Trustee and the Board, and attorney's fees incurred by the Trustee, shall be chargeable to and paid by the trust fund, provided that the City may pay all or part of such expenses and fees in the discretion of the City Manager. 
(2)  All expenses incurred in the preparation and adoption of the Plan shall be paid by the City. 
(F)  Records and Accounts of the Trustee: The Trustee shall keep all such records and accounts that may be necessary in the administration and conduct of this Chapter. The Trustee's records and accounts shall be open to inspection by the City, the Board, and the participant of the participant's own accounts, during business hours. 
(1)  Commingled trust fund. All income, profits, recoveries, contributions, forfeitures, and any and all moneys, securities and properties of any kind at any time received or held by the Trustee shall be held for investment purposes as a commingled trust fund. Separate accounts or records may be maintained for operational and accounting purposes, but no such account or record shall be considered as segregating any funds or property from any other funds or property contained in the commingled fund, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. 
(2)  Accounting of the trust fund. After the close of each year of the Trust, the Trustee shall render to the City and the Board an accounting of the trust fund for such year. If no objections to any such accounting are filed within a period of 60 days after it has been delivered to the City and the Board, it shall be deemed to have been approved and shall constitute a full and complete discharge and release to the Trustees from the City and the Board and all other persons having or claiming any interest in the trust fund. 
(G)  Resignation and Removal of Trustee: The City, by action of the City Manager, may, in its discretion, appoint an additional non-voting Trustee to act as co-trustee with the City Finance Director, which may, but need not, be a bank or trust company organized under the laws of Colorado or the United States authorized by law to administer trusts and maintaining and operating a full-time trust department. 
(1)  Resignation. Any Trustee, other than the City Finance Director, may resign from serving as a Trustee at any time by filing with the City Manager an appropriate written resignation. No such resignation shall take effect until 30 days from the date thereof, provided that if a successor Trustee shall have been appointed prior to the expiration of said period, the resignation shall be effective immediately. 
(2)  Removal. Any Trustee, other than the City Finance Director, may be removed by the City by action of the City Manager at any time by giving 30 days' notice in writing to such Trustee. Such removal shall be effected by delivering to such Trustee written notice of removal, executed by the City Manager. 
(3)  All the provisions set forth in this Chapter with respect to the Trustee shall relate to all successor Trustees and if more than one Trustee is then acting, reference to the term "Trustee" shall mean "Trustees." 
(4)  Corporate co-trustee. In the event any corporate co-trustee at any time acting hereunder shall be merged, or consolidated with, or shall sell or transfer substantially all of its assets and business to another corporation, whether State or federal, or shall be in any manner reorganized or reincorporated, then the resulting or acquiring corporation shall thereupon be substituted ipso facto for such corporate co-trustee hereunder without the execution of any instrument and without any action upon the part of the City, any Participant or Beneficiary of any deceased Participant, or any other person having or claiming to have an interest in the Trust Fund or under the Plan. 
(2464 3199 3447 3584 3704; Ord. No. 3897, § 11, 8-14-2017 ) 
14-2-12. - Continuance, Termination and Amendment of Plan. 
(A)  Continuance of the Plan Not a Contractual Obligation of the City. It is the expectation of the City that it will continue the Plan indefinitely, but the continuance of the plan is not assumed as a contractual obligation by the City, and the right is reserved to the City by action of its City Council to discontinue the Plan at any time. The discontinuance of the plan by the City shall, in no event, have the effect of re-vesting any part of the trust fund in the City. 
(B)  Termination of Plan. The plan shall continue in full force and effect until terminated or discontinued by the City by action of its City Council. Notice of such termination shall be given to the Trustee by an instrument in writing executed by the City Manager pursuant to the action of its City Council. 
(C)  Distribution of the Trust Fund on Termination of Plan. If the plan shall, at any time, be terminated by the terms of this Section, the Trustee shall immediately convert the entire trust fund, other than insurance and annuity contracts, to cash. The value of the interest of each respective participant or interest of each respective beneficiary in the trust fund shall be vested in its entirety as of the date of the termination of the plan. The Trustee shall, as soon as possible, distribute to each participant or beneficiary outright, in a lump sum cash payment, such participant's entire interest or beneficiary's entire interest in the trust fund. 
(D)  Amendments to the Plan. 
(1)  General rule. The City, by action of its City Council, may at any time amend this Chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall: 
(a)  Divert the trust fund to purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of the participants and their beneficiaries; 
(b)  Divert or use any part of the corpus or income of the Retirement Medical Savings Accounts for any purpose other than paying medical benefits under Code Section 401(h) (other than as provided in Section 14-2-8(B)(5), W.M.C.; 
(c)  Decrease any participant's interest; or 
(d)  Discriminate in favor of Employees who are officers, persons whose principal duties consist in supervising the work of other Employees, or highly compensated employees. 
(2)  No participant approval required. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, this Chapter may be amended, if necessary, without requiring the approval of the participants to conform to the provisions and requirements of the Code or any amendments thereto, and no such amendment shall be considered prejudicial to the interest of any participant or beneficiary hereunder. 
(2464 3447 3704; Ord. No. 3897, § 12, 8-14-2017 ) 
14-2-13. - Miscellaneous. 
(A)  Benefits to be Provided Solely from the Trust Fund. All benefits payable under the Plan shall be paid or provided for solely from the Trust Fund, and the City assumes no liability or responsibility therefor. 
(B)  Notices from Participants to be Filed with the Plan Administrator, the Board or the Trustee. Whenever provision is made that a participant may exercise any option or election or designate any beneficiary, the action of each participant shall be evidenced by a written notice therefor signed by the participant on a form furnished by the Plan Administrator, the Board or the Trustee, as may be applicable, for such purpose and filed with the Plan Administrator, the Board or the Trustee, as applicable, which shall not be effective until received by the Plan Administrator, the Board or the Trustee, as applicable. 
(C)  Text to Control. The headings of sections and subsections are included solely for convenience or reference. If there be any conflict between such headings and the text of this Chapter, the text shall control. 
(D)  Law Governing. The plan shall be construed under the laws of the State of Colorado and the Trustee shall be liable to account only in the courts of Colorado. All contributions received by the Trustee pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed to have been received in Colorado. 
(E)  Severability. In the event any provision of this Chapter shall be held illegal or invalid for any reason, said illegality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions. On the contrary, such remaining provisions shall be fully severable and this Chapter shall be construed and enforced as if said illegal or invalid provisions had never been inserted herein. 
(F)  Plan for Exclusive Benefit of Participants; Reversion Prohibited. The plan has been entered into for the exclusive benefit of the participants and their beneficiaries. Other than as provided in Section 14-2-8(B)(5), W.M.C., under no circumstances shall any funds contributed to or held by the Trustee hereunder at any time revert to or be used by or enjoyed by the City, nor shall any such funds or assets at any time be used other than for the exclusive benefit of the participants or their beneficiaries. 
(2464 3319 3447 3704; Ord. No. 3897, § 13, 8-14-2017 ) 
Title XV. - PURCHASING PROCEDURES 
CHAPTER 1. - PURCHASING PROCEDURES 

15-1-1. - Application and Definitions. 
(A)  This Chapter shall apply to every purchase agreement to which the City is a party. 
(B)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Authorized expenditure shall mean the amount of spending approved by City Council action for a specific purchase agreement, including any authorized contingency amount, which may differ from the budgeted amount and from the purchase agreement amount. For amounts that do not exceed $250,000.00, "authorized expenditure" means the amount of spending approved by the City Manager, including any authorized contingency amount, which may differ from the budgeted amount and from the purchase agreement amount. 
    Bids shall mean either bids or proposals submitted in response to a written invitation for bids or a written request for proposals. 
    City Manager shall mean the City Manager and the City Manager's designee. 
    Employee services shall mean all compensation and benefits, including insurance, provided by the City as an employer to its employees. 
    Professional services shall mean architectural, engineering, legal, consulting or other services that involve primarily the furnishing of skilled labor, time or expertise. 
    Purchase agreement shall mean purchase orders and contracts for the purchase of construction, professional services, or other services, or for the purchase of real estate. 
    Purchase order shall mean the City's standard computerized form used to purchase services, materials, equipment, supplies, goods, or commodities, and includes the City's standard purchase order terms and conditions, as well as transactions made using a City-issued purchase card. 
(2138 3692; Ord. No. 3945 , § 1, 8-27-2018) 
15-1-2. - General Requirements. 
(A)  Every purchase agreement shall be evidenced by a written contract or by a purchase order. 
(B)  A purchase agreement for materials, equipment, supplies or professional services to be provided on an ongoing basis shall contain a maximum amount payable under the agreement or a termination date for the agreement. 
(C)  A purchase agreement in an amount that does not exceed the City Manager's purchasing authority, hereby set at $250,000.00 or less per fiscal year, may be approved by the City Manager without separate council action. 
(D)  Before any purchase agreement in an amount that exceeds $250,000.00 is executed, the City Manager shall certify that an appropriation has been made or that other sufficient funds, such as bond proceeds, special assessments, or matching funds, will be available to pay the amounts required in the purchase agreement. This subsection shall not apply to an individual agreement of employment with an employee or officer of the City. 
(E)  No purchase agreement may be entered into with any person, firm, corporation, or other entity in default to the City. 
(F)  City Council Review: Every purchase agreement in an amount that exceeds $250,000.00 in one fiscal year, regardless of form, shall be presented to City Council so that council may approve the authorized expenditure. However, the purchase of utilities, postage, vehicles, heavy equipment, trailers, or employee services need not be approved by express action, but shall be considered an authorized expenditure if the budget appropriation has been approved. The purchase of water rights is subject to the requirements in Section 15-1-12, W.M.C. 
(G)  City Attorney Review: Every purchase agreement shall be approved as to legal form by the City Attorney before it is executed. This subsection shall not apply to an individual agreement of employment with an employee or officer of the City. 
(2138 2960 3692 3754; Ord. No. 3945 , § 2, 8-27-2018) 
15-1-3. - Prohibition of Financial Interest. 
    Every officer and employee of the city is expressly prohibited from knowingly: 
(A)  Seeking or accepting any personal gift or money rebate, directly or indirectly, from any person, company, firm or corporation in connection with a purchase agreement; 
(B)  Underestimating or exaggerating requirements to a prospective bidder for the purpose of influencing bids; 
(C)  Misrepresenting the quality of a bidder's products or services; 
(D)  Influencing the City to enter into a purchase agreement that will benefit the officer or employee, either directly or indirectly. 
(E)  Approving a purchase involving an amount in excess of $100.00 in which any elective or appointive officer of the City or member of the officer's family has a pecuniary interest, as defined in Section 5.12 of the City Charter, without the unanimous approval of all members of the City Council. 
(2138 3692) 
15-1-4. - Formal Bidding Required. 
(A)  Formal bids shall be required when the amount of a purchase agreement exceeds $50,000.00, unless: 
(1)  City Council determines by unanimous resolution of those present at the meeting that the public interest will be best served by joint purchase with or from another unit of government; or 
(2)  City Council determines, upon recommendation of the City Manager that the public interest will be best served by negotiated contract with a single vendor or contractor. 
(3)  The expenditure is the purchase of utilities, postage, or employee services; the expenditure is part of an intergovernmental agreement; or the expenditure is dues for membership in a professional organization for which there is no competitive alternative. 
(B)  When the amount of the purchase agreement does not exceed $50,000.00, formal bidding is not required and the procedures in Section 15-1-6, W.M.C., for comparative price quotes apply. 
(C)  Formal bids must be obtained every three years, except with permission from the City Manager. 
(D)  In case of emergency affecting the public peace, health or safety, City Council may waive all requirements for formal bidding. In such cases, the City Manager may direct the appropriate department head to procure emergency needs by informal, open-market procedures, at no more than commercial prices, as expeditiously as possible. The City Manager shall present a full report of the circumstances necessitating the emergency action at the next City Council meeting. 
(2138 2960 3061 3692 3754; Ord. No. 3945 , § 3, 8-27-2018) 
15-1-5. - Formal Bidding Procedures and Selection Criteria. 
(A)  When formal bidding is required pursuant to Section 15-1-4, W.M.C., except as defined in subsections (B) and (C) of this section, the formal bidding process shall be as follows: 
(1)  Unless prequalification of bidders applies pursuant to Section 15-1-10, W.M.C., at least five days prior to the deadline for receipt of bids, a request or invitation for sealed bids shall be published at least once in an area newspaper selected for maximum impact on prospective bidders, or shall be sent to three or more potential bidders, or shall be posted via electronic solicitation. 
(2)  A bid bond or deposit shall be required when deemed necessary by the City Manager. If a bid is not accepted or a bidder is unsuccessful, the bid bond or deposit shall be refunded. When a bid is awarded, but the successful bidder fails to enter into a purchase agreement within ten days of the award, the bid bond or deposit may be forfeited, at the sole discretion of the City Manager. 
(3)  Sealed bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice, unless all bidders have been notified of a change in such time or place by written addendum. A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection. Responses received in response to a request for interest, request for qualifications, or request for proposals are exempt from the requirements of this paragraph. 
(4)  After the bids have been reviewed, if the purchase will exceed the City Manager's purchasing authority, the City Manager shall submit a report to City Council that contains an analysis of the bids, a recommendation for an award, and the reasons for the recommendation. The purchase agreement shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder meeting the bid specifications, unless City Council determines that, after reviewing the City Manager's report, the public interest would be better served by accepting another bid. If the purchase will not exceed the City Manager's purchasing authority, the City Manager shall make the required analysis and decision. 
(5)  In determining whether the public interest would be better served by accepting a bid other than the lowest bid, the following factors shall be considered: 
(a)  The bidder's skill, ability, and capacity to perform the services or to furnish the materials, equipment, or supplies required; 
(b)  Whether the bidder can perform the services or furnish the materials, equipment, or supplies promptly, or within the time period specified, without delay or interference; 
(c)  The bidder's character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency; 
(d)  The quality of the bidder's performance of previous purchase agreements; 
(e)  The bidder's previous and current compliance with statutes, ordinances, and rules relating to the purchase; 
(f)  The sufficiency of the bidder's financial resources necessary for the performance of the purchase agreement; 
(g)  The bidder's ability to provide future maintenance or service; and 
(h)  The number and nature of any conditions attached to the bid. 
(6)  If the purchase will exceed the City Manager's purchasing authority, upon recommendation of the City Manager, the City Council may reject all bids when it determines that such action is in the public interest. If the purchase will not exceed the City Manager's purchasing authority, the City Manager may reject all bids upon making the same determination. 
(B)  The City Manager shall have authority to determine whether other federal, state, and local government jurisdictions' bidding processes may satisfy the requirement for formal bids under this title. The City Manager shall keep a list of all approved federal, state, and local government jurisdictions' bidding processes. 
(C)  The City Manager shall have authority to determine whether cooperative purchasing agreement organizations' bidding processes satisfy the requirement for formal bids under this title. The City Manager shall keep a list of all approved cooperative purchasing agreement organizations' bidding processes. 
(2138 2960 3692; Ord. No. 3945 , § 4, 8-27-2018) 
15-1-6. - Comparative Price Quotations. 
(A)  When the amount of a purchase agreement exceeds a threshold set by the City Manager but does not exceed $50,000.00, comparative price quotes from at least three vendors or contractors will be required, unless: 
(1)  The City Manager determines that the public interest would be best served by negotiated contract with a single vendor or contractor or by joint purchase with or from another unit of government; or 
(2)  The City Manager determines that the public interest would be best served by obtaining the goods or services through the formal bidding process. 
(B)  Comparative price quotes must be obtained every three years, except with permission from the City Manager. 
(2138 2960 3692 3754; Ord. No. 3945 , § 5, 8-27-2018) 
15-1-7. - Amendments to Purchase Agreements. 
(A)  The City Manager shall have authority to approve an amendment to a purchase agreement when the original purchase agreement combined with the amendment does not exceed $250,000.00 per fiscal year or when the amendment does not cause the purchase agreement to exceed City Council's authorized expenditure for the purchase agreement. Even when no council approval is required, change orders to construction purchase agreements must be reported to City Council. 
(B)  All other amendments to a purchase agreement previously approved by City Council shall be approved or ratified by City Council. 
(2138 2960 3692 3754; Ord. No. 3945 , § 6, 8-27-2018) 
15-1-8. - Prohibition Against Subdivision. 
    City Charter prohibits the subdivision of contracts and purchase orders for the purpose of circumventing the dollar value limitations established by City Council. Given the City's decentralized purchasing system, there shall be a presumption that there is no intention to circumvent the dollar value limitations except when the contracts or purchase orders involve the same department, the same fund(s), the same capital project, the same vendor, and the same, or substantially similar, services or products; or as otherwise determined by the Finance Director based on the totality of the circumstances. 
(2138; Ord. No. 3945 , § 7, 8-27-2018) 
15-1-9. - Rules and Administrative Procedures. 
    The City Manager is authorized to promulgate rules and administrative procedures to implement the provisions of this Title. 
(2138) 
15-1-10. - Prequalification of Bidders. 
(A)  The City Manager may prequalify bidders to bid on certain construction projects for the City when he determines that it is in the best interest of the City and: 
(1)  The particular construction project requires: 
(a)  Complex or unusual construction techniques or expertise; or 
(b)  An unusually tight construction time; or 
(c)  Experience in a construction field not generally held by others; or 
(2)  The construction project has a projected budget of $500,000.00 or more, excluding design and related architectural/engineering tasks. 
(B)  If the City Manager determines that a specific project will require prequalification of bidders according to subsection (A) above, an invitation for prequalification will be issued in the same manner as is required for a request or invitation for sealed bids by Subsection 15-1-5(A), W.M.C., herein; a determination as to which bidders are prequalified shall be made according to subsection (C) below; and no bids will be accepted from any bidder who has not been prequalified. 
(C)  When reviewing responses to invitations for prequalification, the city may consider the following factors: 
(1)  Availability of equipment necessary to accomplish the project; 
(2)  Availability of trained personnel to accomplish the project; 
(3)  Potential bidder's organization and technical staff with the size, training, experience and capability to accomplish the project; 
(4)  Financial capability to perform the project; 
(5)  Demonstrated experience in the type of work required for the project; 
(6)  Satisfactory performance of similar projects, including, but not limited to, compliance with all terms and specifications, satisfactory quality of workmanship, and consistent on-time performance; 
(7)  Whether the potential bidder is in any jurisdiction under notice of debarment or debarred; 
(8)  Whether the potential bidder has made false, deceptive or fraudulent statements in the application for prequalification or any other information submitted to the City; 
(9)  Listing of all projects of the type and size for which prequalification is sought, or projects similar to it, performed by potential bidder within the last five years, with name, address, and phone number of owner's representative on each project; 
(10)  Any additional criteria necessary to determine qualification for the specific project; 
(11)  Statement of understanding that the City or City's agent will check any or all previous projects for evidence of quality of workmanship, compliance with contract terms, timeliness and other factors indicating ability to perform the project; and 
(12)  Potential bidder's prequalified status with an authority or agency acceptable to the City. 
(D)  A decision not to prequalify a potential bidder is final and may not be appealed. 
(2340 2960 3692) 
15-1-11. - Acquisition of Real Property Remainders Related to Public Projects. 
    Whenever a part of a parcel of land is to be taken for public purposes and the remainder is to be left in such shape or condition as to be of little value to its owner or to give rise to claims or litigation concerning severance or other damage, the City may acquire by purchase or condemnation the whole parcel. The City may sell or lease the remainder of said parcel or may exchange the same for other property needed for public purposes. 
(2374) 
15-1-12. - Acquisition of Water Rights. 
    Notwithstanding any other requirements of this chapter, the City Manager is authorized to acquire water rights, through direct purchase or otherwise, without specific council pre-authorization prior to such purchase, provided that the City Manager: 
(A)  Ascertains the value and benefit of such water rights by means of an appropriate engineering study, if necessary; and 
(B)  Determines that an expedited acquisition of such rights is necessary to preserve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Westminster; 
(C)  Finds that adequate funds have previously been appropriated for such acquisition; 
(D)  Provides a written report to the City Council advising the council of any such purchase within 20 days of the acquisition. 
(3442 3692; Ord. No. 3945 , § 8, 8-27-2018) 
CHAPTER 2. - DISPOSAL OF CITY PROPERTY 

15-2-1. - Methods of Disposal and Procedures. 
(A)  Personalty: Obsolete, surplus, or other City personal property may be traded as part of the purchase of new property, sold to the public through formal bidding procedures or public auction, donated or discarded as follows: 
(1)  The trade, sale, donation, or discarding of City personal property with an estimated value of $15,000.00 or more per item shall be approved by City Council. 
(2)  The trade or sale of City personal property with an estimated value less than $15,000.00 per item shall be approved by the City Manager. 
(3)  The City Manager may authorize the donation or discarding of City personal property with an estimated value less than $15,000.00 per item if such property cannot be disposed of through trade or sale, or if such property is deemed to be of such nominal value that trade or sale is impractical. 
(4)  When City personal property is to be sold through formal bidding procedures or public auction, a notice inviting bids or a notice of public auction shall be published at least once in an area newspaper selected for maximum impact on prospective bidders or shall be sent to three or more potential bidders at least five days prior to the public auction or the deadline for receipt of bids. The notice shall include a general description of the property to be sold. 
(B)  Realty: Surplus City real property may be traded as part of the purchase of new real property, donated to another public or quasi-public entity or non-profit corporation, or sold in any open market transaction, or disposed of in any other manner approved by City Council as follows: 
(1)  The trade, sale, or donation of City real property with an estimated value of $15,000.00 or more per parcel shall be approved by City Council. 
(2)  The trade, sale, or donation of City real property with an estimated value less than $15,000.00 per parcel may be approved by the City Manager. 
(3)  When City real property is to be sold in an open market transaction, a notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in an area newspaper selected for maximum impact on prospective bidders. The notice shall include a general description of the property to be sold. Alternatively, the City may list the property with a licensed real estate broker selected by the City Manager. 
(4)  The term "estimated value," as used in this subsection, shall mean a good faith determination by any individual knowledgeable in the value of realty comparable to the City realty being evaluated. The City Manager is authorized to determine if a formal "member appraisal institute" (MAI) appraisal is required to establish the estimated value. 
(5)  Nothing in this subsection is intended to apply to the vacation of city roadways or easements, as that process is set forth in Section 11-6-9, W.M.C. 
(3245 3421; Ord. No. 3945 , § 9, 8-27-2018) 
15-2-2. - Prohibition Against Subdivision. 
    No single sales transaction shall be subdivided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar value limitations of this Chapter. 
(2138) 
Title XVI. - UTILITIES AND FRANCHISES 
CHAPTER 1. - PUBLIC UTILITY REGULATION 

16-1-1. - Legislative Intent. 
    The City Council does hereby find, determine and declare: 
(A)  Certain persons are engaged in the provision of public utility services within the municipal limits of the City using public streets, public easements and other public places. 
(B)  The nature of public utilities, including their use of public streets and other public places and the potential and actual hazards and inconveniences resulting from the operations of such utilities, has a substantial effect upon the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City. 
(C)  Public utilities make a pervasive and permanent use of public streets and other public places and such use is necessary in order for these utilities to conduct their business. 
(D)  The City operates water, sewer, fiber optic and other utilities using public streets and other public places, including those that are or may be used by public utilities to conduct their business. 
(E)  In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to serve the convenience of the residents of the City, it is necessary to coordinate activities relating to the use of the public streets and other public places, including, but not limited to, the placement of and relocation of facilities, excavations, construction and maintenance by public utilities. 
(F)  The regulations imposed herein are a matter of local concern relating to the use of public streets and other public places by public utilities and are imposed upon all public utilities doing business within the City, unless otherwise exempted by ordinance. 
(G)  The City has authority under the Colorado Constitution, its charter and ordinances and state statutes to regulate businesses operating within its territorial boundaries and the use of public streets and other public places to ensure the safety, welfare, health and convenience of its citizens. 
(H)  In order to provide for the public health, safety, welfare and convenience, the City enacts this ordinance that governs the location and relocation of public utility facilities, as well as any excavation or opening, or other use of the public streets and other public places for public utility purposes. 
(1879 3370) 
16-1-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Title XVI, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this section shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
    City shall mean the municipal corporation designated as the City of Westminster and include the territory within the boundaries of the City of Westminster. 
    City Council shall mean the legislative body of the City. 
    City Manager shall mean the City Manager of the City of Westminster or his designee. 
    Distribution facilities shall mean all gas, electric, cable, telecommunications and other public utility distribution facilities. 
    Electric distribution facilities shall mean that portion of a public utility's electric system that delivers electric energy from the substation breakers to the point-of-delivery of the customer, including all devices connected to that system. 
    Electricity shall mean all electric energy and electric service provided to the City and its residents, including street lighting services. 
    Facilities shall mean all components that are reasonably necessary to provide public utilities, gas and electricity, telecommunications services and cable television services into, within and through the City, including plants, works, systems, substations, transmission and distribution structures, lines, street lighting fixtures, generating plant, equipment, pipes, mains, conduit, transformers, underground lines, gas compressors, meters, wires, cables and poles. 
    Franchise shall mean the rights granted by ordinance authorizing and regulating a person to occupy the public streets, public easements and other public places in order to conduct a business in the nature of private enterprise, but selling a service in the nature of a public utility to the residents of the City. 
    Gas shall mean such gaseous fuels as natural, artificial, synthetic, liquefied natural, liquefied petroleum, manufactured, or any mixture thereof. 
    Gas distribution facilities shall mean that portion of a public utility's gas system that delivers gas from the down side of the regulator station to the point-of-delivery of the customer, including all devices connected to that system. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or other legal entity. 
    Public easements shall mean easements, including utility easements, available for use as permitted by the City. 
    Public places shall mean alleys, viaducts, bridges, drainageways, rights-of-way and public easements in the City. 
    Public streets shall mean streets, boulevards, roads and lanes that are deeded or dedicated to the City and are used as routes for transportation by the public. 
    Public utility shall mean every pipeline corporation, gas corporation, electrical corporation, telephone corporation, telegraph corporation, CATV or cable corporation, water corporation, person, or political subdivision of the state, other than the City, operating for the purpose of supplying the public for domestic, mechanical, or public uses and every corporation, or person declared by law to be affected with a public interest; except common carriers. 
    Residents shall mean all persons, businesses, industry, governmental agencies, and any other entity whatsoever, located, in whole or in part, within the territorial boundaries of the City. 
    Telecommunications service shall be as defined in Chapter 2 of Title IV of this Code. 
(1879 3370 3711) 
16-1-3. - Obligations Regarding Facilities. 
(A)  Work: All work by a public utility shall be done: 
(1)  In a good workmanlike manner; 
(2)  In a timely and expeditious manner; 
(3)  In a manner that minimizes inconvenience to the public and individuals; and 
(4)  In accordance with all applicable codes, rules, regulations, standards and specifications of the City. 
(B)  Location of Facilities: 
(1)  The installation, maintenance, renovation and replacement of any facilities in public streets and other public places by the public utility shall be subject to approval of location by the City. 
(2)  Public utility facilities shall not interfere with street and traffic facilities, water facilities, sanitary or storm sewer facilities or the use of public streets, and public places by the public or the City. 
(3)  Public utility facilities shall be installed and maintained so as to minimize interference with other property, trees and other improvements and natural features. 
(4)  A public utility shall not, pursuant to this ordinance, place any of its facilities on, over, under or within any City park, City greenbelt or open space, or designated park property owned by the City, unless the City grants a revocable permit therefor. 
(C)  Supervision and Inspection: All work is subject to supervision and inspection by the City. The public utility shall promptly perform reasonable remedial action required by the City pursuant to said inspection. 
(1879 3370 3711) 
16-1-4. - Excavation and Construction. 
(A)  Permits: The public utility and its subcontractors shall comply with all city requirements for excavation and construction and shall be responsible for obtaining and paying for all applicable permits. All permits shall be obtained from the appropriate City office at least 24 hours prior to initiation of the work, except in emergency situations, in which case the public utility shall notify the City within 48 hours after the emergency work is commenced. All subcontractors of public utilities working in public streets and public places shall hold the necessary contracting licenses required by the City. 
(B)  Method: 
(1)  All construction and excavation shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 16-1-3, W.M.C. 
(2)  All public and private property whose use conforms to restrictions in public easements disturbed by public utility construction or excavation activities shall be restored by the public utility at its expense according to existing City standards and specifications or matching the preexisting materials and equipment as specified by the City. Such restoration shall be subject to inspection by the City and the public utility shall perform all reasonable remedial action required by the City pursuant to said inspection. 
(3)  The public utility shall comply with the City's requests for reasonable and prompt action to remedy all damage to private property adjacent to public streets or public easements where the public utility is performing excavation or construction work. If all remedial action is not completed within 30 days, the City may cause the work to be completed at the public utility's expense. 
(4)  If, in the opinion of the City, such damage poses a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public or individuals, the City may cause repairs to be made at the public utility's expense, unless the public utility makes such repairs promptly upon the City's request. 
(1879 3370) 
16-1-5. - Relocation of Facilities. 
    If at any time the City requests the public utility to relocate any facility installed or maintained in public streets or other public places in order to permit the City or a person under contract to the City: 
(A)  To make any public use of public streets or other public places, 
(B)  To construct any public improvements, 
(C)  To build any public project, 
(D)  For any municipal purpose in which the City has a financial or ownership interest, or 
(E)  Whenever the City requires such relocation in the exercise of its police power to protect the public health, safety, welfare or convenience of its residents, such relocation shall be made by the public utility at its expense. 
(1879 3370) 
16-1-6. - Franchise Controls. 
    To the extent that any franchise lawfully granted by the City is inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter, such franchise shall control. 
(1879 3370) 
16-1-7. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstance is adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of this Chapter that can be effective without the invalid provision and, to said end, each provision and section of this Chapter is declared to be severable. 
(1879 3370) 
CHAPTER 2. - PUBLIC UTILITY OCCUPATION TAX 

16-2-1. - Short Title. 
    This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Westminster Public Utility Occupation Tax." 
(1879) 
16-2-2. - Legislative Intent. 
    The City Council does hereby find, determine, and declare as follows: 
(A)  Certain public utility companies may occasionally do business within the City without applying for or receiving a franchise from the City for the use of the public streets and other public places. 
(B)  As consideration for the privilege of using the public streets and other public places for private business purposes, which are valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the City at great expense to its residents, and in recognition that such use is a valuable privilege without which public utilities would be required to invest substantial time and capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, and recognizing that each public utility must pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of the public streets and other public places as shall arise from its use thereof, levying of an occupation tax is just and equitable. 
(C)  In the course of such a public utility's installation, operation, and maintenance of its facilities within the City, such public utility utilizes City resources to a greater degree than do other businesses or occupations. 
(D)  Delivery of such public utilities within the City requires standby and active service by police, fire, public works and other employees of the City and local safety agencies, which is a matter of local and municipal concern. 
(E)  Upon review of all matters properly considered relating to the nature of public utilities and the relation of such public utilities, their demands on City resources, and the use of public streets and other public places, as well as the other operations of such public utilities, to the municipal welfare of the residents of the City and to expenditures budgeted to the City, classification of such public utilities as separate businesses and occupations is reasonable, proper, uniform, and nondiscriminatory. The taxable amount hereby levied is reasonable, proper, uniform, nondiscriminatory, and necessary for a just and proper distribution of tax burdens within the City. 
(F)  The occupation tax herein created and defined is levied on the right of a public utility to do business within the City as are other occupation taxes so created and imposed within the City. 
(1879) 
16-2-3. - Definitions. 
    Unless indicated below, definitions shall be as set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title. 
(1879) 
16-2-4. - Levy of Tax. 
(A)  There is hereby levied upon public utilities that provide natural gas or electricity to residents of the City a tax or excise upon all sales of natural gas or electricity. 
(B)  The taxable rate levied shall be three percent of sales. 
(1879) 
16-2-5. - Payment and Enforcement. 
(A)  Payment of the taxable amount to the City shall be made in monthly installments not more than 20 days following the close of the month for which payment is to be made. 
(B)  In the event an error by a public utility results in an overpayment of the taxable amount to the City, the public utility may apply for a refund within three years of the date the taxable amount was due. If the refund is denied, the public utility may request a hearing before the Finance Director. Any request for a hearing shall be made within 21 days of the date of the denial of the refund. In the event an error by the public utility results in an underpayment of the taxable amount to the City, the public utility shall repay the difference between the underpayment and the correct payment with interest from the date due at the rate assessed for delinquent sales taxes. No penalty shall be assessed if the public utility voluntarily corrects the underpayment without an audit or collection action of any type by the City. 
(C)  The City shall have reasonable access to the books and records of the public utility insofar as they relate to any matters covered by this ordinance and such reasonable and necessary reports containing or based on information readily obtainable from the public utility's books and records with respect to the activities taxed pursuant to this Chapter. 
(D)  If any public utility subject to the provisions of this Chapter fails to pay the tax herein levied, it may be collected in the same manner as provided in this Code for the collection of sales and use taxes. Interest, penalty and collection costs shall be added to the principal owed in the amounts permitted by the sales and use tax provisions. 
(E)  The Director of Finance shall administer the provisions of this Chapter. Pursuant to the directive of the City Manager, the Director of Finance may promulgate rules to aid in the enforcement and administration of this Chapter. 
(1879) 
16-2-6. - Tax Not in Lieu of Other Fees and Taxes. 
    Payment of this occupation tax shall not exempt a public utility from any lawful taxation, charges and fees that are uniform and generally applicable to other persons conducting business within the City. This tax shall not be levied against any public utility that pays a franchise fee of at least three percent of its revenues pursuant to a franchise granted by the City. 
(1879) 
16-2-7. - Local Purpose. 
    The tax herein provided is upon occupations and businesses in the performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those functions relating to interstate commerce. No terms of this chapter shall be construed to create any franchise rights in favor of any person or public utility. 
(1879) 
16-2-8. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstance is adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of this Chapter that can be effective without the invalid provision and, to said end, each provision and section of this Chapter is declared to be severable. 
(1879) 
CHAPTER 3. - COMPETITIVE CABLE FRANCHISE APPLICATION PROCESS 

16-3-1. - Legislative Intent. 
    The City Council does hereby find, determine and declare as follows: 
(A)  The "competitive franchise application rule" (CFAR), adopted on December 20, 2006, by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), provides that local franchising authorities may require application information from an applicant for a competitive cable franchise, in addition to the information set forth in the CFAR. 
(B)  In order to comprehensively evaluate whether or not to grant a competitive cable franchise, the City will require certain information from applicants, in addition to the information required by the CFAR. 
(C)  To ensure compliance with the CFAR and provide notice to prospective applicants, the review process for applications for competitive cable franchises and the criteria upon which the final decision of the City will be based should be codified. 
(D)  The application requirements and the processes for application review and determination set forth in this Chapter are intended to comply with the new FCC rules. 
(3370) 
16-3-2. - Instructions and Definitions. 
    The following instructions shall apply to all applications, except those filed under Section 16-3-13, W.M.C.: 
(A)  An applicant for a competitive cable franchise ("applicant") shall include the requisite information set forth below, in writing, in its franchise application, in addition to any information required by 47 Code of Federal Regulations §76.41 and applicable state and local laws and the application fee set by Section 16-3-9, W.M.C., herein. 
(B)  The City shall accept and review only those applications that include complete responses to every requirement of this Chapter. Submission of an application that does not include the requisite information set forth in Sections 16-3-3-16-3-7, and 16-3-9, W.M.C., as applicable, shall not commence the time period for granting or denying the application set forth in 47 Code of Federal Regulations §76.41(d). The applicant shall submit additional or updated information as necessary to ensure the requisite information provided is complete and accurate throughout the City's review of the application. 
(C)  Applications shall be made to the Director of Information Technology, City of Westminster, 4800 West 92nd Avenue, Westminster, Colorado 80031. 
(D)  Upon request, the City will promptly provide access to documents or information in its possession or control that are necessary for the completion of this application, provided that the applicant does not otherwise have access to such documents or information and that such documents or information are subject to disclosure under Colorado open records laws. 
(E)  For the purposes of the application, the terms, phrases, and their derivations set forth below shall have the meanings given, unless the context indicates otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Affiliated entity or affliate shall mean any entity having ownership or control in common with the applicant, in whole or in part, including, without limitation, applicant's parent corporations and any subsidiaries or affiliates of such parent corporations. 
    Applicant shall mean an applicant for a cable franchise pursuant to the provisions of the competitive franchise application rule ("CFAR") set forth in Part 76 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, §76.41, and includes the parent corporation, its subsidiaries and principals. 
    City shall mean the City of Westminster, a Colorado home-rule municipality. 
    Control is not limited to majority stock ownership, but shall include actual working control in whatever manner exercised. 
    Interest shall include officers, directors and shareholders owning five percent or more of the applicant's outstanding stock or any equivalent voting interest of a partnership or joint venture. 
    Parent corporation shall include any entity with ownership or control of the applicant. 
    Principal shall include any person, firm, corporation, partnership, joint venture, affiliates, or other entity, who or which owns or controls five percent or more of the voting stock (or any equivalent voting interest of a partnership or joint venture) of the applicant. 
    Regulatory authority shall include any governmental or quasi-governmental organization or entity with jurisdiction over all or any portion of the applicant or its operations. 
(3370) 
16-3-3. - Requisite Information. 
(A)  Identification and Ownership Information: The application shall include: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number and web site (if applicable) of the applicant and the proposed franchisee (if different from applicant); and 
(2)  The name, address, primary telephone number and primary e-mail address of all individual(s) authorized to represent the applicant before the City during its consideration of the franchise(s) requested, including the applicant's primary contact and any additional authorized contacts. 
(B)  Business Structure: 
(1)  If a corporation, the applicant shall provide: 
(a)  A list of all officers and members of the Board of Directors, their principal affiliations and their addresses; 
(b)  A certificate of good standing indicating that the applicant is licensed to do business in the State of Colorado; and 
(c)  A statement indicating whether the applicant is directly or indirectly controlled by another corporation or legal entity. If so, applicant shall attach an explanatory statement and provide the documents in subparagraphs (a) and (b) above for the controlling corporation or legal entity. 
(2)  If a partnership, the applicant shall: 
(a)  Describe the structure of the partnership and the interests of general and limited partners; and 
(b)  State whether the applicant is controlled directly or indirectly by any corporation or other legal entity. If so, applicant shall attach an explanatory statement and provide the documents in subparagraphs (1)(a) and (2)(b) above for the controlling entity, partnership or legal entity. 
(C)  Experience: 
(1)  Current Franchises. An Applicant shall list all cable systems in which it or any affiliate owns more than five percent of the system. For each system, applicant shall include name of system, address, communities served, number of subscribers, number of homes passed, date of system award, duration (start and end date) of franchise, status of construction, and percent of penetration of homes passed as of most recently available date (indicate date). 
(2)  Potential Franchises. An applicant shall list communities where it or any affiliate currently has a formal or informal request pending for an initial franchise, the renewal of a franchise, or the approval of a transfer of ownership. The Applicant shall include the name of communities, date of application, and date of expected action. 
(D)  Management Structure: Every application for a competitive franchise shall include a management/organizational chart showing the management structure of the applicant. A similar chart shall also be provided showing the relationship of the applicant to all general partners, parent corporations, subsidiaries, affiliates and all other subsidiaries of parent corporations, including a brief description of each entity's relationship to the applicant. 
(3370) 
16-3-4. - Legal Qualifications. 
(A)  Media Cross-Ownership: 
(1)  Section 613 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. §533(a), and applicable FCC rules prohibit certain forms of media cross-ownership. An applicant shall state whether it or an affiliate directly or indirectly owns, operates, controls or has an interest in any of the following, or whether the applicant holds or operates any company or business operating jointly with any of the following: 
(a)  A national broadcast television network (such as ABC, CBS or NBC, etc.). 
(b)  A television broadcast station whose predicted Grade B contour, computed in accordance with Section 73.684 of the FCC's rules, overlaps in whole or in part the City's service area, or an application for license to operate such a station. 
(c)  A telecommunications or telephone company whose service area includes any portion of the City's service area. 
(2)  If the response to any of subsection (1)(a)-(c), above, is affirmative, the applicant shall state the name of the applicant or affiliate, the nature and percentage of ownership or interest and the company that is owned or in which the interest is held. 
(B)  Franchise Violations: An applicant shall state whether it or any affiliate has been found in violation by a regulatory authority or franchising authority of any franchise ordinance or agreement, contract or regulation governing a cable system. If so, the applicant shall identify the judicial or administrative proceeding, giving the date, name of tribunal and result or disposition of that proceeding. 
(C)  Other Violations: An applicant shall state whether it has been found in violation by a regulatory authority of any other type (e.g., utility) of franchise, ordinance, agreement, permit, contract or regulation. If so, the applicant shall identify the judicial or administrative proceeding, giving the date, name of tribunal and result or disposition of that proceeding. 
(3370) 
16-3-5. - Financial Qualifications. 
(A)  Unless securities and exchange commission ("SEC") Forms 10K and 10Q are available on the electronic data-gathering, analysis, and retrieval system ("EDGAR") database, applicants with existing operations shall provide audited financial statements, including statements of income, balance sheets and cash flow statements, together with any notes necessary to the understanding of the financial statements for the last three fiscal years for the applicant and any parent corporation. 
(B)  Applicants that are new (start-up) entities shall provide pro forma projections for the next five fiscal years, if available, but at a minimum the next three fiscal years from the date of the application. 
(3370 3711) 
16-3-6. - Technical Qualifications, Planned Services and Operations. 
(A)  The application shall describe the applicant's planned initial and proposed cable services geographic area, including a map of all areas proposed to be served and proposed timetable for offering service to each area. The application shall additionally state whether the applicant proposes to provide cable services to the entire franchise area and, if so, a proposed timetable for meeting that goal. 
(B)  The applicant shall describe how its proposed service area will not result in denial of service to any group of potential residential cable customers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides. 
(C)  If the applicant has or asserts existing authority to access the public right-of-way in any of the initial or proposed service areas listed in subsection (A) above, the applicant shall state the basis for such authority or asserted authority and attach the relevant agreements or other documentation of such authority. 
(D)  The applicant shall describe with particularity its planned residential cable services, including basic cable services, other cable programming service tiers, and any additional pay-per-view, on-demand or digital services and the projected rates for each category or tier or service. 
(E)  The applicant shall describe with particularity its planned system technical design, upstream and downstream capacity and speed, provision for analog or digital services or packages, distribution of fiber, planned count of households per residential node, and any other information necessary to demonstrate that the applicant's technology will be deployed so as to be able to successfully offer cable services in the proposed locations. 
(F)  The applicant shall describe with particularity its planned non-residential cable services. 
(G)  The applicant shall describe its planned construction and extension or phase schedule, as applicable, including system extension plans or policy and describe the current status of the applicant's existing or proposed arrangements with area utilities, including pole attachments, vault, or conduit sharing agreements as applicable. 
(H)  The applicant shall describe its plan to ensure that the safety, functioning and appearance of property and convenience and safety of other persons not be adversely affected by installation or construction of the applicant's facilities, and that property owners are justly compensated for any damages caused by the installation, construction, operation or removal of the facilities. 
(I)  The applicant shall describe its plan to comply with the subscriber privacy protections set forth in 47 U.S.C. §551, and the privacy protections of the City's local cable customer service standards. 
(3370) 
16-3-7. - Affidavit of Applicant. 
    Each application shall be accompanied by an affidavit substantially in the form set forth below: 
This application is submitted by the undersigned, who has been duly authorized to make the representations within on behalf of the applicant and certifies the representations are true and correct. 
The applicant recognizes that all representations are binding on it, that all application commitments are enforceable, and that material misrepresentations or omissions, or failure to adhere to any such representation, may result in a denial of an application by the City. 
The applicant shall comply with all applicable local laws. 
Consent is hereby given to the City and its representatives to make inquiry into the legal, character, technical, financial and other qualifications of the applicant by contacting any persons or organizations named herein as references, or by any other appropriate means. 
Name of applicant's authorized representative: ___________ 
Affiant's signature: ___________ date: ___________ 
Official position: ___________ 
STATE OF COLORADO ) ) ss. COUNTY OF _______ )  
Subscribed and sworn to before me this day of _______, 20___, by ___________. 
WITNESS MY HAND AND OFFICIAL SEAL. 
My Commission expires: ___________. 
___________ 
NOTARY PUBLIC 
(3370) 
16-3-8. - Open Records/Confidentiality. 
    Unless otherwise provided by law, information submitted as part of an application is open to public inspection and subject to the Colorado Open Records Act. It is the applicant's responsibility to be familiar with the Colorado Open Records Act. An applicant may specifically identify any information it considers proprietary. In the event that the City receives a request from another party to disclose any information that the applicant has deemed proprietary, the City will tender to the applicant the defense of any request to compel disclosure. By submitting information that the applicant deems proprietary or otherwise exempt from disclosure, the applicant agrees to defend and hold harmless the City from any claim for disclosure, including, but not limited to, any expenses including out-of-pocket costs and attorneys' fees, as well as any judgment entered against the City for the attorneys' fees of the party requesting disclosure. 
(3370) 
16-3-9. - Application Fee. 
    An application fee in the amount of $2,000.00 shall accompany any franchise application to cover the reasonable cost of processing applications under this Chapter. 
(3370) 
16-3-10. - Review Process. 
(A)  Acceptance of Application: 
(1)  Within five business days of receipt of an application, the City shall review the application to ensure all requisite information is included in the application. 
(2)  If the application is not complete, the City will notify the applicant in writing, listing the requisite information that is required to complete the application and notifying the applicant that the time period for granting or denying the application set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.41(d) will not begin to run until such information is received. 
(3)  If the application is complete, the City will notify the applicant in writing that all requisite information has been received. 
(B)  Staff Review: The City staff shall review all completed applications based on the review criteria set forth herein. If, during the review of an application, staff reasonably requires additional information from the applicant, staff will promptly request the information from the applicant, in writing, along with a notification that the time period for granting or denying the application set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.41(d) will be tolled until such information is received by the City. After completing the review, staff shall provide an analysis of the application to the City Council. 
(C)  Franchise Negotiations: Within the time period set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.41(d), the City shall attempt to negotiate a cable franchise agreement with the applicant, and within that time period, schedule the application and any proposed franchise for public hearing as set forth in Section 16-3-11, W.M.C. 
(3370) 
16-3-11. - Public Hearing. 
    The City shall hold a public hearing before acting on the application, affording the public, the applicants and, the City a process substantially equivalent to that required by 47 U.S.C. §546(c)(2) governing renewal of cable franchises. 
(3370) 
16-3-12. - Review Criteria. 
    The City may deny an application if, based on the information provided in the application, at the public hearing and/or any terms of a proposed franchise agreement: 
(A)  The applicant does not have the financial, technical, or legal qualifications to provide cable service; 
(B)  The applicant will not provide adequate public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, facilities, or financial support; or 
(C)  The applicant's proposed terms do not comply with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, local customer service standards, or relevant existing contractual obligations of the City. 
(D)  The applicant's proposed service plan will result in denial of service to a group of potential residential cable customers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides. 
(3370) 
16-3-13. - Non-cfar franchise applications. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any competitive cable services franchise applicant may election to submit a cable franchise application to the City and/or engage in cable franchise negotiations without regard to the application of the FCC CFAR. Such election must be clearly stated in writing at the time the applicant files its application with the City. In such cases, the City will negotiate the terms of a competitive cable franchise without regard to 47 CFR § 76.41 and the other provisions of this Chapter. Agreement by any Applicant to negotiate a franchise without regard to 47 CFR §76.41 and the other provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed by the City to effect a waiver of any applicant's right to terminate its franchise negotiations with the City and to file a new franchise application that will be subject to the application of the FCC CFAR. 
    Non-CFAR applications shall include the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name; 
(2)  The names of the applicant's officers and directors; 
(3)  The applicant's business address; and 
(4)  The name and contact information of the applicant's contact. 
(3370) 
CHAPTER 5. - FRANCHISE FOR ELECTRICITY 

16-5-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this franchise, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this Section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this Section shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
    City shall mean the municipal corporation designated as the City of Westminster and shall include the territory as currently is or may in the future be included within the boundaries of the City of Westminster. 
    City Council shall mean the legislative body of the City. 
    City Manager shall mean the City Manager of the City of Westminster or his designee. 
    Company shall mean United Power, Inc., and its successors and assigns, but does not include its affiliates, subsidiaries or any other entity in which it has an ownership interest. 
    Electricity shall mean all electric energy and electric service provided to the City, including street lighting services. 
    Electric distribution facilities shall mean that portion of the company's electric system that delivers electric energy from the substation breakers or transformers on company's transmission lines to the point-of-delivery of the customer, including all devices connected to that system. 
    Facilities shall mean all devices of the company that are reasonably necessary to provide electricity into, within and through the City, including systems, substations, transmission and distribution structures, lines, street lighting fixtures, equipment, conduit, transformers, under ground lines, meters, wires, cables and poles. 
    Franchise shall mean the rights and obligations of the City and the company set forth in this franchise ordinance, as same may be amended from time to time, and includes those rights that are associated herewith under the laws of Colorado. 
    Public easements shall mean easements available for use by electric utilities, except for those privately owned by the company. 
    Public streets shall include, but is not limited to, streets, medians, boulevards, roads, lanes, alleys, viaducts, bridges and public right-of-way that are deeded, dedicated or otherwise available for use to the City. 
    PUC shall mean the public utilities commission of the State of Colorado or other authority succeeding to the regulatory powers of the public utilities commission. 
    Residents shall mean all persons, businesses, industry, governmental agencies, and any other entity whatsoever, located, in whole or in part, within the territorial boundaries of the City that are or may be served by the company hereunder. 
    Revenue shall mean those amounts of money that the company receives from the: 
(1)  Sale of electricity under authorized rates to residents as adjusted for refunds, the net write-off of uncollectible accounts, corrections or other regulatory adjustments, excluding revenues received from the City for street lighting service furnished to it. 
(2)  Use by others of its facilities located within the City. 
(2107) 
16-5-2. - Grant of Franchise. 
(A)  The City hereby grants to the company, for the period specified in and subject to the conditions, terms and provisions contained in this franchise, a non-exclusive right to furnish, sell and distribute electricity to the City and its residents. Subject to the conditions, terms and provisions contained in this franchise, the City also hereby grants to the company a non-exclusive right to acquire, construct, install, locate, maintain, operate and extend facilities into, within and through the City and a non-exclusive right to make use of the public streets and public easements as may be necessary to carry out the terms of this franchise. These rights shall extend to all areas annexed by the City from and after February 2, 1987, that are within the company's PUC certificated territory as the same may exist from time to time. 
(B)  This franchise does not grant to the company the right, privilege or authority to engage in the community antenna (or cable) television business, or any other business not related to the provision of electric utility sales and service, although nothing herein contained shall preclude the company from permitting those lawfully engaged in such business to utilize facilities for such purposes, so long as the written approval of the City is first obtained by any such business. 
(C)  The right to use and occupy said public streets and public easements for the purposes herein set forth is not, and shall not be deemed to be, an exclusive franchise, and the City reserves the right to itself to make or grant a similar use of public streets and public easements to any other person, firm, or corporation. 
(2107) 
16-5-3. - Street Lighting Service. 
    The rights granted in this franchise encompass the non-exclusive right, duty and franchise to provide street lighting service to the City, and the provisions of this franchise apply with full and equal force to the street lighting service provided by the company. 
(2107) 
16-5-4. - Term of Franchise. 
    The term of this franchise shall be for 20 years, beginning on January 1, 2007, and expiring on December 31, 2026. 
(2107 3322) 
16-5-5. - Franchise Fee. 
    As further consideration for the grant of this franchise, which provides for the use by the company of public streets and public easements, which are valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the City at great expense to its residents, and in recognition that the grant to the company of the use of those public streets and public easements is a valuable right without which the company would be required to invest substantial time and capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, the company shall pay to the City a franchise fee in the amount of three percent of the annual revenue, as defined in Section 16-5-1, W.M.C., of this franchise and from the revenues accruing to the company from the use by others of its facilities within the City. The franchise fee provided for herein shall constitute the exclusive monetary payment by the company to the City for the company's use and occupancy of public streets and public easements within the City, except as specifically provided in this franchise. 
(2107) 
16-5-6. - Payment Schedule. 
(A)  For the franchise fee owed on revenues accruing to the company after the effective date of this franchise from the sale of electricity, payment shall be made in monthly installments not more than 30 days following the close of the month for which payment is to be made. For the franchise fee owed on revenues accruing to the company from the use by others of its utility facilities, payment shall be made within 90 days after the close of the calendar year for which payment is being made. Initial and final payments shall be prorated for the portions of the months at the beginning and end of the term of this franchise. All payments shall be made to the City. 
(B)  In the event an error by the company results in an overpayment of the franchise fee to the City and said overpayment is in excess of $5,000.00, credit for the overpayment shall be spread over the same period the error was undiscovered. If the overpayment is $5,000.00 or less, credit shall be taken against the next payment. In the event an error by the company results in an underpayment of the franchise fee to the City, the company shall repay the difference between the underpayment and the correct payment. 
(C)  The City shall have reasonable access to the books and records of the company, as may be requested by the City from time to time, insofar as they reasonably relate to any matters covered by this franchise and to such reasonable and necessary reports containing or based on information readily obtainable from the company's books and records with respect to the electricity supplied under this franchise. 
(D)  No charges to the City by the company for any service or supply shall exceed the lowest charge for similar or identical service or supply provided by the company to any other similarly situated customer or consumer of the company. 
(2107) 
16-5-7. - Change in Franchise Fee and Other Franchise Terms. 
    Once during each calendar year of the franchise term, the City Council, upon giving 30 days' notice to the company of its intention to do so, may review and change the consideration paid by the company under this franchise; provided, however, the City Council may only change the consideration to be received by the City under the terms of this franchise to the equivalent of the consideration paid by the company to any City or town in the State of Colorado in which the company supplies electricity under franchise. 
    The company shall report to the city within 60 days of the execution of a subsequent franchise or of any change of franchise in another municipality that could have a significant financial impact on the consideration to be paid by the company to the City hereunder. 
    If the City Council decides the consideration shall be so changed, it shall provide for such change by ordinance; provided, however, that any changed franchise fee is then allowed to be surcharged by the company and, provided further, that the consideration is not higher than the highest consideration paid by the company to any municipality within the State of Colorado. For the purposes of this Section, consideration means the franchise fee as established in Section 16-5-5, W.M.C.; the undergrounding program established in Section 16-5-36, W.M.C.; and also includes any other provision that is of similar significant financial benefit to the City. 
(2107) 
16-5-8. - Franchise Fee in Lieu of Other Fees. 
    Payment of the franchise fee by the company is accepted by the City in lieu of any occupation tax, license tax or similar tax on the privilege of doing business in the City. Payment of the franchise fee does not exempt the company from payment of taxes that are uniform and generally applicable to other persons conducting business within the City, such as head, sales and use taxes. 
(2107) 
16-5-9. - Contract Obligation. 
    This franchise constitutes a valid and binding contract between the company and the City. In the event that the franchise fee specified in this franchise is declared illegal, unconstitutional or void for any reason by any court or other proper authority, the company shall be contractually bound to pay the City, on the same schedule as provided herein for the franchise fee, an aggregate amount equal to the amount that would have been paid as a franchise fee. In the alternative, the City shall have the right to impose on the company occupation and license fees and permit charges reasonably equivalent on an annual basis to said franchise fee. 
(2107) 
16-5-10. - Adequate Supply at Lowest Reasonable Costs. 
(A)  The company shall at all times take all reasonable and necessary steps to assure an adequate supply of electricity to the City and its residents at the lowest reasonable cost, consistent with long-term reliable supplies. Should electricity be made available to the company from whatever source, including any agency or instrumentality of the united states, at less total cost than the total cost that would be incurred by the company to supply such electricity from its own systems and under circumstances that will not adversely affect the company or its operations, the company agrees to attempt to purchase this lower-cost electricity and to pass on to its customers any savings resulting from the purchase. 
(B)  If the supply of electricity to the City or its residents should be interrupted, the company shall immediately take all necessary and reasonable actions to restore such supply at the soonest possible time. 
(C)  The company shall provide to the City a telephone number that is not available to the public whereby the City will be able to obtain status reports from the company on a 24-hour basis concerning interruptions of the supply of electricity in any portion of the City. 
(D)  The company shall install, repair, renovate and replace its facilities in a good and workmanlike manner. The company's facilities shall be of sufficient quality, redundancy and durability to provide adequate and efficient electric service to the City and its residents. 
(2107) 
16-5-11. - Obligations regarding company facilities. 
(A)  All work by the company shall be done: 
(1)  In a good workmanlike manner; 
(2)  In a timely and expeditious manner; 
(3)  In a manner that minimizes inconvenience to the public and individuals; 
(4)  In a cost-effective manner, which may include the use of qualified private contractors; and 
(5)  In accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations of the City. 
(B)  Company facilities shall not interfere with water facilities, sanitary or storm sewer facilities or other municipal or public use of public streets and public easements. Company facilities shall be installed and maintained so as to minimize interference with other property, trees and other improvements and natural features. 
(C)  The company shall promptly repair all damage caused by company activities or facilities. If such damage poses threat to health, safety or welfare of the public or individuals, the City may cause repairs to be made at the company's expense, unless the company makes such repairs promptly upon the City's request. 
(D)  All work is subject to inspection and approval by the City that said work has been performed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations of the City. The company shall promptly perform reasonable remedial action required by the City pursuant to said inspection. 
(E)  The installation, maintenance, renovation and replacement of any facilities in public streets and public easements by the company shall be subject to inspection and approval of location by the City. Such inspection and approval may include, but not be limited to, the following matters: location of facilities in public streets and public easements; cutting and trimming of trees and shrubs; and disturbance of pavements, sidewalks and surfaces of public streets and public easements. All company facilities shall be installed in public easements so as to cause a minimal amount of interference with such property. 
(F)  The company and all of its contractors shall comply with all applicable City regulations and ordinances. The company shall require its contractors working in public streets and public easements to hold the necessary contracting licenses required by the City. 
(G)  The company shall reimburse the City for the costs of upgrading the electrical system or facility of any City building or facility that uses electricity, where such upgrading is caused or occasioned solely by the company's decision to increase the voltage of delivered electrical energy. 
(2107) 
16-5-12. - Excavation and Construction. 
    The company shall be responsible for obtaining all applicable permits. All permits shall be obtained at least 24 hours prior to initiation of the work, except for emergency situations, in which case the company shall notify the City within 72 hours after the emergency that work has commenced. All public and private property whose use conforms to restrictions in public easements disturbed by company construction or excavation activities shall be restored by the company at its expense to substantially its former condition according to then existing City codes and specifications. 
(2107) 
16-5-13. - Relocation of Company Facilities. 
(A)  If at any time the City requests the company to relocate any facility installed or maintained in public streets or public easements, pursuant to this franchise or previous franchises, in order to permit the City: 
(1)  To make any public use of public streets or public easements; 
(2)  To construct any public improvement; 
(3)  To build any public project; or 
(4)  To pursue any municipal purpose in which the City has a financial or ownership interest, such relocation shall be made by the company at its expense. 
(B)  The company shall complete such relocations as soon as practicable from the date when the City makes its request. The company shall, in any event, be granted an extension of time of completion equivalent to any delay caused by conditions not under its control. The company shall proceed with due diligence at all times. As and when requested by the City, representatives of the City and the company shall meet to share information regarding anticipated City projects that will require relocation of company facilities. Such meetings shall be for the purpose of providing the City with the estimated time table within which the involved company facilities shall be relocated, including an anticipated start date (within a 30-day window), so as to facilitate coordination with the timetable to be established by the City for completion of the City project. 
(C)  Following relocation, all property shall be restored to substantially its former condition by the company at its expense in accordance with then existing City codes and specifications. 
(D)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to impose any obligation upon the City to make any payment for any relocation of the company's facilities. 
(E)  Relocated underground facilities shall be under ground. Relocated aboveground facilities shall be above ground, unless the City either agrees to pay the additional cost of moving similar facilities underground or requests that such additional cost be paid out of the available funds under Section 16-5-36, W.M.C. 
(2107) 
16-5-14. - Service to New Areas. 
    If, during the term of this franchise, the boundaries of the City are expanded within the company's certificated service area, as same may be expanded from time to time, the company shall extend service at the earliest practicable time to residents of the newly incorporated areas in accordance with the company's extension policy. Service to newly expanded areas shall be in accordance with the terms of this franchise, including payment of franchise fees. 
(2107) 
16-5-15. - City Not Required to Advance Funds. 
    Upon receipt of the City's authorization for billing and construction, the company shall extend its facilities to provide electric service for municipal uses within the City limits or for any major municipal facility outside the City limits, and within the company certificated service area, without requiring the City to advance funds prior to construction. 
(2107) 
16-5-16. - Technological Improvements. 
(A)  The company shall generally introduce and install, as soon as practicable, technological advances in its equipment and service within the City when such advances are technically and economically feasible and are safe and beneficial to the City and its residents. Upon request, the company shall review and promptly report advances that have occurred in the electric utility industry that have been incorporated into the company's operations in the City in the previous year or will be so incorporated in the six months following the City's request. 
(B)  The company shall report in advance to the City any plans to include technological advances relating to communications systems, such as fiber optics that may utilize electric facilities already in place for the transmission of communication signals, which facilities may be installed by the company for its use, the use of the City, or for use of others as the company may license. The city may use said facilities for its own use without cost, except such additional expense that may be incurred by the company as a result of the City's use. The City shall not use said facilities for commercial purposes, unless it reaches prior agreement with the company regarding consideration for the use of said facilities. In no event shall the City's use impair the company's ability to use its own facilities. Upon request of the City, the company will provide a detailed report for the use of such communications systems, subject to protecting confidential information. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to authorize the company to engage in communications activities for sale or lease, nor shall this franchise be construed as a franchise for said telecommunications activities within the City. 
(2107) 
16-5-17. - City Regulation. 
    The City expressly reserves, and the company expressly recognizes, the City's right and duty to adopt, from time to time, in addition to the provisions herein contained, such charter provisions, ordinances, rules and regulations as may by the City be deemed necessary in the exercise of its police power for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and their properties. The company shall comply with such applicable laws. Nothing herein contained, however, shall waive the company's right to challenge the validity of any such provision, ordinance, rule or regulation. In the event of any inconsistency between this franchise and any other ordinance, rule or regulation, this franchise shall control. 
(2107) 
16-5-18. - Compliance with City Requirements. 
(A)  The company shall use its best efforts to keep the City informed as to existing and planned system capacity, construction, maintenance and other activities of the company within the City. The City shall use its best efforts to keep the company informed as to existing and planned development, construction and other activities. Regular planning and coordination meetings will be held. Representatives of the company and the City shall meet annually to discuss annual and long-term planning for capital improvement projects contemplated by each. To the extent reasonable, the company and the City shall include within their capital improvement projects the plans of the other relating to same. The company shall submit reports of annual and long-term planning for capital improvement projects with descriptions of required street cuts, excavation, digging and related construction activities within 30 days after issuance of the report. Except for emergencies, the company shall coordinate all installations with the City's capital improvement programs. 
    Within 60 days after the City Council adopts the City budget for the following year, the City shall forward, in writing, a list of the improvement projects (including street widening projects, street overlay projects, bridge improvement projects, new street construction projects, drainage improvement projects, and park improvement projects) that are included in the adopted budget. Within 60 days of receipt of the City's list of improvement projects, the company shall make available information regarding each City project within the public streets and public easements that identifies and generally describes the existing and anticipated company facilities that are or may be within or cross through the project boundaries. Said information shall: (1) identify the size, type and general location of any existing company facility; (2) address the current condition of any existing company facility (e.g., capacity, integrity, expected service life, etc.); (3) identify any scheduled or anticipated upgrades, repairs or replacements of any existing company facility; (4) identify generally what activities will be required to be performed by the company in order to accommodate the city project and the necessary timeframe for completion of such activities; and (5) provide any other reasonable information that may be pertinent. Nothing herein contained shall limit or restrict the company's ability to upgrade, repair or replace any company facility that is or may be within or cross through the boundaries of any City project. 
(B)  The City and the company shall designate their respective officials to serve as their representative for coordination of this exchange of information and planning on any such project. 
(2107) 
16-5-19. - City Review of Construction and Design. 
    Except for emergencies, the company shall use its best efforts to advise the designated City representative at least 60 days prior to construction of any transmission lines, generating plant, building, substation or similar structure located within a public street or public easement within the City. Upon request, the company shall provide the plans for such facilities. In addition, the company shall assess and report on the impact of its proposed construction on the City environment. Such plans and reports may be reviewed by the City to ensure that, among other items, (1) aesthetic and good planning principles have been given due consideration, (2) adverse impact on the environment has been minimized, and (3) that all applicable laws, including building and zoning codes and air and water pollution regulations are complied with. Reasonable changes requested by the City shall be incorporated into the company's plans 
(2107) 
16-5-20. - Compliance with Puc Regulations. 
(A)  The electricity that the company distributes shall conform with the standards promulgated by the PUC in the rules regulating the service of electric utilities and with the tariff provisions of the company setting standards, as the same may be amended from time to time. The City shall have access to all records of the company monitoring compliance with such standards. 
(B)  Prior to final adoption by the City of this franchise, the company shall file with the PUC such amendments to its tariffs as may be necessary to make its tariff provisions compatible with the provisions of this ordinance, and shall report to the City any changes that have been made for this purpose. 
(2107) 
16-5-21. - Compliance With Air and Water Pollution Laws. 
    The company shall use its best efforts to take measures that will result in its facilities meeting the standards required by applicable federal and state air and water pollution laws. Upon the City's request, the company will provide the City with a status report of such measures. 
(2107) 
16-5-22. - Inspection. 
    The City shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times, and upon obtaining proper clearance for secured areas, any portion of the company's facilities used to serve the City and its residents. The City shall also have access to company records for the purpose of determining company compliance with this franchise. The company agrees to cooperate fully with the city in conducting the inspection and to correct any discrepancies in the records affecting the City's interest in a prompt and efficient manner. 
(2107) 
16-5-23. - Reports on Company Operations. 
(A)  The company shall submit reasonable and necessary reports containing or based on information from the company's books and records as the City may from time to time request with respect to the operations of the company under this franchise, provided that such information can be provided at reasonable cost. Such reports may be changed from time to time as may be mutually agreeable between the City and the company. Initially, the City requests the following reports: 
(1)  On an annual basis, a list of all real property and leasehold interests in real property owned by the company in the City, except public and other easements. 
(2)  On an annual basis, short-term (less than three years) and long-range (over three years) plans for all capital improvements, construction and excavation within the City or affecting service to the City and its residents. 
(3)  Upon the City's request, the company and the city shall meet to share information regarding excavations in public streets or public easements made by the company within the City. Information shared shall include: 
(a)  Exact locations of excavations; 
(b)  Date(s) excavations made; 
(c)  City of Westminster permit number; 
(d)  Contractor; and 
(e)  Purpose. 
(2107) 
16-5-24. - Copies of Tariffs, All Puc Filings. 
    Upon request by the City, the company shall file with the City all tariffs, rules, regulations and policies relating to service by the company to the City and its residents. Upon request, the company shall provide the City with a copy of filings it makes with the PUC affecting said service. In addition, the company will provide the City, at the City's request, copies of the company's most recent annual report, all advice letters and applications, together with supporting pre-filed testimony and exhibits filed with the PUC. 
(2107) 
16-5-25. - Detailed bills. 
    All bills sent to the City by the company shall include account numbers, address and items metered, and they shall specify the type of account for which charges are made, i.e., electric service, street lighting, traffic signal, general office, spot lighting, etc. The company shall provide the City annually with a complete listing of all the City's accounts. 
(2107) 
16-5-26. - City Use of Company Facilities. 
    The City shall be permitted, for the purpose of stringing wires, to make all reasonable use of all poles and overhead structures constructed by the company within the City, provided such use does not unreasonably interfere with the use of such systems for distribution or transmission of electricity or create an unreasonable hazard, and provided further there is space available. Except as provided herein, such use by the City shall be without cost. The company shall not be responsible for any modifications to the system or for payment of any costs necessitated by such use. The use by the City shall not include the transmission or distribution of electricity. Such use may include, by way of explanation, but not by way of limitation, the attachment of traffic control signs, fire alarm or police signal systems or the attachments of cables for transmitting television or radio signals, or for any other municipal use. 
(2107) 
16-5-27. - Underground Conduit. 
(A)  In addition to the rights given the City in Section 16-5-26, W.M.C., in the event the company installs new electrical conduit or opens a trench or replaces existing conduits, the company shall provide advance notice to the designated city representative to permit additional installation for the City of similar conduit and pull-wire. If the City wants additional similar conduit and pull-wire installed, it will so notify the company and in a timely manner provide similar conduit and pull-wire at its expense to the company, who will install it without further cost to the City, provided that such action by the City will not unreasonably interfere with the company's facilities or delay the accomplishment of the project. 
(B)  The City and the company shall cooperate to minimize installation costs of underground conduit and pull-wire and to minimize cutting the public streets and public easements. 
(2107) 
16-5-28. - Use of Company Right-of-Way Facilities. 
    The company will offer to grant to the City use of transmission right-of-way that it now, or in the future, owns or has an interest in within the City for the purposes set forth in and pursuant to the provisions of the Park and Open Space Act of 1984, provided that the company shall not be required to make such an offer in any circumstances where such offer would interfere with the company's use of the transmission right-of-way. If the Company's offer of use is accepted by the City, then any improvements deemed appropriate by the City and consistent with the purpose of the Park and Open Space Act of 1984 shall be made by the City at its expense. 
(2107) 
16-5-29. - Joint Use. 
(A)  The company shall permit use of company facilities provided: 
(1)  The joint use grantees are not in competition with the company; 
(2)  The joint use grantees obtain the permission of the City and pay to the City its appropriate fees, if any; 
(3)  Such joint use does not unreasonably interfere with the company's use of these facilities; 
(4)  Said use does not create a safety hazard; and 
(5)  That the company shall assume no liability nor shall it be put to any additional expense in connection therewith. 
(2107) 
16-5-30. - City Held Harmless. 
(A)  The company shall construct, maintain and operate its facilities in a manner that provides reasonable protection against injury or damage to persons or property; provided, however, said obligation of the company shall not increase or decrease its liability on third-party claims. 
(B)  The company shall save the City harmless and indemnify the City from and against all liability or damage and all claims or demands whatsoever in nature, and reimburse the City for all its reasonable expenses arising out of the operations of the company within the City and the securing of and the exercise by the company of the franchise rights granted in this ordinance, including any third-party claims, administrative hearings and litigation. None of the City expenses reimbursed by the company under this section shall be surcharged by the company. 
(C)  The indemnification hereby extended shall include delay damages, as that term is used in Section 24-91-103.5, et seq., C.R.S., awarded against the City in favor of contractors for damages incurred by contractors for delays experienced in the performance of public works contracts entered into with the City; provided, however, that said indemnification shall extend only to those delays in performance of public works contracts for which the company either agrees it is responsible or that were caused as the sole result of the acts or omissions of the company in the performance of its obligations under this franchise. Unless the company otherwise agrees in writing, in no event shall the company be required to indemnify the City for any delay damages awarded against the City, unless and until a final determination has been made by a court of competent jurisdiction that the delay damages suffered by a contractor were the sole result of the acts or omissions of the company acting on behalf of or within the City's control. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as an acknowledgement by the parties that the company, in exercising its rights and obligations under this franchise, is an entity controlled by, subject to the control of, or acting on behalf of the City for the purposes of Section 24-91-103.5., et seq., C.R.S. 
(D)  In the event the City institutes litigation against the company for a breach of this franchise or for an interpretation of the franchise, and the City is the prevailing party, the company shall reimburse the City for all costs related thereto, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
(E)  Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, the company shall not be obligated to indemnify, defend or hold the City harmless in any manner inconsistent with the doctrine of comparative negligence in Colorado. 
(2107) 
16-5-31. - Notice to Company. 
    The City will provide prompt written notice to the company of the pendency of any claim or action against the City arising out of the exercise by the company of its franchise rights. The company will be permitted, at its own expense, to appear and defend or to assist in defense of such claim. 
(2107) 
16-5-32. - Financial Responsibility. 
(A)  At the time of the execution of this franchise and from time to time at the City's request, not more frequently than annually, the company shall submit to the City Attorney, as a confidential document, proof of its ability to meet its obligations under this franchise, including its ability to indemnify the City as required by this Section. This proof may take the form of insurance coverage, adequate funding of self-insurance, or the provision of a bond. 
(B)  The company shall supply the City with a list of its insurance companies with the types of coverage, but not levels of, insurance. Said list shall be kept current by annual revisions as of January 1 during the term of the franchise. 
(C)  The City may require, from time to time, and the company agrees to provide, additional reasonable funding of the company's indemnification obligations as a self-insured, if company is acting as a self-insurer. 
(2107) 
16-5-33. - Payment of Expenses Incurred by City in Relation to Ordinance. 
(A)  At the City's option, the company shall pay in advance or reimburse the City for expenses incurred in publication of notices and ordinances and for photocopying of documents arising from the negotiation of the franchise. 
(B)  All City expenses reimbursed by the company under this Section shall not be surcharged by the company. 
(C)  Nothing contained in this section shall limit the company's indemnification obligation to the City under Section 16-5-30, W.M.C. 
(2107) 
16-5-34. - Breach of Contract. 
    In the event the company fails to fulfill a substantial obligation under this franchise, the City will have a breach of contract claim against the company, in addition to any other remedy provided by law. 
(2107) 
16-5-35. - Underground Electrical Distribution Lines in New Areas. 
    The company will place newly constructed electrical distribution lines underground to serve new developments in accordance with City ordinances and the company's tariffs. 
(2107) 
16-5-36. - Overhead Conversion at Expense of Company. 
(A)  As and when requested by the City, the company shall spend one and one-half percent of the preceding calendar year's electric revenues derived from customers located within the City to move the company's electric distribution lines located on public streets and public easements underground, provided that the undergrounding shall extend for a minimum distance of one block or 750 feet. 
(B)  Any unexpended portion of the one and one-half percent of electric revenue shall be carried over to succeeding years and, in addition, upon request by the City, the company shall anticipate amounts to be available for up to three years in advance. Any amounts advanced shall be credited against amounts to be expended in succeeding years, until such advance is eliminated. 
(C)  The City and the company shall consult and plan together regarding projects to be undertaken pursuant to this section. The company shall provide nonbinding "ballpark" cost estimates for planning purposes at no cost to the City. The final decision as to which projects are selected rests with the City, subject to the provisions of this Section. The specific scheduling of projects rests with the company, who shall make every reasonable effort to complete such projects within the time requested by the City. 
(D)  If the PUC authorizes a system-wide program or programs of undergrounding electric distribution facilities, the company will allocate to the program of undergrounding in the City such amount as is authorized by the PUC, but in no case less than one and one-half percent of annual electric revenues derived from customers located within the City. 
(E)  In no event shall any overhead conversion expense be charged against the one and one-half percent fund herein provided for, unless the project to be so funded has been approved by the City to be funded pursuant to this Section. 
(F)  No relocation expenses that the company is required to expend pursuant to Section 16-5-13, W.M.C., shall be charged to this allocation. 
(G)  In addition to the provisions of this Section, the City may require additional facilities to be moved underground at the City's expense. 
(H)  The establishment of this undergrounding program creates no vested right in the City to the undergrounding monies. Further, if such monies are not expended pursuant to the conditions hereof, the undergrounding monies are not convertible to cash or available for any other purposes. 
(2107 3322) 
16-5-37. - Review of Undergrounding Program. 
(A)  Representatives of both the City and the company shall meet periodically to review: 
(1)  The company's undergrounding program, including conversions, public projects and replacements that have been accomplished or are underway by the company, together with the company's plans for additional undergrounding; 
(2)  The status of technology in the field of electric undergrounding; 
(3)  Construction and operation and maintenance costs of underground lines versus overhead lines; and 
(4)  Public projects anticipated by the City. 
    Such meetings shall be held to achieve a continuing program for the orderly undergrounding of electric lines in the City. 
(2107) 
16-5-38. - Cooperation with Other Utilities. 
(A)  When undertaking a project of undergrounding, the City and the company shall work with other utilities or companies that have their lines overhead to have all lines undergrounded as part of the same project. When other utilities or companies are placing their lines underground, the company shall cooperate with these utilities and companies and undertake to underground company facilities as part of the same project where feasible; provided, however, the company shall not be required to pay the costs of any other utility or company. 
(B)  The company shall use its best efforts to coordinate its installation of new underground facilities with preexisting underground facilities of other companies. In each instance, each utility and company shall pay its own costs associated with the work performed by any such utility or company. 
(2107) 
16-5-39. - Consent of City to Transfer of Franchise. 
    The company shall not sell or transfer or assign any rights under this franchise to another, by stock exchange or otherwise, excepting only corporate reorganization of the company not involving a third party, unless the City shall approve in writing such sale, transfer or assignment. Approval of the sale, transfer, or assignment shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(2107) 
16-5-40. - Transfer Fee. 
(A)  In order that the City may share in the value this franchise adds to the company's operation, any such transfer or assignment of rights under this franchise by the company requiring the approval of the City shall be subject to the condition that the transferee shall promptly pay to the City the greater of $5,000.00 or the pro rata share of $1,000,000.00, which pro rata amount of $1,000,000.00 shall be calculated by multiplying $1,000,000.00 times a fraction of which the then population of the City within company's PUC certificated service territory is the numerator and the then population of the City and County of Denver is the denominator and then dividing that result by two. 
(B)  Such transfer fee shall not be recovered from the City or from the City residents or property owners through electric rates of consumers in the City or by surcharge by the transferee or the company. 
(2107) 
16-5-41. - Right of First Purchase. 
(A)  In the event the company at any time during the term of the franchise proposes to sell or dispose of any of its real property located within the City, it shall grant to the City the right of first purchase of same. The company shall obtain a qualified appraisal on any such property and the City shall have 60 days from the time such appraisal is provided to the City in which to exercise the right of first purchase by giving written notice to the company. Should the City not provide the required written notice, the company may proceed to negotiate with others for the sale of such property, provided that the company may not sell such property for an amount less than 95 percent of the appraised value without first providing the City an opportunity to purchase such property at such lesser price, in which event the City must notify the company in writing within 30 days if it wishes to purchase such property. 
(B)  Nothing in this paragraph shall preclude the company from transferring real property to a subsidiary or affiliate without first according the city the rights referred to above, provided that if the transferee proposes to sell or dispose of such property within one year, it shall not do so without first affording the City the rights referred to above. 
(2107) 
16-5-42. - City's Right to Purchase or Condemn. 
    The right of the City to construct, purchase or condemn any public utility works or ways and the rights of the company in connection therewith, as provided by the Colorado Constitution and statutes, are hereby expressly reserved. 
(2107) 
16-5-43. - Negotiated Purchase Price of Condemnation Award. 
(A)  Upon the exercise of the City's option to purchase, the parties shall negotiate in good faith to determine a mutually acceptable purchase price. No value shall be given to the franchise or to public rights-of-way. 
(B)  If the City and the company cannot reach agreement as to the purchase price or acceptable payment terms within 90 days after commencement of negotiations, the City may commence condemnation proceedings, and each party shall have the rights provided by law relating to condemnation; provided, however, no award shall be made for the value of the franchise or public rights-of-way. 
    Nothing herein contained shall limit the parties' right to assert that applicable law further limits or expands the factors that may be considered in determining the value of any public utility facilities that may be condemned by the City. 
(2107) 
16-5-44. - Continued Cooperation by Company. 
(A)  In the event the City exercises its option to purchase or condemn, the company agrees that it, at the City's request, will continue to supply any service it supplies under this ordinance for the duration of the term of this ordinance pursuant to terms and conditions negotiated for such continued operation. 
(B)  The company shall cooperate with the City by making available the existing pertinent company records to enable the city to evaluate the feasibility of acquisition by the City of company facilities. 
(C)  The company shall not be obligated to conduct studies or accrue data without reimbursement by the City, but will make such studies if reimbursed its costs for the same. 
(D)  The company shall take no action that could inhibit the City's ability to effectively or efficiently use the acquired systems. 
(E)  At the City's request, the company shall supply electric power for use by the City in the City-owned system. 
(2107) 
16-5-45. - Limitations of Company Removal of Facilities. 
(A)  In the event this franchise is not renewed at the expiration of its term, is forfeited, or the company terminates any service provided herein for any reason whatsoever, and the City has not purchased or condemned the system and has not provided for alternative electric service, the company shall not remove said system pending resolution of the disposition of the system. The company further agrees it will not withhold any temporary services necessary to protect the public and shall be entitled only to monetary compensation in no greater amount than to which it would have been entitled were such services provided during the term of this franchise. Only upon receipt of written notice from the City stating that the City has adequate alternative electricity sources to provide for the residents of the City shall the company be entitled to remove any or all of said systems in use under the terms of this franchise. 
(B)  Upon request from the City and within a reasonable time, the company, at its expense, shall remove from the public streets and public easements all overhead distribution facilities belonging to the company that are not otherwise purchased by the City at the termination of the franchise. Further, the company, at the request of the City, shall remove at the company's expense all underground electric distribution facilities that are not so purchased within a reasonable time after the receipt by the company of a written notice from the City that said underground distribution facilities constitute a hazardous condition or interfere with a public use of the subsurface of said public streets and public easements. All property affected by such removal shall be restored by the company to substantially its former condition after said removal. 
(C)  The company need not remove any property from said public streets and public easements, which property the company shall continue to use and maintain pursuant to contractual arrangements with the City. 
(2107) 
16-5-46. - Company to Purchase City-Produced Power. 
    The City expressly reserves the right to engage in the production of electricity. If requested by the City, the company agrees to purchase city-generated power pursuant to the company's tariffs and applicable PUC rules and regulations and pursuant to separate contracts negotiated with the City. Payment for generated power and energy actually purchased shall be guaranteed over the term of the purchase contract. 
(2107) 
16-5-47. - Curtailment. 
    The company shall not curtail contractual purchase of City-generated power and energy, except in emergency situations or as provided in the company's tariffs and PUC rules and regulations. 
(2107) 
16-5-48. - Forfeiture. 
(A)  Both the company and the City recognize there may be circumstances whereby compliance with the provisions of this franchise is impossible or is delayed because of circumstances beyond the company's control. In those instances, the company shall use its best efforts to comply in a timely manner and to the extent possible. 
(B)  If the company fails to perform any of the terms and conditions of this franchise and such failure is within the company's control, the City, acting by and through its City Council, may determine, after hearing that such failure is of a substantial nature. Upon receiving notice of such determination, the company shall have a reasonable time, not to exceed six months unless otherwise agreed in writing, in which to remedy the violations. If, during said reasonable time, corrective actions have not been successfully taken, the City, acting by and through its City Council, shall determine whether any or all rights and privileges granted the company under this franchise shall be forfeited. 
(2107) 
16-5-49. - Judicial Review. 
    Any such declaration of forfeiture shall be subject to judicial review as provided by law. 
(2107) 
16-5-50. - Other Legal Remedies. 
    Nothing herein contained shall limit or restrict any legal rights that the franchise. 
(2107) 
16-5-51. - Continued Obligations. 
    Upon forfeiture, the company shall continue to provide service to the City and its residents in accordance with the terms hereof until the City makes alternative arrangements for such service. If the company fails to provide continued service, it shall be liable for damages as provided by law to the City and its residents. 
(2107) 
16-5-52. - Amendments to Franchise. 
    At any time during the term of this franchise, the City, through its City Council, or the company may propose amendments to this franchise. Both parties thereafter, through their designated representatives, will negotiate within a reasonable time in good faith in an effort to agree on mutually satisfactory amendments. The word "amendment," as used in this section does not include a change authorized in Section 16-5-7, W.M.C. No amendment or amendments to this franchise shall be effective until mutually agreed upon by the City and the company and approved by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of the Westminster City Charter. 
(2107) 
16-5-53. - No Waiver. 
    Neither the City nor the company shall be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this franchise by any failure of the other, or any of its officers, employers, or agents, upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms and conditions. 
(2107) 
16-5-54. - Successors and Assigns. 
    The rights, privileges, franchises and obligations granted and contained in this franchise shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon United Power, Inc., its successors and assigns. 
(2107) 
16-5-55. - Representatives. 
(A)  Upon request by the City, the company shall provide annually to the City a current chain of command chart showing all managers and supervisors, along with their names, titles, and telephone numbers, up to the Chief Executive Officer of the company, who have responsibility for providing services within the City. 
(B)  Both parties shall designate from time to time in writing representatives for the company and the City who will be the persons to whom notices shall be sent regarding any action to be taken under this ordinance. Notice shall be in writing and forwarded by certified mail or hand delivery to the persons and addresses as hereinafter stated, unless the names and addresses are changed at the written request of either party, delivered in person or by certified mail. Until any such change shall hereinafter be made, notices shall be sent to the City Manager and to the company's Chief Executive Officer. Currently, as of the date of the commencement of this franchise, the names and addresses are as follows: 
For the city: For the Company: J. Brent McFall 
City Manager 
City of Westminster 
4800 W. 92nd Avenue 
Westminster, CO 80031 Robert Broderick 
Chief Executive Officer 
P.O. Box 929 
Brighton, CO 80601  
16-5-56. - Severability. 
    Should any one or more provisions of this franchise be determined to be illegal or unenforceable, all other provisions nevertheless shall remain effective; provided, however, the parties shall forthwith enter into good faith negotiations and proceed with due diligence to draft a term that will achieve the original intent of the parties hereunder. 
(2107) 
16-5-57. - Entire Agreement. 
    This franchise constitutes the entire agreement of the parties. There have been no representations made other than those contained in this franchise. 
(2107) 
16-5-58. - Company Approval. 
    The company shall file with the City Clerk its written approval of this franchise and of all of its terms and provisions at least ten days prior to the City Council meeting at which the ordinance granting the franchise is to be heard on second reading. The company shall file with the City Clerk its written ratification thereof within ten days after the approval of this franchise by the City Council on second reading of the ordinance. The acceptance and ratification shall be in form and content approved by the City Attorney. If the company shall fail to timely file its written acceptance or ratification as herein provided, this franchise shall be and become null and void. 
(2107) 
16-5-59. - Annexation to the City. 
    When any property owned by the company becomes eligible for voluntary annexation to the City and is not simultaneously eligible for voluntary annexation to another municipal corporation, the company shall petition to annex the same upon request made by the City, provided that no condition of such annexation shall impair the company's ownership or then existing use of its property and water or water rights for public utility purposes. Except as herein provided, the company agrees to meet all terms and conditions imposed upon the annexation by the City that are no more stringent than those imposed generally upon property owners seeking annexation of their land to the City. The company shall be exempted from a public donation of land, money or water rights arising from such mandatory annexation under this Section, to the extent that the land being annexed is committed, dedicated and being utilized by facilities directly involved in generating, transmitting or distributing electric energy services under this ordinance, and provided further that said exemption from public donation shall not extend to any unimproved land or land not so committed, dedicated and currently used. 
(2107) 
16-5-60. - Third Parties. 
    Nothing contained in this franchise shall be construed to provide rights to third parties. 
(2107) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 3805 10-26-2015 1 1-7-2 3806 11- 9-2015 1       Added tit. 2, ch. 14, §§ 2-14-1-2-14-6 3822  3-28-2016 1 13-1-3(Q) 3855 10-10-2016 1 1-7-2 3838  9-12-2016 1 2-4-1 2       Rpld 2-4-3(H)       Rnbd 2-4-3(I)-(N)       as 2-4-3(H)-(M) 3       Rpld 3-3-5-3-3-7       Rnbd 3-3-8       as 3-3-5 4       Rpld tit. XIII, ch. 1, §§ 13-1-1-13-1-9       Added tit. XIII, ch. 1, §§ 13-1-1-13-1-14 5       Rpld tit. XIII, ch. 2, §§ 13-2-1-13-2-11       Added tit. XIII, ch. 2, §§ 13-2-1-13-2-11 6 13-5-6 7       Rpld 13-5-11, 13-5-12 3848  9-26-2016 1       Added 5-14-4(A)(2)(m), (A)(2)(n) 2, 3 5-14-4(C), (H)(2)(c), (H)(2)(d)       Rpld 5-14-4(H)(2)(e) 4 5-14-8(D), (D)(1) 5 5-14-16(B)(1) 3849  9-26-2016 1       Added 8-7-27(E) 3850  9-26-2016 1 8-8-1 2       Added 8-8-5(F) 3851  9-26-2016 1, 2 8-7-3(A)(3), (A)(4), (D)(4) 3 8-8-5(B) 3858 10-24-2016 1 8-7-7(B)-(D) 2 8-8-5(D) 3 8-12-7(C), (D) 3867  1- 9-2017 1-5       Added tit. XI, ch. 15, §§ 11-15-1-11-15-14 3869  5- 8-2017 1-3       Added 11-4-8(B)(11), (C)(17), (G)(5) 4       Added 11-4-9(B)(6) 5 11-5-20(G) 3873  4-10-2017 1 11-3-2 2 11-3-5(B) 3       Added 11-3-5(N) 3882  5-30-2017 1       Added tit. I, ch. 34, §§ 1-34-1-1-34-11 3883  5-22-2017 1       Added tit. III, ch. 10, §§ 3-10-1-3-10-3 2       Added tit. III, ch. 11, §§ 3-11-1-3-1-3 3887  6-26-2017 1 1-7-2 3888  6-26-2017 1 2-1-1(C) 2 2-14-1 3889  6-26-2017 1 4-1-1 2 4-1-3(A)(2) 3 4-2-2 4 4-2-5 5 4-2-6(A)(2), (3), (10), (16), (18), (26), (28), (30), (31), (33), (35) 6, 7 4-2-9, 4-2-10 8 4-3-2 9 4-4-1 10 4-4-3(C) 3891  6-26-2017 1 9-2-1 2 9-2-7(A) 3 11-4-4(B) 4 11-4-5(B) 5       Rpld 11-4-11 6       Added tit. XI, ch. 16, §§ 11-16-1-11-16-8 3896  8-14-2017 1 14-1-1(D) 2 14-1-12 3897  8-14-2017 1 tit. 14, ch. 2(tit.) 1-13 14-2-1-14-2-13 3904 10-23-2017 1 1-7-2 3908 11-27-2017 1       Rpld Tit. 11, ch. 9, §§ 11-9-1-11-9-13       Added Tit. 11, ch. 9, §§ 11-9-1-11-9-14 2       Rpld Tit. 11, ch. 10, §§ 11-10-1- 
11-10-8       Added Tit. 11, ch. 10, §§ 11-10-1- 
11-10-11 3919  2-26-2018 1, 2 11-2-1(A) 3       Rpld Tit. XI, ch. 3, 
§§ 11-3-1-11-3-11       Added Tit. XI, ch. 3, 
§§ 11-3-1-11-3-6 4       Rpld 11-4-16 5 Tit. XI, 
ch. 5(tit.) 6 11-5-7(A) 7 11-5-8(A) 8 11-5-10(A) 9 11-5-13(A) 10 11-5-17(A) 11       Added 11-5-21 3922  2-26-2018 1 6-1-1 2 6-1-7 3 6-2-2 3923  2-26-2018 1 1-8-1(A) 3924  3-12-2018 2 8-7-1 3(1) 8-7-4(B) 3(2) 8-7-5 4 8-7-10 5 8-7-11 6 8-7-13(D) 7 8-7-26 8 8-7-27(D) 9 8-8-1 10 8-8-3 11 8-8-14 3926  3-26-2018 1 11-2-1 2 11-4-4(E) 3 11-4-9 3927  4- 9-2018 1 11-2-1(A) 3930  4-23-2018 1 Tit. XIII(tit.) 2 13-1-2 3 13-1-5(A) 4 13-1-5(B)(3) 5(1) 13-1-6 5(2)       Added 13-1-15, 
13-1-16 6       Rpld 13-5-6 3945  8-27-2018 1 15-1-1(B) 2 15-1-2(C)-(F) 3 15-1-4(A) 4 15-1-5 5 15-1-6(A) 6 15-1-7(A) 7 15-1-8 8 15-1-12 9 15-2-1 3950 10-10-2018 1 8-7-1 2 8-7-7 3 8-7-9(A) 4 8-7-11 5 8-7-23 6 8-8-1 7 8-8-5(D) 8 8-8-5(H) 9 8-8-12 10 8-12-1 11 8-12-7(C), (D) 12 8-12-8(A) 3951 10- 8-2018 1 8-7-1 2 8-7-3 3 8-7-4(C), (D) 4 8-7-5(A)(2), 
(C)(1), (2) 5 8-8-5(B)(4) 3954 10-22-2018 1 1-7-2 3970  2-25-2019 1 5-14-1-5-14-5, 5-14-7, 5-14-9, 5-14-11, 5-14-13, 5-14-15, 5-14-16 3975  3-25-2019 1       Added 8-4-2(A)(4) 3976  3-25-2019 1 6-14-3 3977  3-25-2019 1 6-13-2 3978  3-25-2019 1 6-6-4 3980  4-22-2019 1 8-7-24 3981  4- 8-2019 1 11-16-2 2 11-16-5 3 11-16-6 4 11-16-7 3982  4- 8-2019 1       Added 11-4-5(C) 3983  4- 8-2019 1 2-22(E) 3987  5-13-2019 1 7-1-8(F) 3992  6-24-2019 1       Added 3-12-1-3-12-3  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
C.R.S. 
Section Section  
this Code tit. 1, arts. 1-13 Char. § 3.1 7-1-2 tit. 1, art. 7.5 7-1-7 1-7.5-107.3 7-1-7 1-7.5-109 7-1-7 tit. 1, art. 45 7-1-13 tit. 12 3-1-10 tit. 12, art. 6 10-1-3 12-13-101 et seq. 11-12-3 tit. 12, art. 25.5 5-19-3 tit. 12, art. 35.5 5-15-2 5-15-10 12-43.3-101 et seq.       5-10-1 5-10-2 tit. 12, art. 46 5-14-2 5-14-3 5-17-13 tit. 12, art. 47 5-17-13 6-13-2 8-4-2 12-47-505 5-14-5 12-47-103(20) 5-16-8 12-47-601(3)(a) 5-14-7 12-47.1-509 6-13-4 tit. 12, art. 48 5-14-2 5-14-3 tit. 12, art. 48.5 5-15-3 tit. 12, art. 59 5-15-3 12-47-901(1)(a) 8-4-2 12-47-901(1)(f) and (g) 8-4-2 tit. 13, art. 22, pt. 2 11-15-4 tit. 13, art. 10 1-22-4 1-22-14 1-22-20 13-20-803.5 11-15-3 13-22-211(2) 11-15-4 13-22-212 11-15-4 14-10-113 14-1-7 14-2-7 16-11-309 8-4-2 16-13-301 8-4-2 16-13-301(2.2) 8-4-2 tit. 18 8-4-2 18-1-1001 6-1-7 18-2-101 8-4-2 18-3-402 8-4-2 18-3-404 8-4-2 18-3-405.3 8-4-2 18-3-405.5 8-4-2 18-3-405 8-4-2 18-3-414.5 6-17-1 6-17-2 18-4-410 8-4-2 18-4-501 8-4-2 18-6-403 8-4-2 18-6-802 6-14-4 18-6-803 6-14-4 18-7-201 8-4-2 18-7-202 8-4-2 18-7-203 8-4-2 18-7-204 8-4-2 18-7-206 8-4-2 18-7-302 8-4-2 18-7-401 8-4-2 18-7-402 8-4-2 18-7-403 8-4-2 18-7-404 8-4-2 18-7-405.5 8-4-2 18-7-405 8-4-2 tit. 18, art. 8, pt. 2 8-4-2 18-8-112 8-4-2 18-9-116.5 8-4-2 18-9-204 6-7-1 6-7-8 18-10-102(3) 8-4-2 18-10-102(5) 8-4-2 18-10-102(7) 8-4-2 18-10-102(8) 8-4-2 18-13-114 5-8-9 18-16-103 5-8-9 18-18-102 8-4-2 18-18-102(5) 6-12-1 18-18-102(6)(A) 6-12-1 18-18-402 8-4-2 18-18-403 8-4-2 18-18-404 8-4-2 18-18-405 8-4-2 18-18-406 8-4-2 18-18-411 8-4-2 18-18-412.5 8-4-2 18-18-412.7 8-4-2 18-18-420(3) 8-4-2 18-18-421 8-4-2 18-18-422 8-4-2 18-18-423 8-4-2 18-18-426 8-4-2 18-18-427 8-4-2 18-18-429 8-4-2 18-18-430 8-4-2 tit. 24, art. 6, pt. 4 6-13-2 tit. 24, art. 32, pt. 21       1-32-1 24-32-2103 1-32-2 24-32-2111 1-32-8 tit. 24, art. 68 11-5-18 24-68-102 11-5-18 24-68-103 11-5-18 24-68-103(1) 11-5-18 24-91-103.5 et seq.       16-5-30 25-3-101 4-2-2 25-3-102 4-2-2 25-7-115- 
25-7-118 8-6-12 tit. 25, art. 12 11-4-14 25-14-103.5 6-13-3 25-27-102 11-2-1 29-2-106.1(3) 4-1-27 tit. 29, art. 4, pt. 2 1-26-1 1-26-3 tit. 30, art. 15, pt. 4       10-1-1 tit. 31 11-3-2 tit. 31, art. 10 Char. § 3.1 7-1-2 tit. 31, art. 10, pt. 3       7-1-8 tit. 31, art. 10, pt. 15       7-1-12 tit. 31, art. 16, pts. 1, 2       10-1-1 tit. 31, art. 16, pt. 2       1-1-4 tit. 31, art. 35, pt. 4       8-9-1 31-12-101 et seq. 11-5-1 tit. 31, ch. 23 11-2-1 tit. 31, ch. 23, pt. 2 11-3-1 31-23-301 11-8-1 32-11-101 et seq. 8-11-3 tit. 33, art. 13 13-1-8 33-1-101 13-1-8 33-1-106 13-1-8 tit. 33, art. 4 6-2-12 tit. 35 6-7-13 tit. 35, art. 5.5 8-1-13 35-80-106.3 6-7-9 37-90-137(4) 11-6-8 tit. 38 1-32-8 tit. 38, art. 33.3 11-15-1 38-33.3-303.5 11-15-3 39-1-102 6-13-4 39-26-105.3 4-1-5 tit. 39, art. 27 4-2-6 42-1-102 10-1-1.5 13-1-2 42-1-102(17) 10-1-3 42-1-102(32) 10-1-3 42-1-102(57) 6-9-3 42-1-102(106)(a) 6-9-3 42-2-127 10-1-3 42-2-206 8-4-2 tit. 42, art. 3 10-1-1.5 10-1-13 42-3-102 10-2-4 42-3-204 10-1-3 42-3-204(1) 10-1-3 42-3-204(1)(b) 10-1-3 42-3-204(2) 10-1-3 43-3-219 10-1-13 42-4-104 10-1-1 42-4-110 10-1-3 42-4-111 10-1-3 42-4-235 10-1-11 42-4-235(1)(a) 10-1-3 42-4-306.5- 
42-4-316 8-6-9 42-4-1105 8-4-2 42-4-1413 8-4-2 42-4-1701(4)(a)(I)(K)       10-1-3 tit. 42, art. 4, pt. 21       10-1-3 42-4-2102(1)(d) 10-1-3 42-4-2108(2)(a.5) 10-1-3 tit. 42, art. 6, pt. 1 10-1-3 43-2-101 10-1-16 43-2-135(1)(g) 10-1-13 43-4-205(5.5)(a) 10-1-13 tit. 44, art. 3 5-14-2 tit. 44, arts 3-5 5-14-3 44-3-101 et seq. 5-14-1 44-3-103(20) 5-14-16 44-3-301 5-14-15 44-3-303 5-14-4 44-3-307 5-14-4 44-3-313(1)(d) 5-14-13 44-3-401 5-14-13 44-3-402 5-14-16 44-3-403 5-14-16 44-3-505 5-14-5 44-3-601(3)(a) 5-14-7 tit. 44, art. 4 5-14-2 44-4-107 5-14-5 tit. 44, art. 5 5-14-2  
