2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 1/138
Town of Brooklyn, CT
Monday, February 8, 2021
Adopting Ordinance
Chapter AO. Adopting Ordinance
ATTACHMENTS
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Municipal Code
Chapter 1. General Provisions
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE.
[New]
This book shall be known and may be cited as the "Code of the Town of Brooklyn, 2009," and is hereinreferred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS.
[New]
For the purpose of this Code and in the interpretation and application of all other ordinances heretoforeor hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require, the definitions contained in thissection shall apply:
BOARD OF SELECTMEN
Shall mean the executive authority of the Town of Brooklyn and the First Selectman shall be thechief executive and shall be an ex officio member without vote of all Town boards, commissionsand committees.
CLERK OR TOWN CLERK
Shall mean the Municipal Clerk of the Town of Brooklyn.
CONNECTICUT GENERAL STATUTES, GENERAL STATUTES, STATUTES OR C.G.S.
Shall refer to the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut (Revision of 1958).
COUNTY
Shall mean County of Windham.
DEPARTMENT
Shall mean an organizational unit of the Town government established or designated by ordinanceor this Code as a department, together with any agency or instrumentality of the Town governmentassigned to such organizational unit by the Board of Selectmen.
LEGISLATIVE BODY
Shall mean the Town Meeting of the Town of Brooklyn.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 2/138
LICENSED
Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or chapter of this Code.
MONTH
Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
MUNICIPALITY
Shall mean the Town of Brooklyn, County of Windham, State of Connecticut.
OATH
Shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath.In such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be construed to be equivalent to the words"affirm" and "affirmed."
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL
And the title of an officer or official shall be construed as if the words "of the Town of Brooklyn"followed it.
ORDINANCE
Shall mean any act of local legislation previously or hereafter adopted, and including this Code, solong as it shall have been adopted by the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance andso long as it shall remain in force and effect pursuant to law and all amendments thereto.
OWNER
Shall mean any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, ortenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of a building or land and shall include otherproperty or other personal property.
PERSON
Shall mean any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association, corporation or any otherlegal entity. Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this Code prescribing a penaltyor fine, as applied to partnerships or associations, corporation or any other legal entity the wordincludes officers, managers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible for any violations ofthis section.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING
Shall mean next before and next after, respectively.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC PLACES
Shall severally be construed to mean any and every public ground, public square, public parks,other public place or bodies of water within the Town.
SIDEWALK
Shall mean that portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line which hasbeen paved with concrete or other approved material and is intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE
Shall mean the State of Connecticut.
STREET
Shall include any public street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard, concourse,driveway, culvert, and crosswalk, and every class of road, square, place or municipal parking fieldused by the general public.
WEEK
Shall mean seven days.
YEAR
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 3/138
Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION.
[New]
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances previously or hereafter adopted, except as thecontext may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future, the present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The feminine gender includes the masculine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including thelast day, and if the last day be a Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
"Writing" and "written" includes printing, typewriting and any other mode of communication using paperor similar material which is in general use, as well as legible handwriting.
"And" may be construed as meaning "or," and "or" as "and," if the sense requires and indicates suchmeaning.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the prevailing and established time ineffect in the State of Connecticut during any day in any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall be deemed to refer to suchstatute, law or ordinance as amended, whether or not such designation is included in this citation.
§ 1-4. DIVISIONS OF THE CODE.
[New]
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the Code, identified by an Arabic numeral, anddivided by subject matter.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal number.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an alphabetical letter and/orArabic number.
§ 1-5. SEVERABILITY.
[New]
Each section of the Code and every part of a section shall be considered an independent section,subsection or paragraph. If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Code shall bedeclared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part, by a court of competentjurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or paragraph shall, to the extent that it is notunconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shallbe deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or paragraphs of this Code.
§ 1-6. CODE OF THE TOWN OF BROOKLYN TO BEMAINTAINED BY TOWN CLERK.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 4/138
[New]
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk or someone authorized and directed by the Town Clerk to keepup-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the "Code of the Town of Brooklyn, 2009" requiredto be filed in the Office of the Clerk for the use of the public. All changes in the Code and all ordinancesadopted by the Board of Selectmen and the legislative body subsequent to the adoption of the Code,which the Board of Selectmen and the legislative body shall adopt specifically as a part of the Code,shall, when finally adopted, be included herein by reference until such change or new ordinances areprinted as supplements to the Code, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-7. ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
[New]
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the "Code of the Town of Brooklyn, 2009", whenpassed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Selectmen and thelegislative body for them to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code, sothat reference to the "Code of the Town of Brooklyn, 2009" shall be understood and intended to includesuch additions and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Codeof the Town of Brooklyn shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-8. SALE OF CODE BOOK; SUPPLEMENTS PROVIDED.
[New]
Copies of the "Code of the Town of Brooklyn, 2009," may be purchased from the Town Clerk upon thepayment of a fee, to be set by the Board of Selectmen, which may also arrange for procedures for theperiodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH CODE PROVISIONS.
[New]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change, amend or alter this Code, without authorization asprovided by law, for the purpose of causing the law of the Town of Brooklyn to be misrepresented bysuch action.
Chapter 2. Administration
Article I. SELECTMEN
§ 2-1. BOARD OF SELECTMEN.
§ 2-1.1. Election.
Pursuant to Section 9-188 of the Connecticut General Statutes Revision of 1958, the Town of Brooklynshall elect three Selectmen who shall be designated as First Selectman and two other Selectmen.
§ 2-1.2. Powers and Duties.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 5/138
[1]
a.
b.
The Selectmen shall have powers and duties as provided in Section 7-12 of the Connecticut GeneralStatutes. (Revision of 1958)
Editor's Note: See Town Meeting Book 2, May 29, 1942, which states a motion was made andseconded that Selectman be empowered to enact an ordinance for the protection of life and property insaid town.
Article II. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE TOWN
§ 2-2. TOWN CLERK.
Pursuant to Section 7-16a et seq. of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut (Revision of1958), there shall be a Town Clerk, with powers and duties as provided in the Statutes.
§ 2-3. ASSESSOR.
§ 2-3.1. Appointment.
[Ord. 3/29/79 § 1]
Pursuant to Section 9-198 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut (Revision of 1958) asamended, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint an Assessor who shall serve for an indefinite termcommencing November 7, 1979.
§ 2-3.2. Powers and Duties.
[Ord. 3/29/78 § 2]
The Assessor shall have all the powers and duties conferred or imposed by the General Statutesof such office and shall devote his full time to the duties of his office.
The Assessor shall appoint and remove, subject to approval of the Board of Selectmen, anassistant and such other employees as may be required to assist him within the limits of theappropriation therefor.
§ 2-3.3. Compensation.
[Ord. 3/29/78 § 3]
The salary or compensation of the Assessor shall be fixed by the Board of Selectmen, subject toapproval by the Board of Finance and Annual Town Budget Meeting.
§ 2-3.4. Qualifications.
[Ord. 3/29/78 § 4]
The Assessor shall be chosen on the basis of his administrative ability, character, knowledge,education and experience and shall not serve on any regular Town Board or Commission or hold anyother elective or appointed office within the Town.
§ 2-3.5. Vacancy.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 6/138
[Ord. 3/29/78 § 5]
The Assessor shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Selectmen and may be removed by a majorityvote thereof. Upon the removal or resignation of the Assessor, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint areplacement.
§ 2-4. MUNICIPAL COLLECTOR OF TAXES AND REVENUE.
§ 2-4.1. Appointment.
[
Ord. No. 97-3
§ 1]
The Board of Selectmen of Brooklyn is hereby authorized and empowered to appoint a MunicipalCollector of Taxes and Revenue who shall have and exercise all rights, powers and duties as conferredupon a Municipal Collector of Taxes under Section 9-189 of the Connecticut General Statutes(Revision of 1958) as amended.
§ 2-4.2. Term, Qualifications and Method of Appointment.
[
Ord. No. 97-3
§ 2]
The appointment shall be for a period of five years pursuant to Public Act 244, effective July 1, 1997. Inselecting a Municipal Collector, the Board of Selectmen shall consider the knowledge, education, skillsand experience of all candidates. The appointed person having the minimum of an associates degreein accounting, business administration or a closely related financial field and four years of experiencein accounting, bookkeeping or related financial work. The person shall have the ability to usecomputers and other electronic equipment in financial record keeping, the ability to prepare andinterpret complex statistical and financial reports, the ability to supervise and train staff and work wellwith other Town departments, State, Federal Agencies and the general public. The Board of Selectmenis authorized to execute a contract with the appointee based on this section.
§ 2-4.3. Evaluation, Reappointment and Dismissal.
[
Ord. No. 97-3
§ 3]
The Board of Selectmen shall perform an evaluation of the Collector each year in the month of April.Such evaluation shall be based upon the effectiveness and abilities of the Collector as described in thejob qualifications.
Should the Board of Selectmen find in their evaluation that in their opinion the Collector is not fulfillingthe requirements of the position, they shall dismiss the Tax Collector pursuant to the ConnecticutGeneral Statutes as amended from time to time.
Reappointment of a Collector for a succeeding five year term shall be carried out after the evaluationand before the appointment expires. Failure of the Board of Selectmen to make a reappointment shallresult in the Tax Collector's renewal of a five year term.
§ 2-4.4. Salary.
[
Ord. No. 97-3
§ 4]
The salary shall be within the adopted compensation plan for Town of Brooklyn employees.
§ 2-5. TOWN TREASURER.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 7/138
[1]
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-185 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the position of TownTreasurer shall be appointed by the chief executive authority of the Town of Brooklyn commencing withthe term beginning January 7, 2014. The Town Treasurer shall be appointed for a two year term inNovember of each odd numbered year by the chief executive authority as elected at that year'sbiennial election. The term of the Treasurer shall be coterminous with that of the Board of Selectmen,however, the Treasurer may be removed during the term, with or without cause, by a majority vote ofthe Board of Selectmen. The Town Treasurer shall be the Chief Financial Officer of the Town and shallhave such additional duties as may be prescribed from time to time by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 2-6. BUILDING OFFICIAL.
Pursuant to Section 29-260 et seq. of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut (Revision of1958) there shall be a Building Official having the powers and duties as provided in the Statutes.
[1]
Editor's Note: See also Chapter
8
, Building and Housing, subsection
8-1.4
for the term andqualifications of the Building Official.
§ 2-7. CONSTABLES.
[Ord. 2/17/11]
Pursuant to the provision of Section 9-185 and 9-200 of the Connecticut General Statutes,Constables shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Brooklyn and the office ofselected Constables of the Town of Brooklyn shall cease upon the expiration of the term of thecurrent elected Constables.
The number of Constables, to a maximum of five to be appointed. Their qualifications, duties andterms of office shall be determined by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Brooklyn from timeto time. No more than three Constables shall be appointed from the same political party. Noappointment of a Constable shall be made for a term which will extend beyond the term of theOffice of the Board of Selectmen appointing such Constable, but anyone serving as a Constablemay be appointed for successive terms by succeeding Boards of Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Brooklyn shall have the right with or without cause toterminate the term of office of any Constable should they deem it in the best interest of the Townof Brooklyn.
All appointed Constables shall be electors of the Town of Brooklyn and the term of any Constableno longer an elector shall cease.
Nothing contained herein shall terminate the term of the existing elected Constables until theirexpiration on November 8, 2011 and nothing contained herein shall prohibit an elected Constablefrom becoming an appointed Constable should the Selectmen so appoint.
§ 2-8. through § 2-12. (RESERVED)
§ 2-13. JUSTICES OF THE PEACE.
§ 2-13.1. Findings.
[Ord. 4/16/64, Preamble]
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 8/138
[1]
Section 9-183 et seq. of the General Statutes of Connecticut (Revision of 1958) provides that thenumber of Justices of the Peace for each Town shall be equal to one-third the number of jurors towhich such Town is by law entitled, and by law, the Town of Brooklyn is entitled to 72 jurors. There isno need for the election of 24 Justices of the Peace in the Town of Brooklyn, and Section 9-183 of theGeneral Statutes (Revision of 1958) provides that the Town may, by ordinance, provide for the electionof a lesser number of Justices of the Peace for such Town.
§ 2-13.2. Number of Justices Established.
[Ord. 4/16/64 § 1; Ord. 7/16/12]
Until further action by the legislative authority of the Town of Brooklyn, the number of Justices of thePeace of the Town shall be, and the same is fixed at 15.
Article III. COMMISSIONS, COUNCILS ANDAUTHORITIES
§ 2-14. BROOKLYN CONSERVATION COMMISSION.
Editor's Note: Ord. 5/19/90 provided for the separation of the Brooklyn Conservation Commission fromthe Brooklyn Inland Wetlands Commission, which was created by Ord. 2/28/74. Ord. 5/19/90 reads, inpart, as follows:
All matters now pending before the Brooklyn Inland Wetlands Commission shall survive the passage ofthis Ordinance.
All acts, decrees, regulations, orders, permits, or other doings of the existing unified Commission shallcontinue in full force and effect unless and until they are modified, repealed, or superseded by decisionof the Commissions created by this Ordinance.
Such matters as pertain to the development, conservation, supervision and regulation of naturalresources shall be directed to the Brooklyn Conservation Commission as hereinafter created. Thebooks and records of the Brooklyn Inland Wetland Commission which pertain to each new commissionshall be turned over to the appropriate new commission at the time the members are sworn in.
§ 2-14.1. Creation.
[Ord. 5/19/90 § A]
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-131a of the General Statutes (Revision of 1958), there ishereby created a Brooklyn Conservation Commission for the purpose of developing, conserving,supervising and regulating all natural resources, including water resources, within the regulation ofthose activities described in Sections 22a-36 through 22a-45 of the General Statutes, whose regulationis elsewhere delegated to the Brooklyn Inland Wetlands Commission.
§ 2-14.2. Appointment, Number, Term.
[Ord. 5/18/90 § B;
Ord. No. 91-5
§ 1]
The Conservation Commission shall consist of seven members and three alternates, all of whom shallbe appointed by the Chief Executive Officer of the Town. Members shall be appointed for a full term ofthree years each. Alternate members shall, when seated, have all the powers and duties of a memberof the Commission. The Chief Executive Officer may remove any member or alternate for cause andmay fill any vacancy.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 9/138
[1]
§ 2-14.3. Powers and Duties.
[Ord. 5/19/90 § C]
The Conservation Commission shall conduct research to determine the optimum uses or combinationof uses of land within the Town. It shall coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized forsimilar purposes, and may advertise, prepare and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphletsas necessary for its purposes. It shall maintain an inventory of all undeveloped lands, publicly orprivately owned, including wetlands and watercourses, for the purpose of identifying uniqueecosystems, important or high value wildlife habitats and/or corridors, scenic areas worthy of specialconsideration. It shall assist the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Chief Executive Officer indeveloping and updating the Town plan of development and other plans which impact the use of suchareas. It may, with the approval of the legislative body, acquire land and easements in the name of theTown, and may promulgate rules and regulations, including but not limited to the establishment ofreasonable charges for the use of land or the use, granting or acceptance of easements, for any of itspurposes as set out in this section.
§ 2-14.4. Records and Reports.
[Ord. 5/19/90 § D]
The Conservation Commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall make anannual report to the Town in the manner required of other agencies of the respective municipalities.
§ 2-14.5. Gifts.
[Ord. 5/19/90 § E]
The Commission may receive gifts in the name of the Town for any of its purposes and shall administerthe same for such purposes subject to the terms of the gift.
§ 2-14.6. (Reserved)
[Ord. 7/16/12]
Editor's Note: Former subsection 2-14.6, Designation of the Brooklyn Conservation Commission as theTown's Aquifer Protection Agency was redesignated as subsection
2-16.6
, Designation of the Planningand Zoning Commission of the Town of Brooklyn as the Town's Aquifer Protection Agency.
§ 2-15. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.
§ 2-15.1. Members of the Commission.
[Ord. 10/19/67 § 1;
Ord. No. 02-11
;
Ord. No. 03-01
]
Pursuant to the provision of Section 7-136 of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended, there ishereby established in the Town of Brooklyn an Economic Development Commission. The Commissionshall consist of five members and two alternate members who shall be electors of the Town of Brooklynappointed by the First Selectman. Each appointment shall be for a term of four years. Members shallbe sworn and serve until their successors have been appointed and have qualified. Members may bereappointed and shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for theirnecessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. Vacancies created byresignation or inability to serve shall be filled by the First Selectman for the remainder of the unexpiredterm.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 10/138
a.
b.
§ 2-15.2. Organization and Duties.
[Ord. 10/19/67 § II]
The Commission shall elect from its members a chairman and such other officers as it shall deemnecessary. The Commission shall conduct research into the economic conditions and trends in theTown of Brooklyn, shall make recommendation to appropriate officials and agencies of the Town ofBrooklyn regarding action to improve its economic conditions and development, shall seek tocoordinate the activities and cooperate with unofficial bodies organized to promote such economicdevelopment and may advertise and may prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts andpamphlets which in its judgment will further its official purposes. The Commission shall annuallyprepare and transmit to the Legislative Body of the Town of Brooklyn a report of its activities and of itsrecommendation for improving such economic condition and development.
§ 2-16. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION OF THETOWN OF BROOKLYN.
§ 2-16.1. Established; Name.
[Ord. 12/10/65; Ord. 8/21/70 § I]
The Planning Commission established by vote of a Town Meeting on December 10, 1965, is herebydesignated The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Brooklyn.
§ 2-16.2. Members; Qualifications.
[Ord. 8/21/70 § II; Ord. 8/1/13]
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Brooklyn shall consist of eight members, whoshall be Electors of the Town holding no salaried municipal office with all the powers and dutiesspecified in Chapters 124 and 126 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, (Revision of 1958) asamended. The First Selectman of the Town of Brooklyn shall also be a member of said Commission,but without voting privileges. There shall also be three alternate members. No member or alternatemember of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 2-16.3. Appointment of Members.
[Ord. 8/21/70 § III; Ord. 8/1/13]
Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be chosen as follows:
Appointment to fill vacancies due to expiration of terms of members shall be made by theSelectmen during the month of December of each year and the appointments shall be arranged sothat the terms of not more than three members expire in any one year. Appointments shall be forthe term of four years from the January 1 next following. Any vacancies on the Commission due todeath, resignation, or expulsion shall be filled by vote of the members of the Commission for theunexpired portion of any such term.
Alternate members shall be appointed by the Selectmen for a term of four years. Any vacancieswhich may occur among the alternate members shall be filled by the Selectmen for the unexpiredportion of any such term. In filling such vacancies, the Selectmen and/or Commission must followthe minority representation rule as determined under Conn. Gen. Stat. Section 9-167a.
§ 2-16.4. Absence from Meetings.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 11/138
(a)
(b)
(c)
1.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
2.
a.
[Ord. 8/21/70 § IV]
Any regular member of the Commission who is absent without excuse from three consecutive regularmeetings and/or any intervening duly called special meetings may be expelled by majority vote ofthose Commission members attending any meeting warned for that purpose.
§ 2-16.5. Adoption of Bylaws.
[Ord. 8/21/70 § VII]
The Planning and Zoning Commission is authorized to adopt bylaws and such other procedures asmay to them seem necessary for the efficient management of their business. Copies of any suchbylaws and/or rules shall be filed with the Town Clerk before they shall be effective.
§ 2-16.6. Designation of the Planning and Zoning Commission ofthe Town of Brooklyn as the Town's Aquifer Protection Agency.
[Ord. 6/8/05 § 1; Ord. 7/16/12]
Section 22a-354o of the Connecticut General Statutes ("General Statutes") provides that eachmunicipality in which an aquifer protection area is located shall authorize by ordinance an existingboard or commission to act as an aquifer protection agency. It has been determined that it is in thebest interest of the Town of Brooklyn to designate the Brooklyn Planning and Zoning Commissionas the Town's Aquifer Protection Agency.
Designation and Membership.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 22a-354a, et seq. of the General Statutes,the Brooklyn Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby designated as the AquiferProtection Agency (hereinafter the "Agency") of the Town of Brooklyn. (The Town Plannerand/or Land Use Officer shall serve as the staff of the Agency.)
Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve coexisting terms on theAgency. The membership requirements of the Agency shall be the same as those of thePlanning and Zoning Commission including, but not limited to, the number of members,terms, method of selection and removal of members, and procedures for fillingvacancies.
At least one member of the Agency or staff of the Agency shall complete the course intechnical training formulated by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection of theState of Connecticut, pursuant to Section 22a-354v of the General Statutes.
Regulations to be Adopted.
The Agency shall adopt regulations in accordance with section 22a-354p of the GeneralStatutes and Section 22a-354i of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies(R.C.S.A.). These regulations shall provide for:
The manner in which boundaries of aquifer protection areas shall be established andamended or changed.
Procedures for the regulation of activity within the area.
The form for an application to conduct regulated activities within the area.
Notice and publication requirements.
Criteria and procedures for the review of applications.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 12/138
(6)
(a)
(b)
3.
a.
b.
Administration and enforcement.
Inventory of Land Use.
In order to carry out the purposes of the Aquifer Protection Program, the Agency willconduct an inventory of land use within the area to assess potential contaminationsources.
Not later than three months after approval by the Commissioner of the ConnecticutDepartment of Environmental Protection of Level B Mapping of Aquifers, the Agency willinventory land uses overlying the mapped zone of contribution and recharge areas ofsuch aquifers in accordance with guidelines established by the Commissioner pursuantto Section 22a-354f of the General Statutes. Such inventory shall be completed not morethan one year after authorization of the Agency (Section 22a-354e of the GeneralStatutes.)
§ 2-17. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
§ 2-17.1. Creation.
[Ord. 8/21/70 § V]
There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Appeals in and for the Town of Brooklyn with all the powersand duties set forth in the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, as amended,relating to zoning boards of appeals.
§ 2-17.2. Members; Qualification.
[Ord. 8/21/70 § VI]
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five regular members and three alternate members,each of whom must be an elector of the Town of Brooklyn and none of whom may be members oralternate members of the Planning and Zoning Commission, and any member of the Commissionwho shall become a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be deemed to have resignedfrom the Commission.
Regular members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmenas follows:
As the term of each regular member ends, his successor shall be appointed for a term of fiveyears. Alternate members shall be appointed for terms of five years. Regular members andalternate members may be reappointed. Any vacancy occurring among regular members oralternate members due to death or resignation shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen for theunexpired portion of such member's term.
§ 2-17.3. Bylaws Adopted.
[Ord. 8/21/70 § VII]
The Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized to adopt bylaws and such other procedures as may to themseem necessary for the efficient management of their business. Copies of any such bylaws and/orrules shall be filed with the Town Clerk before they shall be effective.
§ 2-18. BROOKLYN INLAND WETLANDS COMMISSION.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 13/138
[1]
Editor's Note: The Brooklyn Inland Wetlands Commission was originally established by Ord. 2/28/74,and subsequently Ord. 5/19/90 created as separate Commissions, the Inland Wetlands Commissionand the Conservation Commission. Ord. 5/19/90 reads in part, as follows:
All matters now pending before the Brooklyn Inland Wetlands Commission shall survive the passage ofthis Ordinance.
All acts, decrees, regulations, orders, permits, or other doings of the existing unified Commission shallcontinue in full force and effect unless and until they are modified, repealed, or superseded by decisionof the Commissions created by this Ordinance.
Such matters as pertain to the regulation and protection of inland wetlands shall be directed to theBrooklyn Inland Wetlands Commission as hereinafter created. Such matters as pertain to thedevelopment, conservation, supervision and regulation of natural resources shall be directed to theBrooklyn Conservation Commission as hereinafter created. The books and records of the BrooklynInland Wetlands Commission which pertain to each new commission shall be turned over to theappropriate new commission at the time the members are sworn in.
§ 2-18.1. Creation; Purpose.
[Ord. 5/19/90 § II A]
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 22a-42 of the General Statutes, there is hereby created aBrooklyn Inland Wetlands Commission for the purpose of regulating all activities affecting the wetlandsand watercourses within the Town.
§ 2-18.2. Appointments; Number of Members; Alternates.
[Ord. 5/19/90 § II B]
The Brooklyn Inland Wetlands Commission shall consist of seven members and three alternates.Members shall be appointed for a term of three years. The Board of Selectmen shall make suchappointments. Alternates shall serve (as designated by the Commission Chairman) when a member ofthe Commission is absent or disqualified, and shall, when seated, have all the powers and duties of amember of the Commission. The Chief Executive Officer may fill any vacancy.
§ 2-18.3. Removal of Commission Member.
[Ord. 5/19/90 § II C]
The Board of Selectmen may remove a Commission member for cause after public hearing, whichcause shall include, but not be limited to, unjustified absenteeism.
§ 2-18.4. Member Having Personal or Financial InterestDisqualified.
[Ord. 5/19/90 § II D]
No member of this Commission shall participate in the hearing or decision of such Commission uponany matter in which he is directly or indirectly interested in a personal or financial sense.
§ 2-18.5. Adoption of Rules and Regulations.
[Ord. 5/19/90 § II E., F., G.]
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 14/138
a.
b.
c.
a.
b.
c.
d.
The Commission may develop and adopt such rules and regulations as are legally allowed and asit deems fit to govern its operations and to effectuate the purposes of Sections 22a-26 through22a-45, inclusive, of the General Statutes, and may administer such regulations in conformity withState law and regulation.
The Commission shall hold public hearings prior to the adoption of regulations and prior to anyamendments thereto. Notice of the time and place of such hearings shall be published in anewspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town not more than 15 and not less than fivedays prior to the date of such hearing, and a copy of the proposed regulations, or of proposedamendments, shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk not less than 35 days prior to the date ofsuch hearing. The regulations, or any amendments, shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk,and notice of the adoption of the regulations or any amendments shall have been published in anewspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town.
Not less than 35 days prior to any public hearing, a copy of the regulations, or any amendmentsthereto, shall be referred to the Brooklyn Planning and Zoning Commission, and the ConnecticutDepartment of Environmental Protection for review and comment.
§ 2-19. AGRICULTURE COMMISSION.
§ 2-19.1. Established.
[Ord. 12/30/09]
Adopted by Ordinance of 12/30/09.
§ 2-19.2. Charges/Duties.
[Ord. 12/30/09]
The Agriculture Commission shall be an advisory board with the following charges and duties:
Information. To serve as a conduit between nonprofit agencies, civic organizations, municipalboards and commissions, elected officials, and local farmers. To serve as an agriculturalclearinghouse by creating an informational website and map of local farms. To chart land use inBrooklyn to support a balance between agriculture, preservation and other land uses.
Education. To recommend changes to language and practices across Town departments andother boards and commissions regarding a local definition for agriculture, farming and farms. Toeducate Town government about agricultural laws and legal issues regarding farm machinery,buildings and operations. To provide information and guidance on agriculture-related issues—suchas zoning, inland wetland, public works and others—to Town departments and other boards andcommissions as necessary. To act as a sounding board/provide review to Town departments,boards and commissions concerning the impact of proposed Town policies on farms. To supportyoung farmers and new farmers. To support local, regional and State vocational agriculturaleducation programs.
Conflict Resolution. To serve as a resource for information and nonbinding advice for residents,established Town committees and departments concerning the resolution of agriculture relatedconflicts.
Economic Opportunities. To identify innovative opportunities for farming additional lands inBrooklyn. To promote opportunities for residents and local businesses to support and valuefarming. To serve as a conduit between nonprofit agencies, funders, and local farmers. To work tocreate a climate that supports the economic viability of farming as a career in Brooklyn. To create
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 15/138
a sustainable agriculture community. To secure the land base necessary for future agricultureuses.
§ 2-19.3. Elected/Appointed.
[Ord. 12/30/09]
The Agricultural Commission shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 2-19.4. Membership.
[Ord. 12/30/09]
The Agricultural Commission will consist of five members and three alternates. Members andalternates will be appointed by the Board of Selectmen in accordance to Connecticut General Statutesand Town Charter. Insofar as practical, members appointed shall be representative of all groupsinterested in the management, protection and regulation of agriculture as defined by ConnecticutGeneral Statutes 1-1q, particularly those directly involved in agriculture. The failure of a voting memberto attend four consecutive meetings of the Commission shall constitute cause for the Board ofSelectmen to remove the member and fill the position thus vacated. The annual organizational meetingfor the Agricultural Commission shall be held on the first regular meeting in January of each year. Achairman, vice chairman and a secretary will be elected and will serve for a term of one year.
§ 2-19.5. Length of Term.
[Ord. 12/30/09]
Staggered 3-year terms, with initial appointments to be three members for three years and twomembers for two years; one alternate to be for three years and two alternates for two years. Membersof the Commission shall serve without pay.
§ 2-20. RECREATION AND PARK COMMISSION.
§ 2-20.1. Members of the Commission.
[Ord. 12/28/66 § I; Ord. 5/6/80 § I; Ord. 3/4/92; New; Ord. 11/10/11]
There is hereby established in the Town of Brooklyn a Recreation and Park Commission. TheCommission shall consist of nine members as follows: a member of the Board of Finance to beappointed by said Board to serve for the term of one year; a member of the Board of Education to beappointed by said Board to serve for the term of one year such terms to commence on February 1 ofeach year and provided that any vacancy occurring shall be filled by the respective Boards for theunexpired portion of the term. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint the remaining seven members ofthe Commission who shall be electors of the Town of Brooklyn. Such appointments shall be for a termof four years each. No more than four of the members of the Commission appointed by the Board ofSelectmen shall be of the same political party. Such members shall be sworn and serve until theirsuccessors have been appointed and have qualified, may be reappointed and shall receive nocompensation for their services. The existing members of the commission shall each continue to servethe remainder of their respective terms.
§ 2-20.2. Organization and Duties.
[Ord. 12/28/66 § II; Ord. 11/10/11]
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 16/138
The Commission shall elect from its membership a Chairman and such other officers as it shall deemnecessary. It shall oversee the preparation and implementation of recreation programs for the Town. Itshall study, plan and make recommendations to the electors for the development of recreational andpark facilities for the Town. It shall provide regulations for the use of such facilities.
§ 2-20.3. Appointment of the Director of Recreation and Parks.
[Ord. 11/10/11]
The First Selectman, upon the recommendation of the Commission, shall appoint a Director of Parksand Recreation. The Director shall, in consultation with the Commission, develop recreation programsfor the benefit of the Town. The Director shall manage the recreation programs and oversee themaintenance of all public playgrounds, recreation fields and facilities and the equipment associatedtherewith, in accordance with the goals and general policies set by the Commission. Upon the approvalof the First Selectman, the Director may hire additional personnel as may be necessary to assist withsuch programs and maintenance. The Director will be under the direct supervision of the FirstSelectman.
§ 2-20.4. Financing.
[Ord. 12/28/66 § III; Ord. 11/10/11]
The Commission shall be a budgeted agency and shall submit its account and budget annually to theBoard of Finance. The Commission shall submit an annual report to the Town which shall become apart of the annual report of the Town of Brooklyn.
§ 2-20.5. Gifts.
[Ord. 12/28/66 § IV; Ord. 11/10/11]
Real and personal property which has been or shall be granted, bequeathed, devised or conveyed tothe Town of Brooklyn for the purposes of recreation and improvement to or ornamentation of its parksor for the establishment or maintenance thereon of objects of interest may be accepted by the Townupon such trusts and conditions as may be prescribed by the grantors or devisers thereof. All propertyso devised, granted, bequeathed or conveyed and the rents, issued, proceeds and income therefromshall be subject to the exclusive management, direction and control of the Commission and shall beexempt from taxation.
§ 2-21. BROOKLYN RESOURCE RECOVERY COMMISSION.
§ 2-21.1. Creation; Title of Authority.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
The Brooklyn Resource Recovery previously established by an ordinance dated November 25, 1986 ishereby abolished. In its place, under the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-273aa, as amended fromtime to time, a new Brooklyn Resource Recovery Commission is created. The name shall be theBrooklyn Resource Recovery Commission.
§ 2-21.2. Purpose.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
The purpose of the Brooklyn Resource Recovery Commission is to oversee the solid waste disposaland resource recovery area(s) of the Town, including but not limited to any plants, works, systems,
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 17/138
facilities, or components of facilities, equipment, machinery or other elements of a facility, or recyclingfacility(ies) which the Commission is authorized to plan, design, finance, construct, manage, operate ormaintain under the provisions of Chapter 103b of the Connecticut General Statutes, including realestate and improvements thereto and the extension or provision of utilities and other appurtenantfacilities deemed necessary by the Commission for the operation of a project or portion of a project,including all property rights, easements and interests required.
§ 2-21.3. Organization.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
The Brooklyn Resource Recovery Commission is designated as the municipal resource recoveryauthority.
It shall oversee the operation of the solid waste disposal and resource recovery area(s) of the Town,and it shall provide regulations for the oversight of such operation.
§ 2-21.4. Members.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
The Commission shall consist of five members and two alternate members who shall be electors of theTown of Brooklyn and who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for a five year term.
Such members shall be sworn and serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for necessaryexpense incurred in conducting Commission business services. Not more than 1/2 of the terms of themembers shall expire within any one year.
§ 2-21.5. Financing.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
The Commission shall submit its account and requested budget annually to the Board of Selectmen,which budget will be part of the general government budget subject to the appropriation process for theannual Town budget. The Commission shall submit an annual report to the Town which shall become apart of the annual report of the Town of Brooklyn.
§ 2-22. WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY.
§ 2-22.1. Title Established.
[Ord. 5/6/80 § 1]
The Sewer Authority of the Town of Brooklyn shall hereinafter by known and designated as the WaterPollution Control Authority of the Town of Brooklyn.
§ 2-22.2. Administrative Assistant Designated to CollectSewerage System Charges.
[Ord. 4/30/81 § I]
Pursuant to Section 7-258 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Administrative Assistant of theWater Pollution Control Authority is designated the Collector of Sewerage System Connection and UseCharges and as such Collector shall collect such charges in accordance with the provisions of theGeneral Statutes for the collection of property taxes.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 18/138
§ 2-22.3. Powers and Purposes.
[Ord. 6/29/71 § II]
The Authority shall conform to and have such powers, purposes and objectives as set forth in Chapter103 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, and amendments thereto.
§ 2-22.4. Members; Term.
[Ord. 6/29/71 § III]
The Authority shall consist of five Commissioners to be appointed by the Selectmen. All members shallbe appointed to serve for five years. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term bythe Selectmen.
§ 2-22.5. Election of Chairman and Secretary.
[Ord. 6/29/71 § IV]
The Authority shall elect from its membership a Chairman and Secretary, shall appoint legal counseland other necessary personnel.
§ 2-22.6. Compensation.
[Ord. 6/29/71 § V]
The Commissioners of the Authority shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed fornecessary expenses.
§ 2-22.7. Vote of Commissioners.
[Ord. 6/29/71 § VI]
The presence of three Commissioners will constitute a quorum to conduct business and no action ofsuch Authority shall be valid unless authorized by a vote of the majority of its Commissioners.
§ 2-22.8. Financial Records.
[Ord. 6/29/71 § VII]
The Authority shall maintain accurate accounting and financial records and shall make an annualreport to the Selectman.
§ 2-22.9. Procedure for Removal of a Commissioner.
[Ord. 6/29/71 § VIII]
A Commissioner of the Authority may be removed for inefficiency or neglect of duty or misconduct inoffice by the Selectmen after hearing conforming to recognized standard of due process of law; aCommissioner shall be removed only after opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel before theSelectmen at least 10 days prior to which he shall have been given a copy of the charges against him.In the event of removal of any Commissioner, a record of the proceedings, together with the chargesand findings thereon, shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Brooklyn.
§ 2-23. (RESERVED)
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 19/138
a.
§ 2-24. BROOKLYN GOLF AUTHORITY.
§ 2-24.1. Established.
[
Ord. No. 04-1
§ 1]
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 7-130a through 7-130w of the Connecticut General Statutes,there shall be a Golf Authority within and for the Town of Brooklyn to be known as the "Brooklyn GolfAuthority."
§ 2-24.2. Office Established.
[
Ord. No. 04-1
§ 2]
The principal office of the Authority shall be: Town Hall, 5 Wolf Den Road, Brooklyn as the Authoritycreated hereunder shall later designate.
§ 2-24.3. Purpose.
[
Ord. No. 04-1
§ 3]
The purpose of the Authority will be to develop, manage and make available for public use a public golfcourse within and for the Town, together with parking facilities and including all buildings, structuresand other facilities for the public convenience which it deems necessary or desirable.
§ 2-24.4. Powers.
[
Ord. No. 04-1
§ 4]
The Authority shall have the power to purchase real or personal property in fee simple, or to lease orotherwise acquire such rights, easements, or interests in real or personal property which the Authoritymay deem necessary or desirable for the fulfillment of its purposes, including those powers defined inSection 7-130d, Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 2-24.5. Members.
[
Ord. No. 04-1
§ 5]
The Authority shall exercise its powers through a Commission consisting of nine members.
At the annual budget meeting of the Town of Brooklyn preceding the end of each term, theirsuccessors shall be chosen for a three-year term by the voters thereupon convened. The Board ofSelectmen shall nominate three candidates for the Commission at each annual budget meeting,provided, however, that additional names may be placed in nomination at the budget meeting andvoted upon, with those three persons who receive the highest number of votes to be designatedCommission members. All members of the Commission shall be electors of the Town of Brooklyn, andthe provisions of Section 9-167a, Connecticut General Statutes, shall apply.
§ 2-24.6. Alternate Members.
[
Ord. No. 04-02
§§ 1,2;
Ord. No. 07-02
§ 1]
Three alternate members shall be appointed to the Brooklyn Golf Authority. Additional names maybe placed in nomination at the budget meeting and voted upon, with those three persons whoreceive the highest numbers of votes to be designated alternate Authority members. All alternate
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 20/138
b.
c.
members of the Authority shall be electors of the Town of Brooklyn and the provisions of Section9-167a of the Connecticut General Statutes shall apply. At the annual budget meeting of the Townof Brooklyn preceding the end of each term, their successor(s) shall be chosen for a three yearterm by the voters thereupon convened.
In the event of a vacancy on the Authority or regular Authority members are absent from ameeting, the Chairman of the Authority shall appoint an alternate or alternates to serve at saidmeeting.
The Golf Authority may appoint an alternate member of the Authority to the vacant term of anyregular member to serve the balance of that term. The majority vote of the Commission is requiredto take this action as set forth in Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-130c.
§ 2-24.7. Selection of Chairman.
[
Ord. No. 04-01
§ 8]
The initial members of the Commission shall select from their number a Chairman, and shall selectfrom among or outside their number a Secretary and Treasurer, or a combined Secretary/Treasurer.
§ 2-24.8. Quorum.
[
Ord. No. 04-1
§ 7]
A majority of the nine Commission members shall constitute a quorum and the vote of a majority ofsuch members shall be necessary for any action taken by the Commission.
§ 2-24.9. Compensation.
[
Ord. No. 04-01
§ 8]
Commission members shall service without compensation, except that the Authority may reimbursethe members for actual expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
§ 2-24.10. Issuance of Bonds.
[
Ord. No. 04-1
§ 9]
The Authority may issue bonds as authorized by Section 7-130g, Connecticut General Statutes. Suchbonds shall not constitute an obligation of the Town of Brooklyn unless so authorized by the voters ofthis Town at a subsequent Town meeting duly called and held for that purpose.
§ 2-25. REGIONAL COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS.
§ 2-25.1. Findings.
[Ord. 3/26/87 Preamble]
A Joint Committee of the Northeastern Connecticut Regional Planning Agency and the NortheasternConnecticut Town Administrators' Association has found that a strengthened Regional PlanningOrganization is needed to assist the 10 towns in the Northeastern Connecticut Planning Region indealing effectively with regional issues; and, the Joint Committee of the Northeastern ConnecticutRegional Planning Agency and the Northeastern Connecticut Town Administrators' Association hasfound that a Regional Council of Governments will provide the most effective organization for:
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 21/138
a.
b.
c.
Addressing pressing regional issues resulting from increased growth and development;
Functioning as an advocate of its member Towns on matters relating to the State and FederalGovernments; and
Coordinating the delivery of shared services to its member Towns.
The Northeastern Connecticut Regional Planning Agency and the Northeastern Connecticut TownAdministrators' Association have recommended that a Regional Council of Governments be formedand that regional planning should be given equal importance with implementation by assuring thatequal status is given to the Council's Regional Planning Commission in the preparation of the Councilof Government's Annual Work Program and Budget.
§ 2-25.2. Formation of Regional Council.
[Ord. 3/26/87 § 1]
The Town of Brooklyn does hereby adopt Sections 4-124i through 4-124p of the Connecticut GeneralStatutes as amended, providing for the formation of a Regional Council of Governments, and doeshereby join such Regional Council of Governments when and as such Council is duly established inaccordance with the Statutes, upon the adoption of the Statutes by not less than 60% of allmunicipalities within the Northeastern Connecticut Planning Region as defined by the Secretary of theOffice of Policy and Management or his designee and upon certification by the Secretary of the Officeof Policy and Management or his designee that a Regional Council of Governments has been dulyestablished.
§ 2-26. BOARD OF ETHICS.
See Section
2-40
for the establishment of the Board of Ethics.
§ 2-27. BOARD OF EDUCATION.
§ 2-27.1. Terms of Office of the Members.
[Ord. 12/13/18]
The Board of Education shall continue to consist of six members. Pursuant to Connecticut GeneralStatutes § 9-206(b), at the Town Election to be held on November 5, 2019, six members of the Boardof Education shall be elected, three of whom shall have a term of two years and three of whom shallhave a term of four years. At each Town Election thereafter, three members of the Board of Educationshall be elected for a term of four years. Beginning with the Town Election on November 5, 2019, andat each Town election thereafter, the terms of the members of the Board of Education shall begin onthe Tuesday two weeks after the day of the Town Election, and shall continue until their successorshave been elected and have qualified.
§ 2-28. through § 2-39. (RESERVED)
Article IV. POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
§ 2-40. BROOKLYN CODE OF ETHICS.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 22/138
§ 2-40.1. Policy.
[
Ord. No. 91-1
§ 1]
The proper operation of the municipal government of the Town of Brooklyn requires that all publicofficials and municipal employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, shall be impartial andresponsive to the public interest; that public office and employment should not be used for personalgain of advantage; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of municipal government. Publicofficial and municipal employees should not place themselves in positions where private interestsconflict with public duty. The administration of legislative or quasi-judicial power demand the highestpublic confidence. Anything which tends to weaken such confidence and to undermine the sense ofsecurity of individual rights which the citizen is entitled to feel is against public policy.
§ 2-40.2. Definitions.
[
Ord. No. 91-1
§ 1]
As used in this section:
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
Shall mean any information concerning the property, business or affairs of the Town not generallyavailable to the public.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Shall mean disqualification in matters involving a personal or proprietary interest. No employee orofficial shall participate in the hearing or decision of the Board or Commission of which he is amember upon any matter in which he is directly or indirectly interested in a personal or financialsense. In the event of such disqualification, such fact shall be entered on the records of theCommission or Board. No employee or official shall appear for or represent any person in anymatter pending before the Commission or Board of which he is a member. Nothing containedherein shall be construed as to prevent any elected or appointed official or employee from anyCommission, Board or Agency of the Town provided such person does not violate this section.
DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
Shall mean that no official or employee shall disclose or use any confidential information obtainedin an official capacity for the purpose of advancing the financial or personal interest of himself orothers.
DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST
Shall mean any official or employee who has, or feels he has a real, pecuniary or personalbeneficial interest in any matter coming before any Board, Commission, or Agency of the Townshall make the same known to such body and such interest shall be disclosed on the records ofsuch body.
EMPLOYEE
Shall mean any person receiving a salary, wages or compensation from the Town for servicesrendered.
FAIR AND EQUAL TREATMENT
Shall mean that no official or employee shall grant or accept any special consideration, treatmentor advantage to or from any person beyond that which is available to every other person.
GIFTS AND FAVORS
Shall mean no official or employee or member of his immediate family shall solicit or accept anygift having a substantial value, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, promise or any otherform, from any person or persons who to his knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in anymanner whatsoever in business dealings with the Town.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 23/138
a.
b.
c.
d.
OFFICIAL
Shall mean any person holding elective or appointive Town office including members and alternatemembers of Town Agencies, Boards, and Commissions, and Committees appointed to overseethe construction or improvement of Town facilities, or any other Board, Commission or Agency thatexercises legislative or judicial functions or financial authority.
REPRESENTATION OF PRIVATE INTERESTS
Shall mean no official or employee shall appear on behalf of private interests before any Board,Commission or Agency of the Town, nor shall represent private interests in any action orproceeding against the Town in any litigation when such appearance or representation would be inconflict with or would impair his independence of judgment on an action in the performance of hisofficial duties as such officer or employee.
USE OF INFLUENCE
Shall mean that no official or employee shall solicit any business, directly or indirectly, fromanother official or employee over whom he has any direct or indirect control or influence withrespect to tenure, compensation or duties.
USE OF TOWN ASSETS RESTRICTED
Shall mean that no official or employee shall use or permit the use of Town funds, services,property, equipment, owned or leased vehicles, or materials for personal convenience or profit,except when such services are available to the public generally or are provided in conformancewith established Town policies for the use of such officials or employees.
§ 2-40.3. Interpretation of Policy; Board of Ethics Established.
[
Ord. No. 91-1
§ 2]
A Board of Ethics shall be established by the Board of Selectmen constituting five members; nomore than two shall be of the same political party.
Terms of office shall be three years.
Such Board shall elect a Chairperson and a Secretary and shall establish its own rules andprocedures in conformance with applicable State laws.
Powers and Duties. The Board of Ethics shall render advisory opinions with respect to theapplicability of this Code of Ethics to specific situations to any agency, or any officer, official,employee or individual pursuant to a written request or upon its own initiative. The Town Board ofEthics may also issue guidelines on such issues for example, ex parte communication. The Boardmay make available to the public advisory opinions which do not invade an individual's privacy,and take other appropriate steps in an effort to increase public awareness of this Code of Ethics.
The Board of Ethics shall establish procedures by which the public may initiate complaints alleginga violation of this Code. The Board of Ethics itself may also initiate such a complaint. The Board ofEthics shall have the power to hold hearings concerning the application of this Code and itsviolation and may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witness by subpoena. Suchhearings shall be closed to the public unless the respondent requests otherwise. If the Board ofEthics determines the respondent has, in fact, violated the provisions of this Code, it shall file amemorandum of decision which may include a recommendation for action with the Board ofSelectmen or the appropriate Agency, Board or Commission. In the case of a consultant, it shallalso be filed with the contracting agency. The recommended action may include reprimand, publiccensure, termination or suspension of employment, removal or suspension from appointive office,or termination of contractual status, except that no action may be recommended which wouldviolate the provisions of the State or Federal law. In the case of union employees, suchrecommended action does not constitute a unilateral change in conditions of employment. Nosuch recommendation shall limit the authority of the Board of Selectmen under the Charter of the
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 24/138
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
1.
2.
f.
a.
b.
Town or under any ordinance, Statute, or any other law, and the actions hereunder shall besupplemental to any authority the Board of Selectmen have under any ordinance, Statute, or anyother law. Any discussion by the Board of Selectmen or other Agency, Board or Commission orcontracting agency of an individual affected by the affected requests that such discussion be heldin open session.
§ 2-40.4. Enforcement of Policy.
[
Ord. No. 91-1
§ 3]
The enforcement of policy shall be the responsibility of the Chief Administrative Officer of the Town inconjunction with the Board of Ethics.
§ 2-41. PURCHASING PROCEDURE.
[
Ord. No. 91-4
§ 1; Ord. 7/16/12]
Purchases for the Town of Brooklyn shall be made under the following rules:
All contracts for goods or for services requiring the expenditure of $5,000.00 or more shall requirethe submission of competitive bids based upon specifications prepared by the Selectmen, Boardof Education or their designee.
All contracts for goods or services requiring the expenditures of from $1,000.00 to $4,999.00 shallbe awarded based upon three or more written quotations for such goods or services involved.
The Selectmen shall yearly, by July 30, obtain quotes of hourly rates for equipment and labor fromcontractors desiring to do business with the Town of Brooklyn. Each such hourly rate scheduleshall be binding upon the submitting contractor for one fiscal year or until notified by the contractorthat the quotation is no longer valid.
A public notice to potential bidders shall be given at least 10 days before the submission date ofbids. All such sealed bids shall be opened publicly.
The Selectmen reserve the right to determine which bid is in the best interest of the Town, and thelow bidder is not guaranteed the bid.
The purchasing procedure set forth in this section shall not apply to the following:
All professional services such as architects, engineers, legal counsel and other professionalconsultants.
Any contract for goods purchased or services rendered which contract is covered by anexisting state or regional bid such as those obtained by the State of Connecticut or theNortheastern Connecticut Council of Governments.
§ 2-42. DECLARATION OF A LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY.
[
Ord. No. 07-01
§ 1]
The First Selectman as the Chief Executive Officer of the Town of Brooklyn is authorized todeclare a local disaster emergency in accordance with the provisions of Connecticut GeneralStatutes §§ 28-8(a) and 28-1(8).
Upon the declaration of a local disaster emergency by the First Selectman of the Town ofBrooklyn, the First Selectman or his designee, and the local Emergency Management Director,
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 25/138
c.
d.
a.
b.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
c.
shall exercise all powers and authority granted to the municipality and/or its Chief ExecutiveOfficer under Title 28 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
In terms of serious disaster or civil emergency, the First Selectman of the Town of Brooklyn, or hisdesignee, is authorized to activate the municipal Emergency Operation Center. The CommandingOfficer of the Connecticut State Police — Troop D, the Chiefs of the municipal Fire Departments,the Director of the Northeast Department of Health, the Emergency Management Director, or theirrepresentatives, shall assist the First Selectman in evaluating the need for the declaration of aLocal Disaster Emergency.
In times of serious disaster or civil emergency, the First Selectman of the Town of Brooklyn, or hisdesignee, will coordinate his or her responsive activities with the appropriate area coordinator fromthe Connecticut Department of Emergency Management and Homeland Security.
§ 2-43. BROOKLYN LAND ACQUISITION FUND.
[
Ord. No. 97-5
§§ 1-5;
Ord. No. 08-01
§§ 3,4]
Pursuant to the authority of Connecticut General Statutes 7-131r and 7-131q, there is herebyestablished the Brooklyn Land Acquisition Fund (hereinafter referenced to as the "Fund") to beused for the purposes of the preservation of open space or agricultural land, the acquisition of land(or any interest in land, including but not limited to easements and development rights) to be usedfor open space and for recreation or agricultural purposes. The Fund shall not lapse at the close ofthe municipal year.
There shall be appropriated into the Fund such sums as the Town may appropriate for thatpurpose. There shall also be deposited into the Fund all payments in lieu of the provision of openspace made pursuant to any regulations adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission underthe authority of Connecticut General Statutes 8-25 and 8-25b, and any other funds acquired by theTown, whether by gift, bequest, grant or otherwise, for the purpose to be served by the Fund.
Expenditures shall be made from the Land Acquisition Fund only in accordance with the followingprocedures and requirements:
Expenditures shall be made exclusively for the appraisal, acquisition and preservation costsrelating to the purchase of parcels of land or any easements, interests or rights therein, theuse of which shall be limited to retention of the parcel in its natural condition or the protectionof natural resources for passive recreational or agricultural purposes.
Recommendations for the appropriation of funds to be used for the acquisition of any parceland/or easement, right, or interest therein, including the sum to be expended, shall beapproved by a vote of the Brooklyn Conservation Commission and forwarded to the Planningand Zoning Commission Board for a report in accordance with Section 8-24 of theConnecticut General Statutes.
Following a report by the Planning and Zoning Commission and incorporation of any changesapproved by the vote of the Conservation Commission, any recommendations for theappropriation of funds shall be forwarded to the Board of Selectmen for their considerationand upon their approval, to the Board of Finance.
Following the approval of such recommendation by the Board of Finance for the appropriationof funds, the Board of Selectmen shall schedule a duly-warned and noticed Town Meeting forconsideration by the Town's legislative body.
Upon recommendation of the Chair of the Conservation Commission, the Board of Selectmenshall have the authority to expend up to $6,000.00 from the land acquisition fund for eachpotential acquisition, the expenditure to be used to defray the expenses incurred in
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 26/138
d.
investigating the suitability of any parcel of land for acquisition by the Town of Brooklyn. Suchexpenses shall include but not be limited to payment for the services of real estate appraisers,soil scientists and environmental planners.
Any monies generated from timber sales from Town-owned open space properties will bedeposited into this fund.
§ 2-44. SALE, LEASE OR TRANSFER OF TOWN OWNEDREAL PROPERTY.
[Ord. 8/1/13; Ord. 1/8/14]
Town Meeting approval shall be required before the Town of Brooklyn sells, leases or transfers any realproperty owned by the Town of Brooklyn.
§ 2-45. SUMMARY PUBLICATION OF ADOPTEDORDINANCES.
[Ord. 8/1/13]
Pursuant to the provisions of § 7-157(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, any ordinance enactedby the Town of Brooklyn legislative body shall be published within 10 in summary form in a newspaperhaving a general circulation in the Town. Each summary shall bear a disclaimer as follows. "Thisdocument is prepared for the benefit of the public, solely for purposes of information, summarizationand explanation. This document does not represent the intent of the legislative body of the Town ofBrooklyn for any purpose."
The Town Clerk shall make a copy of such ordinance available for public inspection and shall, uponrequest, mail a copy of the ordinance to any person requesting a copy at no charge to such person.Every ordinance, unless specifying a later date, shall become effective on the 15th day after suchpublication following passage of the ordinance. Any ordinance making or requiring an appropriation offunds must be published in full.
§ 2-46. TAXATION: REFUNDS; WAIVERS.
§ 2-46.1. Refund of Taxes.
[Ord. 8/16/16]
Pursuant to Section 12-129 of the Connecticut General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, the TaxCollector for the Town of Brooklyn is hereby authorized to retain payments in excess of the amount dueprovided the amount of the excess payment is less than $5.00.
§ 2-46.2. Waiver of All Taxes Due in an Amount Less Than$10.00.
[Ord. 8/16/16]
Pursuant to Section 12-144c of the Connecticut General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, the TaxCollector for the Town of Brooklyn hereby waives all taxes due in the amount less than $10.00provided that the original bill does not exceed $10.00.
§ 2-47. through § 2-49. (RESERVED)
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 27/138
a.
b.
c.
d.
a.
b.
Article V. CONCERNING ELECTIONS
§ 2-50. CREATION OF A SINGLE VOTING DISTRICT IN THETOWN OF BROOKLYN.
[
Ord. No. 93-4
§ 1]
The existing two voting districts of the Town of Brooklyn shall be consolidated into a single votingdistrict, effective August 1, 1993.
§ 2-51. ALLOWING TWO SHIFTS OF ELECTION OFFICIALS.
[Ord. 10/11/90 §§ 1—4]
Pursuant to Section 9-258a of the Connecticut General Statutes (Revision of 1958), there shall betwo shifts of election officials for each polling place at each election at which the polls are to openfrom 6:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m.
There shall be a single moderator for both shifts.
The moderator shall keep a written record of the specific hours and time served by each electionofficial.
In each such polling place, all members of both shifts who are required to sign returns, includingcheckers and assistant registrars, if any, of both shifts, shall be present at the closing of the pollsand shall remain until all returns have been executed.
Chapter 3. Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 3-1. LOITERING OR OBSTRUCTING PASSAGEWAYS ONPUBLIC PROPERTY, ROADS OR SIDEWALKS.
[
Ord. No. 94-3
§§ 1,2]
Pursuant to Section 7-148 et seq. of the General Statutes (Revision of 1958), no person shallloiter, linger, or remain positioned so as to individually or with others block or obstruct thepassageway of any person or persons, or create a hazard or physical offensive condition while ona public road, walkway or sidewalk, or other public property of the Town of Brooklyn.
A violation of this section shall be deemed an infraction and punishable by a fine not greater than$99.00, exclusive of costs.
§ 3-2. LOITERING, LITTERING AND PUBLIC CONSUMPTIONOF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
§ 3-2.1. Purpose.
[
Ord. No. 97-2
§ 1]
The purpose of this section is to ensure the safety, good order, peace and health and to protect theproperty rights of the owners and residents of the Town; to insure the free access and movement of the
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 28/138
public on sidewalks and streets; and to save the public from inconvenience, annoyance or alarm.
§ 3-2.2. Authority.
[
Ord. No. 97-2
§ 2]
This section is enacted pursuant to the powers granted to the Town of Brooklyn in Section 7-148 of theGeneral Statutes of the State of Connecticut, (Revision of 1958), as amended.
§ 3-2.3. Definition.
[
Ord. No. 97-2
§ 3]
As used in this section:
STREET
Shall mean any State highway, Town highway or any other highway or road open to the generalpublic even though the highway may not be formally accepted by the Town as a Town road.
§ 3-2.4. Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited.
[
Ord. No. 97-2
§ 4]
No person shall, at any time, consume alcoholic beverages upon any street located within the confinesof the Town nor upon any premises over which the general public has a right of way, includingsidewalks, parking lots or any open areas where the general public may have reason to pass, or in anyarea where any property owner has posted his property with a clearly visible sign stating, "Notrespassing or loitering."
§ 3-2.5. Loitering.
[
Ord. No. 97-2
§ 5]
No person shall, at any time, congregate with other persons on or about the streets, sidewalks, parkinglots or where the general public has access, or in any area where any property owner has posted hisproperty with a clearly visible sign stating "No trespassing or loitering" and cause inconvenience,annoyance or alarm to any person, obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
§ 3-2.6. Littering.
[
Ord. No. 97-2
§ 6]
No person shall throw, scatter, spill or place or cause to be blown, scattered, spilled or placed withinthe streets or sidewalks or upon areas within the Town, any trash, papers or offensive materials, glass,crockery, scrap metal, wire or substance of like nature.
§ 3-2.7. Exception.
[
Ord. No. 97-2
§ 7]
This section shall not affect the consumption of alcoholic beverages within or upon any premiseslicensed by the State of Connecticut by authority of the State Liquor Control Commission.
§ 3-2.8. Penalty for Violation.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 29/138
[1]
[
Ord. No. 97-2
§ 8]
A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00.
Chapter 4. Licensing and Business Regulations
§ 4-1. PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND SALESMEN.
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance 4/30/81.
§ 4-1.1. Definitions.
[Ord. 4/7/15]
As used in this section:
CHARITABLE
Shall mean a nonprofit patriotic, philanthropic, social service, benevolent, educational, civic orfraternal.
CONTRIBUTIONS
Shall mean alms, food, clothing, money, subscription, property or donation.
PEDDLER
Shall mean any person, whether principal or agent, who goes from place to place within theboundaries of Brooklyn, selling or bartering or carrying for sale or barter or exposing therefor anyfood, goods, wares or merchandise either on foot or from any vehicle. This shall include offering toaccept orders of purchase for future delivery of any goods, wares or merchandise includingmagazines and other printed matter.
PERSON
Shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, or association.
RELIGIOUS AND RELIGION
Shall not mean and include the word charitable as herein defined but shall be given theircommonly accepted definitions.
SOLICIT AND SOLICITATION
Shall mean the request directly of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other items ofvalue on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or otheritems of value will be used for a charitable or religious purpose.
§ 4-1.2. Hours of Operation.
[Ord. 4/7/15]
No peddler, whether exempt or not from the provisions of this section, under any circumstance maysell, barter or carry for sale or barter or expose any food, goods, wares or merchandise either on footor from any vehicle, or solicit contributions for any charitable or religious cause before the hours of8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. No peddler, with the exception of those exempted under subsection
4-1.3
below, may sell barter or expose for sale any food, goods, wares or merchandise, either on foot or fromany vehicle, within 500 feet of any school.
§ 4-1.3. Persons Exempted.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 30/138
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
a.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
b.
c.
d.
[Ord. 4/7/15]
Subsections
4-1.4
through
4-1.9
shall not apply to:
Persons less than 17 years of age;
Persons exempted under Connecticut General Statutes;
Persons licensed by the State of Connecticut;
Persons selling only to stores or other business establishments for resale; and
Charitable or religious organizations or their representatives engaged in solicitation, where nofood, goods, wares or merchandise is offered in exchange for money, credit, property or financialassistance, even if such exchange is labeled a donation.
§ 4-1.4. Required Application and Identification.
[Ord. 4/7/15]
Except as provided in subsection
4-1.3
, no peddler shall sell or expose or offer for sale or solicitorders for any articles of food or any goods, wares, merchandise, materials or services or solicitfor any contracts within the Town unless he or she shall have made application for and beenissued a license as hereinafter provided.
The applicant for the license shall complete an application form provided by the Town Clerk whichshall contain the following information:
The full name, home address and business address of the applicant along with the telephonenumbers of each address.
A physical description of the applicant, including sex, age, height, weight, physical build, colorof hair and eyes, complexion and identifying scars, marks and characteristics, if any.
The name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer, principal or contractassociates.
The purpose for which the applicant desires to obtain a license and particularly the type offood, goods, wares, merchandise, materials, services or contracts with or in which theapplicant intends to deal.
Whether, when, where and on what charges the applicant has ever been arrested togetherwith the disposition of such charges.
Whether, when, where, in what court and by whom the applicant or any present or formeremployer, principal or contract associate has ever been sued in a civil action alleging fraud ormisrepresentation in connection with or as a result of the applicant's activities in soliciting forany contract or in selling, exposing or offering for sale or soliciting orders for any articles offood or any goods, wares, merchandise, materials or service.
The year, make, model and license plate number of any vehicles the applicant intends to use.
The applicant, at the time of executing the application form, shall also submit photo identificationsatisfactory to the Town Clerk. Each application shall be signed by the applicant and sworn tobefore a Justice of the Peace or other person authorized by the laws of the State of Connecticut toadminister oaths.
The applicant will be subject to a police background check. Approval of the application, or denialfor good cause, will be decided by the Town Clerk no later than 30 days from the date the
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 31/138
application was submitted to the Town Clerk.
§ 4-1.5. Fees.
[Ord. 4/7/15]
The fee for such application shall be $20.00 per person payable to the Town Clerk upon submission ofthe application. If the application is approved, the further sum of $80.00 shall be due and payable tothe Town Clerk upon the issuance of the license. No license shall be issued or renewed unless all feesdue hereunder have been paid in full.
§ 4-1.6. Registration Expiration.
[Ord. 4/7/15]
All licenses issued under this section shall expire on the thirty-first day of December subsequent to thedate on which they are issued, unless sooner revoked as hereinafter provided. Except as provided insubsection
4-1.3
, no person whose license has expired shall engage in any of the activities describedin subsection
4-1.4
until such person shall have made application for renewal with the Town Clerk,obtained a current license and paid a fee of $100.00 per person. No person, who has had a previouslyissued license revoked in accordance with subsection
4-1.8
, shall be eligible for a renewal.
§ 4-1.7. License.
[Ord. 4/7/15]
The Town Clerk shall issue a license to each person filing an application form in accordance with theprovisions of subsection(s) 4-1.4 and 4-1.6. The license shall bear the same identifying numberappearing on the applicant's original license and shall set forth the name, home address and businessaddress of the applicant, the name and address of the applicant's employer, principal or contractassociates, the type of contracts, food, goods, wares, merchandise, materials or services with or inwhich the applicant has registered to sell, and the date of issuance and date of expiration of thelicense. Each person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to this section shall carry it at alltimes while engaged in the activities described therein and shall exhibit it forthwith to any police officer,town official or prospect who shall ask to see it.
§ 4-1.8. Revocation of Credentials.
[Ord. 4/7/15]
Such a license shall be refused or, after issuance, revoked by the Town Clerk and immediatelyreturned if the applicant or credentialed individual has made any false statement or representation inany application filed pursuant to this section, has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanorinvolving moral turpitude or of any violation of this section. There shall be no refund when a license,after being issued, is revoked.
§ 4-1.9. Records.
[Ord. 4/7/15]
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep a record of all licenses granted or renewed under theprovisions of this section giving the number and date of all licenses, the name, age and residence ofthe person licensed, the amount of fees paid and also the dates of revocation of any licenses revoked.A record shall also be kept of each complaint concerning the activities of the licensee.
§ 4-1.10. Violations and Penalties.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 32/138
[1]
a.
b.
[Ord. 4/7/15]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section or shall make any false statement ormisrepresentation on an application form filed pursuant to this section shall be subject to a fine of notmore than $199.00 for each offense and, upon conviction or a finding of such violation, their licenseshall be revoked immediately. No new license shall be issued to such person. Each day of selling,offering for sale or soliciting without the license as required by this section, shall be considered aseparate offense.
§ 4-1.11. Effective Date.
[Ord. 4/7/15]
This section shall take effect 15 days after publication in accordance with the General Statutes of theState of Connecticut.
§ 4-2. PERMITS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ord. No. 94-5.
§ 4-2.1. Purpose.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
The regulation of certain special events and the supervision of such events are hereby declarednecessary for the protection of the health, property, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town ofBrooklyn.
§ 4-2.2. When Permit Required.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
When any planned event may have the potential for the creation of a public nuisance or a threat topublic safety, as evidenced by the existence of one of the following conditions:
Will require parking for more than 100 motor vehicles; or
Can reasonably be expected to be attended by more than 250 people in total, whether all at onceor over the course of the event.
The operator or sponsor of such event shall, at least 30 days before the start of the event, submit tothe First Selectman or Land Use Officer, in writing, a detailed description of the event including thelocation and hours of operation of the event, the admission charge, if any, the anticipated attendance,parking arrangements, whether or not beer or liquor will be served or permitted, the type ofentertainment, if any, that will be required and written consent of the property owner. (The "requiredinformation")
Upon receipt of the required information, the First Selectman or the Land Use Officer shall determinewhether or not the event poses a potential for the creation of a public nuisance, or constitutes a threatto public safety. The First Selectman or Land Use Officer may request additional information from theoperator or sponsor in order to make such determination.
If the First Selectman or Land Use Officer shall reasonably determine that the event does not pose thepotential of a public nuisance or a threat to public safety, then an event permit shall be issued withoutthe submission of an application as described in subsection
4-2.3
below or a fee.
If the First Selectman or Land Use Officer, upon review of the required information and otherconditions such as: (1) anticipated traffic, (2) the potential for noise or unreasonable disturbance ofnearby property owners, and (3) the nature of the event, make a determination that the event poses a
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 33/138
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
potential for the creation of a public nuisance or a threat to public safety, then an event permitapplication, as described in subsection
4-2.3
below, shall be required.
A decision as to whether or not an event permit application is required shall be made within fivebusiness days following the submission of all the required information and any additional informationrequested by the First Selectman or Land Use Officer. A business day shall be any day on which theTown Hall is open.
§ 4-2.3. Event Permit Application Requirements.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
Upon a determination that an event permit application is required, the application shall be submitted tothe First Selectman that shall include:
A site plan of the event location, indicating the location of parking, and, if applicable, foodpreparation and service areas, sanitary facilities, entertainment areas and seating as well asanticipated traffic circulation;
If food is to be served, required permits or other approvals from the Northeast District Departmentof Health;
Proof that a notice has been sent to abutting landowners advising of the time and place of theevent and the fact an event permit application has been submitted;
If alcohol is to be sold, a copy of the permit from the Connecticut State Liquor ControlCommission;
The location and the type of any loudspeakers or sound amplification equipment; and
A written communication from the Resident Trooper that the details of the event have beendiscussed with the office together including any recommendations to guard public safety that theResident Trooper determines to be reasonably necessary.
§ 4-2.4. Issuance of Event Permit after Application.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
Once a determination has been made that an event permit application is required, no special eventshall be held without first obtaining an event permit from the First Selectman.
The event permit may be issued subject to conditions including but not limited to:
The employment of police officers and security personnel, and the implementation parkingcontrols both on and off site or other requirements to protect the public before, during and after theevent;
Any recommendations from the Chief of the local Fire Department, the Fire Marshal, the Land UseOfficer, the Connecticut State Police or other professional sources;
A limitation on the hours of operation and the number of attendees;
Requirements for the cleanup of any public property that may be impacted by the event;
The posting of a bond to indemnify the Town of Brooklyn for the costs of any cleanup of publicproperty or the expense of specific services rendered by the Town or its employees or contractorsas a result of the event.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 34/138
f.
a.
b.
c.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
The First Selectman shall have the power to revoke any Event Permit issued hereunder for duecause which shall be deemed to include, but shall not be limited to, false information in theapplication for a special permit or failure of the applicant to comply with the terms of the permit.
§ 4-2.5. Exemption.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
This section shall not apply to any event:
Which is held upon premises that has been granted a special permit as an "Event Facility" by theBrooklyn Planning and Zoning Commission, so long as all the requirements of the Special Permitare met;
Organized or sponsored by the Town of Brooklyn, its Board or Commissions or the local FireDepartment;
Which is subject to the provisions of Section 19a-435 — 19a-443 of the Connecticut GeneralStatutes.
§ 4-2.6. Penalty.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
A violation of this section shall be deemed an infraction and punishable by a fine not greater than$500.00 for each offense.
Chapter 5. Personnel Policies
§ 5-1. CREATION OF A RETIREMENT SYSTEM FOR THETOWN EMPLOYEES.
[Ord. 6/10/70 §§ I—V]
There is hereby established a retirement system for employees of the Town of Brooklyncommencing in and for the fiscal year of July 1, 1969 to June 30, 1970, and continuing thereafter.
The Board of Finance and the Board of Selectmen, or any successor or successors to their power,are hereby authorized to establish, administer and maintain a retirement system for the employeesof the Town, and to make provisions, by regulations, appointment of boards, committee, agenciesor commissions, for the establishment, administration, and maintenance of the retirement system.
The retirement system may be financed by appropriation of Town funds, contributions byemployees, an insurance policy or policies, trust funds, general contributions or bequests, or anyother legal, actuarial and fiscally sound means.
The retirement system may be administered in conjunction with or in the light of other retirementor pension benefits presently or in the future equitably available to the beneficiaries thereof.
The retirement system may provide benefits for the dependents and/or survivors of the Townemployees and may be administered jointly or in conjunction with any other benefits or plan ofbenefits presently or in the future equitable available to Town employees, their dependents and/orsurvivors.
Chapter 6. Tax Abatements and Tax Exemptions
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 35/138
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
§ 6-1. TAX ABATEMENTS FOR DAIRY FARMS.
§ 6-1.1. Findings.
[
Ord. No. 93-1
, Preamble]
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Brooklyn believes that the preservation of farmland and openspace is vitally important to retaining Brooklyn's rural character and its high quality of life; andConnecticut General Statutes Section 12-81m (Revision of 1958) allows towns to abate up to fiftypercent of the property taxes on any dairy farms, and to recapture abated taxes in certaincircumstances in the event of a sale of the property. The Board of Selectmen wished to establish amechanism whereby tax relief can be granted to dairy farms as provided by law.
§ 6-1.2. Permission Granted to Abate Property Taxes;Requirements.
[
Ord. No. 93-1
§ 1; New]
The Town of Brooklyn ("Town") may abate property taxes on dairy farms and recapture taxes soabated in the event of sale, in accordance with the following procedures and requirements:
Any action by the Town concerning the abatement of property taxes for dairy farms, or therecapture of any taxes so abated, is done pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 12-81m, as such statute may be amended from time to time.
A request for an abatement shall be made by application to the Board of Selectmen and to theTown's Board of Finance by the record owner of the property, or a tenant with a signed, recordedlease of at least three years, which lease requires tenant to pay all taxes on the dairy farm as partof the lease.
In order for an abatement to apply for the tax year beginning July 1, 1994, the application shall besubmitted no later than October 1, 1993. For any tax year thereafter, the application shall besubmitted by October 1 of the preceding year.
An abatement is only available for dairy farmers. The applicant shall provide the Board ofSelectmen and the Board of Finance with evidence to support the status of the farm as a dairyfarm. In determining whether a farm is a "dairy farm," the Board of Selectmen and the Board ofFinance shall take into account, among other factors: the acreage of the farm; the number andtypes of livestock on the farm; the quantities of milk sold by the farm; the gross income of the farmderived from dairy related activities; the gross income derived from other types of activities; andevidence of Dairy Farm or Milk Producing Permit or Dairy Plant or Milk Dealer Permit, aspreviously set forth in Connecticut General Statutes 22-173 or equivalent evidence satisfactory tothe Boards of Selectmen and Board of Finance. All residences and building lots are excluded.
Upon affirmative vote by both the Board of Selectmen and the Board of Finance, the Town mayabate up to 50% of the property taxes for a dairy farm.
Any abatement will continue in force for five years, or until such time as the farm is sold, or ceasesto be a "dairy farm," whichever occurs first.
The property owner receiving the abatement shall notify the Board of Selectmen and the Board ofFinance in writing within 30 days of the sale of property or the cessation of operations as a "dairyfarm."
Upon sale of the property, and subject to the provisions of paragraph i herein, the property ownershall pay to the Town a percentage of the original amount of the taxes abated, pursuant to the
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 36/138
i.
j.
k.
a.
b.
following schedule:
Number of Years Sale Follows Abatementfor Given Tax Year
Percentage of Original Amount of TaxesAbated Which Must Be Paid
10+
0
9–10
10%
8–9
20%
7–8
30%
6–7
40%
5–6
50%
4–5
60%
3–4
70%
2–3
80%
1–2
90%
0–1
100%
Upon affirmative vote by the Board of Selectmen and the Board of Finance, the Town may waiveany of the amounts which would otherwise be owed pursuant to paragraph h herein if the farmcontinues to be used as "farm land," "forest land" or "open space," as those terms are defined inSection 12-107b of the Connecticut General Statutes, after the sale of the property.
The taxes owed to the Town pursuant to paragraphs h and i hereof shall be due and payable bythe record property owner/grantor to the Town Clerk of Brooklyn at the time of recording of her/hisdeed or other instrument of conveyance. Such revenue received by the Town Clerk shall becomepart of the general revenue of the Town. No deed or other instrument of conveyance which issubject to the recapture of tax, as set forth in paragraph h hereof, shall be recorded by the TownClerk unless the funds due under the recapture provisions of paragraph h hereof have been paid,or the obligation has been waived pursuant to paragraph i hereof.
The Tax Assessor shall file, not later than 30 days after abatement is approved by the Board ofSelectmen and the Board of Finance, with the Town Clerk, a certificate for any dairy farm land thathas been approved for a tax abatement, which certificate shall set forth the date of initialabatement and the obligation to pay the recapture funds as set forth in paragraph h hereof. Thecertificate shall be recorded in the land records of the Town of Brooklyn.
§ 6-2. TAX EXEMPTION FOR FOREST LANDOWNERS OFEASTERN CONNECTICUT, INC.
[
Ord. No. 94-1
§§ 1, 2]
Pursuant to Section 12-81b of the Connecticut General Statutes (Revision of 1958), land nowbelonging to the Forest Landowners of Eastern Connecticut, Inc. (d/b/a Wolf Den Land Trust),consisting of a 15 acre parcel situated northerly on Herrick Road in the Town of Brooklyn andshown as Lot 20 on Assessor's Map 18, shall be exempt from taxation as the date of itsacquisition by the Land Trust, to wit, June 10, 1993 (See Volume 138, Page 316 of the Records ofthe Town Clerk for a fuller description of the subject premises).
The Treasurer of the Town of Brooklyn is authorized to reimburse to Forest Landowners of EasternConnecticut, Inc. any tax paid by it for a period subsequent to June 10, 1993.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 37/138
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
§ 6-3. TAX EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN NON-PROFITORGANIZATIONS.
§ 6-3.1. Findings.
[
Ord. No. 94-6
, Preamble]
Section 12-81b of the Connecticut General Statutes (Revision of 1958) permits an immediate taxexemption for certain organizations acquiring real property after the property has been assessed,provided such exemption shall have been authorized by ordinance duly adopted for that purpose.
§ 6-3.2. Guidelines for Tax-Exempt Status.
[
Ord. No. 94-6
§ 1]
Any real property acquired by an organization which is organized and existing for the purpose ofacquiring land and holding the same in perpetuity for purpose of conservation or environmentalprotection and protecting the land from development, which property is exempt from taxationunder Section 12-81 (7)—(16) of the Connecticut General Statutes (Revision of 1958), shall beexempt from taxation as of the date of it acquisition.
If any amount shall have been paid on account of taxes upon real property which is exempt fromtaxation hereunder, then upon application timely made as set forth in paragraph c hereof, theTreasurer is authorized and directed to refund to the exempt organization, without interest, suchportion of the amount as represents taxes for the period subsequent to the exemption date.
Application for reimbursement under paragraph b shall be made to the Tax Collector of the Townon a form prescribed by him not later than the first day of October next following the date ofacquisition by the exempt organization of property for which an exemption is claimed; except inthe case of properties acquired prior the adoption of this section, as to which reimbursement maybe sought until October 1, 1994.
This section shall apply to properties acquired by an exempt organization on or after January 1,1993.
Any taxes previously levied upon this property but unpaid as of the effective date of this sectionshall be abated.
§ 6-4. PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION FOR FARM BUILDINGSAND ADDITIONAL FARM MACHINERY.
§ 6-4.1. Title.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
This section shall be known and may be cited as "An Ordinance Providing a Property Tax Exemptionfor Farm Buildings and Additional Farm Machinery."
§ 6-4.2. Legislative Authority.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 38/138
a.
b.
c.
1.
2.
a.
This section is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12-91(b) and (c) of the ConnecticutGeneral Statutes, as it may be amended from time-to-time.
§ 6-4.3. Findings and Purpose.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
The Town of Brooklyn finds that the preservation of farming and farmland is vitally important toretaining Brooklyn's rural character and quality of life, as well as promoting economic andenvironmental sustainability. Therefore pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 12-91(b) and (c),as amended, the Town of Brooklyn seeks to protect, preserve and promote the health, welfare andquality of life of its people by providing a tax exemption for certain farm buildings and additional farmmachinery.
§ 6-4.4. Applicability and Benefits.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
For a farmer who qualifies for the farm machinery exemption under Connecticut General Statues§ 12- 91(a). Any building used actually and exclusively in farming, as "farming" is defined inSection
1-1
of the Connecticut General Statutes, including any building used to provide housingfor seasonal employees of such farmer, upon proper application being made in accordance withthis section, shall be exempt from property tax to the extent of an assessed value of $100,000.00per eligible building. This exemption shall not apply to any residence of any farmer.
For a farmer who qualifies for the farm machinery exemption under Connecticut General Statues§ 12-91(a). Additional such machinery, upon proper application being made in accordance withthis section, shall be exempt from property tax to the extent of an additional assessed value of$100,000.00.
Annually, within 30 days after the assessment date, each individual farmer, group of farmers,partnership or corporation shall make written application to the Assessor for the exemptionprovided in subsection
(a)
and
(b)
of this section, including therewith a notarized affidavit certifyingthat such farmer, individually or as part of a group, partnership or corporation derived at least$15,000.00 in gross sales from such farming operation, or incurred at least $15,000.00 inexpenses related to such farming operation, with respect to the most recently completed taxableyear of such farmer prior to the commencement of the assessment year for which such applicationis made, on forms to be prescribed by the Commissioner of Agriculture. Failure to file suchapplication in said manner and form within the time limit prescribed shall be considered a waiver ofthe right to such exemption for the assessment year. Any person aggrieved by any action of theAssessor shall have the same rights and remedies for appeal and relief as are provided in theConnecticut General Statutes for taxpayers claiming to be aggrieved by the doings of theAssessor or Board of Assessment Appeals.
§ 6-5. TAX EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN MOTOR VEHICLES.
[Ord. 8/1/13]
Pursuant to the authority conferred by Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81c, the following three types ofvehicles shall be exempt from local taxation:
Ambulance-type motor vehicles used exclusively for the purpose of transporting any medicallyincapacitated individual (except any such vehicle used to transport any such individual forprofit);
Any property owned by a nonprofit ambulance company; and
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 39/138
3.
b.
c.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
d.
e.
Any motor vehicle owned by a person with disabilities, or owned by the parent or guardian ofsuch a person, which vehicle is equipped for purposes of adapting its use to the disability ofsuch person, shall be exempt from local taxation.
For the purpose of this section, an "ambulance-type motor vehicle used exclusively for thepurpose of transporting any medically incapacitated individual" is defined as a motor vehiclespecifically designed to carry patients and typically operated by a person possessing certificationfrom the office of Emergency Medical Services.
For the purpose of this section, a "motor vehicle ...equipped for the purpose of adapting its use toa disability" is defined as a vehicle modified from stock specifications by the addition of hydrauliclifts, specialized steering or braking apparatus, or similar alterations, solely for the purpose ofequipping said vehicle to adapt its use to the disability of either owner or the owner's child, or theowner's ward.
Any person wishing to claim an exemption pursuant to this section shall make an application forsaid exemption to the Town's Assessor on a form prescribed by the Assessor, and shall supply tothe Assessor such proof as is necessary to establish the compliance of the vehicle with the intentof this section. Such proof may include but not be limited to:
Photo(s) of the vehicle showing the modification;
Copy of the invoice showing modifications made to the vehicle;
A valid special license plate for the disabled issued by the Connecticut Department of MotorVehicles;
A removable windshield placard for the disabled;
A letter from a physician, no older than three years, which attests to the applicant's need for aspecially manufactured motor vehicle or a modified motor vehicle due to that person's medicalcondition; or
A letter from a physician, no older than three years, which attests that the spouse, ward, orchild of the applicant needs a specially manufactured motor vehicle or a modified motorvehicle due to that person's medical condition.
Anyone applying for the tax exemption shall file the application with the Tax Assessor annually inaccordance with this section no later than November 1 following the assessment date with respectto which such exemption is claimed. For vehicles purchased or modified on or after October 2 andon or before July 31 of the assessment year for which such exemption is requested, theapplication shall be filed not later than 30 days following the purchase.
§ 6-6. TAX EXEMPTION FOR VETERANS.
[Added
7-11-2019
]
The Town of Brooklyn hereby adopts the municipal option to allow a full property tax exemption forpersons eligible therefor as authorized by and in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes § 12-81(21)(C). The dwelling house and the lot whereupon the same is erected belonging to or held in trustfor any citizen and resident of the Town of Brooklyn shall be fully exempt from local property taxation, ifsuch person is a veteran who served in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Coast Guard or Air Force of theUnited States and has received financial assistance for specially adapted housing under the provisionsof Section 801 of Title 38 of the United States Code, as amended from time to time, and has appliedsuch assistance toward the acquisition or modification of such dwelling house. The same exemptionmay also be allowed on such housing units owned by the surviving spouse of such veteran i) whilesuch spouse remains a widow or widower, or ii) upon the termination of any subsequent marriage ofsuch spouse by dissolution, annulment or death, or by such veteran and spouse while occupying such
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 40/138
a.
b.
c.
[1]
a.
premises as a residence. An individual seeking to benefit from the tax exemption provided for by thissection shall submit proof to the Assessor evidencing qualification for such exemption. The Assessorshall grant such exemption upon receipt of sufficient written proof from the individual seeking to benefitfrom this section that he or she meets all eligibility requirements set forth in Connecticut GeneralStatutes § 12-81(21)(C).
Chapter 7. Traffic
§ 7-1. PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
§ 7-1.1. Parking of Vehicles on Public Property and Roads.
[
Ord. No. 94-4
§§ 1—3; Ord. 12/13/18]
The Board of Selectmen is hereby empowered to post as "No Parking" areas those portions ofTown streets or public property belonging to the Town as they, in their discretion, determine thatthe public interest requires. Such designation may include a ban on parking during specified times,events, or occurrences.
The Selectmen are further authorized to establish a schedule of penalties for violations of the noparking rules, provided that such penalties shall not be less than $5.00 nor greater than $50.00 forany enumerated offense, if the penalty of said violation is paid within seven days thereof; theBoard of Selectmen may establish such additional penalties, including a doubling of the originalpenalty, for parking fines not paid within seven days of the violation.
The Board of Selectmen may prepare and cause to be issued summonses in appropriate formgiving notice to the owner of any vehicle of violations of the postings authorized hereunder.
§ 7-1.2. Parking in Designated Fire Zones and No Parking ZonesProhibited.
[
Ord. No. 06-01
§ 1; Ord. 12/13/18]
Pursuant to Section 7-148 of the Connecticut General Statutes (Revision of 1958), no person shallpark a vehicle or remain stationary in an area, that is clearly marked "NO PARKING" or "FIRE ZONE"by appropriate devices or markers or by lines upon the surface of ground, indicating parking isprohibited, or for a period of time that is longer than allowed by legally installed signs.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to emergency vehicles or maintenance vehicles inthe normal course of business.
Editor's Note: See also Section
11-2
, Parking in Designated Fire Zones Prohibited.
§ 7-2. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING PARKING BANS FORSNOW REMOVAL.
[Ord. 3/24/88 §§ 1—3; Ord. 2/17/11; Ord. 12/13/18]
The First Selectman or his or her designee may impose a parking ban during and/or in anticipationof winter weather events on any public streets or highways within the Town of Brooklyn, asdeemed necessary in his or her sole discretion. Any such parking bans will be announced on theTown's website and on local broadcast radio such as WINY 1350am. No automobile, truck, vehicleor any personal property of any kind or description shall be parked, placed, deposited, left or
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 41/138
b.
c.
allowed to remain within the limits of any public street or highway in the Town of Brooklyn duringthe duration of any such parking ban.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of paragraph a hereof shall be fined notmore than $50.00 for each offense.
The Town of Brooklyn, acting through its First Selectman or designee, may remove, or cause to beremoved from any street or highway within the Town of Brooklyn, any automobile, truck, vehicle, orany personal property packed, placed, deposited, left or allowed to remain upon any street orhighway within the Town of Brooklyn in violation of the provisions of this section, to a garage orother place of storage, where the same shall be kept until repossessed by the owner or otherperson entitled to the possession thereof, or otherwise disposed of. There shall be no liabilityattached to the First Selectman or his designee. The owner or other person entitled to thepossession of any such automobile, truck, vehicle or other personal property may recoverpossession thereof upon payment of all expense and cost of removal and storage thereof. Allcharges necessarily incurred by the First Selectman or his designee shall be a lien upon suchmotor vehicle. The owner or keeper of any garage or other place where such motor vehicle isstored, shall have a lien upon the same for his storage charges.
Chapter 8. Building and Housing
§ 8-1. ADOPTION OF THE STATE BUILDING CODE.
§ 8-1.1. Adoption by Reference.
[
Ord. No. 94-2
§ 1]
Pursuant to Section 29-253 of the Connecticut General Statutes (Revision of 1958), the Town ofBrooklyn adopts the State Building Code, including any amendments to this Code adopted by the StateBuilding Inspector and Codes and Standards Committee, as the Building Code for the Town ofBrooklyn.
§ 8-1.2. Applicability.
[
Ord. No. 94-2
§ 2]
The Building Code adopted herein shall control all matters concerning the construction, alteration,addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings andstructures, and shall apply to existing or proposed buildings and structures, except as such matters areotherwise provided for in other ordinances or statutes, or in the rules and regulations authorized forpromulgation under the provisions of the State Building Code.
§ 8-1.3. Construction.
[
Ord. No. 94-2
§ 3]
The Code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to insure public safety, health,and welfare, insofar as they are effected by building construction, through structural strength, adequatemeans of egress facilities, sanitary equipment, light and ventilation, and fire safety; and, in general, tosecure safety to life and property from all hazards incident to the design, erection, repair, removal,demolition or use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises. When the provisions hereinspecified for health, safety, and welfare are more restrictive than other regulation, this Code shallcontrol; but in any case, the most rigid requirements of either the Building Code or other regulationsshall apply whenever they conflict.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 42/138
a.
b.
c.
a.
b.
c.
§ 8-1.4. Building Official.
[
Ord. No. 94-2
§ 4a, b, c]
Term; Qualifications. The Chief Executive Officer shall appoint an officer to administer the Code fora term of four years and until the successor qualifies, and quadrennially thereafter shall so appointa successor. The officer shall be known as the Building Official. The Building Official, to be eligiblefor appointment, shall have had at least five years experience in construction, design orsupervision.
Duties. The Building Official shall pass upon any question relative to the mode, manner ofconstruction or materials to be used in erection or alteration of buildings or structures, pursuant toapplicable provisions of the State Building Code and in accordance with rules and regulationsadopted by the Department of Public Safety. He shall require compliance with the provisions of theState Building Code, of all rules lawfully adopted and promulgated thereunder and of laws relatingto the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition and interval equipment and location,use, accessibility, occupancy and maintenance of buildings and structures, except as may beotherwise provided for.
Right of Entry. The Building Official shall have the right of entries to such buildings or structures,except single-family residences, for the proper performance of his duties between the hours of9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except that in the case of emergency he shall have the right of entry atany time, if such entry is necessary in the interest of public safety.
§ 8-1.5. Municipal Board of Appeals.
[
Ord. No. 94-2
§ 5a, b, c]
Composition. A Municipal Board of Appeals consisting of five members shall be appointed inaccordance with Chapter 541 of the Connecticut General Statutes by the Chief Executive Officer.
Qualifications. Each member other than one member appointed from the general public shall havehad at least five years experience in either building design or construction or supervision ofconstruction.
Powers. When the Building Official rejects or refuses to approve the mode or manner ofconstruction proposed to be followed or the materials to be used in the erection or alteration of abuilding or structure, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Code do not apply or that anequally good or more desirable form of construction can be employed in a specific case, or when itis claimed that the true intent and meaning of the Code and regulations have been misconstruedor wrongly interpreted, and the permit, in whole or in part, has been refused by the BuildingOfficial, the owner of such building or structure, whether already erected or to be erected, or hisauthorized agent may appeal in writing from the decision of the Building Official to the Board ofAppeals. Upon receipt of an appeal from an owner or his representative, the chairman of theBoard of Appeals shall appoint a panel of not less than three members of the Board to hear theappeal. The appeal shall be heard in the Town of Brooklyn within five days, exclusive ofSaturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, after the date of receipt of the appeal. The panel shallrender a decision upon the appeal and file the same with the Building Official from whom theappeal has been taken not later than five days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legalholidays, following the day of the hearing thereon. A copy of the decision shall be mailed, prior tofiling, to the party taking such appeal. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the panel mayappeal to the Codes and Standards Committee within seven days after the filing of the decisionwith the Building Official.
§ 8-1.6. Other Provisions.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 43/138
a.
(a)
(b)
1.
(a)
2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
3.
(a)
(b)
(c)
4.
b.
[
Ord. No. 94-2
§ 6]
Any requirement essential for structural, fire or sanitary safety of an existing or proposed building orstructure, or essential for the occupants thereof, and which is not specifically covered by this Code,shall be determined by the Code Official.
§ 8-1.7. Violations of the State Building Code.
[
Ord. No. 94-2
§ 7]
The continuation of occupancy or use of a building or structure, or of a part thereof, contrary to theprovisions of this Code, shall be deemed a violation and subject to the penalties prescribed in Section117.0 of the State Building Code.
§ 8-1.8. Fees.
[
Ord. No. 94-2
§ 8;
Ord. No. 06-2
§ 1]
The Code Official shall keep an accurate account of all fees collected, and such collected feesshall be deposited weekly in the Treasury of the Town of Brooklyn.
Fee Schedule. A fee for each plan examination, building permit, and inspections shall be paid inaccordance with the following schedule:
New Construction.
Permits for costs in excess of $1,000.00 will be $10.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof.
The fee for renewal of a lapsed permit shall be $20.00.
Additions and Alterations:
Any additions to an existing building or structure or any alterations involving structuralchanges, the fee shall be the same as new construction.
Moving a Structure.
For moving a building or structure on the same lot, $25.00 shall be levied.
For moving a building or structure, whose structural dimensions are greater than 10 feetwide, 10 feet high and 20 feet long or of more than 2,000 cubic feet, in any street a fee of$100.00 shall be levied. The moving of all buildings or structures shall be advertised oncein the local newspaper and the fee for the advertisement paid by the applicants inaddition to the permit fee. Buildings or structures of 10 feet by 10 feet by 20 feet or 2,000cubic feet or less are exempt from fees.
In addition, if in the opinion of the Board of Selectmen, it will be necessary to re-routetraffic or provide Police protection for the safety of the general public any such cost inconnection therewith shall be paid by the person, firm or corporation to whom suchpermit is issued.
Structural Demolition.
Buildings up to 2,500 square feet - no charge.
For buildings from 2,500 to 5,000 square feet a $7.00 fee is required.
There is a $7.00 charge for each additional 5,000 square feet or part thereof.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 44/138
(d)
(e)
c.
a.
b.
In addition, when a demolition permit has been issued, and in the opinion of the Board ofSelectmen it will be necessary to re-route traffic or provide Police safety of the generalpublic, any such costs in connection therewith shall be paid by the person, firm orcorporation to whom such permit is issued.
All demolition permits are for 30 days. The Board of Selectmen may extend the time limitfor valid reasons.
The fee requirements of this section shall not apply to buildings or structures of the United States,State of Connecticut or the Town of Brooklyn.
§ 8-1.9. Penalties.
[
Ord. No. 94-2
§ 9]
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall continue work in or about a building after having beenserved with a stop work order, except such work as he is directed to perform to remove a violation orunsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $1,000.00, orimprisoned not more than six months or both. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed aseparate offense.
§ 8-1.10. Severability and Effective Date.
[
Ord. No. 94-2
§§ 10, 11]
If any court of competent jurisdiction should declare any portion of this section to be invalid, theremaining sections thereof shall be severed therefrom and shall have continuing effect.
This section shall take effect 15 days after publication, and publication shall be in summary form asprovided by Section 7-157 (b) of the General Statutes (Revision of 1958).
§ 8-2. WITHHOLDING APPROVAL OF A BUILDINGAPPLICATION WHEN TAXES ARE DELINQUENT.
[
Ord. No. 95-1
§ 1, 2]
Pursuant to the authority of Public Act 95-320, it will be the policy of the Town to withhold approvalof building applications when taxes are delinquent for the property for which an application ismade.
Waiver. In the event that a taxpayer seeking an application is contesting the underlying taxassessment, or in cases of unusual hardship, the Board of Selectmen may waive the denial ofapproval set forth in this section.
§ 8-3. REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF STRUCTURESCONTAINING MULTIPLE DWELLING UNITS.
§ 8-3.1. Definition.
[Ord. 2/21/89 § 1]
As used in this section:
MULTIPLE DWELLING UNIT
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 45/138
a.
b.
c.
d.
Shall mean a building or structure containing two or more rental housing units.
§ 8-3.2. List of Tenants and Unit Number.
[Ord. 2/21/89 § 2]
No owner of a building containing multiple dwelling units shall rent or lease any unit within suchbuilding before providing the Building Inspector or his designee with a list of all tenants residing in suchbuilding, and their individual unit or apartment numbers, which list shall be updated by the owner of thebuilding within three working days of the time a vacancy occurs.
§ 8-3.3. Permit Required for Multiple Dwelling Unit Occupancy.
[Ord. 2/21/89 §§ 3—6]
Permit Required. No multiple dwelling unit, once vacated, shall be re-occupied before the owner ofthe building containing such dwelling unit shall obtain from the Building Inspector or his designee a"permit for multiple dwelling unit occupancy" for the particular unit.
Forms. The Building Inspector's office shall make available necessary forms for providing the listof tenants and for applying for such permit.
Term of Permit. Any permit obtained for a particular unit shall be valid for a period of one year fromthe date of issue or until the particular unit is vacated, whichever is longer.
Inspection of Unit; Fee. No such permit shall be issued until the Building Inspector or his designeehas inspected the dwelling unit and approved such unit and its appurtenant facilities as being inconformity with all applicable State and Town Codes and until a fee of $15.00 per dwelling unit hasbeen paid to the Building Inspector's office.
§ 8-3.4. Time Limited for Inspection.
[Ord. 2/21/89 § 7]
Such inspection by the Building Inspector or his designee shall be completed with three working daysfrom the date the application for a "permit for multiple dwelling unit occupancy" is filed or therequirement for such permit shall be considered waived.
§ 8-3.5. Violations; Penalty.
[Ord. 2/21/89 § 8]
Any violation of a provision of this section shall require, upon conviction, a fine of $99.00 dollars foreach day that such violation occurs.
§ 8-3.6. Exemption.
[Ord. 2/21/89 § 9]
Exempted from the application of this section shall be buildings less than five years old, hotels, motels,inns, lodging houses and rooming houses.
§ 8-3.7. Grievance; Appeal.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 46/138
a.
b.
c.
d.
[Ord. 2/21/89 § 10]
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Building Inspector's office in enforcing this section shall havethe right to appeal to the Superior Court as provided by the Connecticut State Statutes.
§ 8-3.8. Notification of Fire to Building Inspector; New PermitsRequired.
[Ord. 2/21/89 § 11]
Any owner of a building containing multiple dwelling units which is not exempted from the application ofthis section shall notify the Building Inspector's office within three working days of any fire and obtain anew permit or permits of multiple dwelling unit occupancy, as applicable, upon payment of a $15.00dollars fee for each rental dwelling unit and not to exceed $50.00 per fire in the building.
§ 8-4. REMOVAL, REPAIR, OR DEMOLITION OF ANYBUILDING OR STRUCTURE WHICH IS OR THREATENS TOBE A PUBLIC NUISANCE, DANGEROUS TO THE HEALTH,MORALS, SAFETY, OR GENERAL WELFARE OF THE PEOPLEOF THE TOWN OF BROOKLYN, OR WHICH MIGHT TEND TOCONSTITUTE A FIRE MENACE.
§ 8-4.1. Definitions.
[Ord. 1/23/63 §§ 1, 10]
As used in this section:
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Shall mean that all buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall bedeemed "dangerous buildings" and shall constitute a public nuisance.
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have becomedangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or thepeople of the Town of Brooklyn.
Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which soutterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for humanhabitation or employment, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury tothe health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living or employed therein.
Those having parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members ofthe public or property.
Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health,morals, safety or general welfare of the people of this Town.
OWNER
Shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association.
§ 8-4.2. Inspection by Fire Marshal.
[Ord. 1/23/63 § 2]
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 47/138
The Fire Marshal shall inspect, as often as may be necessary, all buildings and premises in the Townexcept the interiors of private dwellings for the purpose of determining whether any conditions existwhich render such places as "dangerous buildings" within the terms of subsection
8-4.1
.
§ 8-4.3. Duties of Fire Marshal.
[Ord. 1/23/63 § 3]
Whenever the Fire Marshal in making an inspection as provided in the preceding section shall find thatany building or structure is a "dangerous building" within the standards set forth in subsection
8-4.1
, heshall order said "dangerous building" to be repaired or demolished.
§ 8-4.4. Service of Order on Owner.
[Ord. 1/23/63 § 4]
The Fire Marshal making an order as provided in subsection
8-4.3
shall cause such order to be put inwriting and served upon the owner of the premises affected, or upon the owner's agent in charge ofsuch premises, as the circumstances may require. Such order shall be personally served upon suchowner or agent by the Fire Marshal by delivering to the owner or agent a true copy thereof; provided,however, that when such owner or agent cannot be found within the Town, or when the premises areunoccupied, service may be made upon the owner or agent by registered mail. The person servingsuch order shall certify upon the original order the date of the service, and how and upon whom it wasmade.
§ 8-4.5. Hearing.
[Ord. 1/23/63 § 5]
The owner of the premises or the owner's authorized agent in charge thereof may, within 10 days afterthe service of an order as provided in subsection
8-4.4
, request a hearing upon such order before theSelectmen. The Selectmen shall conduct the hearing, after due notice to the owner or agent and theFire Marshal, of the time and place thereof, and shall review such order and may affirm, repeal, ormodify it. The Selectmen shall render their decision upon such order within 10 days from the date ofthe hearing.
§ 8-4.6. Compliance with Order.
[Ord. 1/23/63 § 6]
Any person upon whom an order has been served as provided in subsection
8-4.4
hereof shall complywith such order within 10 days after the service thereof or, if a hearing is requested, within 10 daysafter the Selectmen have rendered their decision upon such hearing, provided however, that for goodcause shown the Selectmen may extend the time for complying with such order for a period notexceeding 90 days.
§ 8-4.7. Violation; Prosecution.
[Ord. 1/23/63 § 7]
If the owner fails to comply with the order provided for in subsection
8-4.3
hereof, the Fire Marshalshall file a written complaint with the Prosecuting Attorney of the 11th District Circuit Court requestingthe prosecution of the owner.
§ 8-4.8. Penalty.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 48/138
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
a.
b.
c.
[Ord. 1/23/63 § 8]
The owner of any "dangerous buildings" who shall fail to comply with any order to repair or demolishthe building or structure shall upon conviction thereof be fined not exceeding $250.00 for each offense.Each day said owner shall fail to comply with the order shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 8-5. HOUSE NUMBERS REQUIRED.
§ 8-5.1. Numbering System Adopted.
[Ord. 3/19/87 §§ 1—6]
The Town adopts as a numbering system for all property and structures fronting on any street orhighway within the Town those specifications shown on a set of maps on file in the office of theTown Clerk, entitled "Town of Brooklyn—Street Numbering System, 1986."
The Town shall henceforth notify all property owners in Town of the number assigned to theirproperty, and in the future the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall issue numbers on futureconstruction. The Town may change numbers if necessary to maintain coherence.
Within 90 days of receiving notice of the number assigned, each owner, agent, or occupant ofeach building shall affix, in a conspicuous place either upon the building and on a mailbox orsimilar object, the correct assigned number. The number shall be visible and readable from thestreet or highway and the style shall be in block numbers, at least three inches in height. No script,old English, or Roman numerals shall be used.
Each owner, agent, or occupant of any building or part thereof who shall fail to affix the numberassigned within 90 days of receiving notice shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction ofsuch shall be liable for the imposition of a fine not to exceed $20.00. Each day in which the failureto affix a number continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Where multiple buildings are located on a single property, the buildings shall be identified by letterA, B, C, etc. Each apartment within a building shall be issued a number such as A1, etc.
The Town may assign numbers to private roads which have not been accepted by the Town, orwhich pass through private property. Such assignment of numbers shall not be construed asacceptance of such streets or highways or any portion thereof by the Town.
§ 8-5.2. Official Street Names Established.
[
Ord. No. 3
/19/87 § 7]
To ensure that street numbering system is correct and understandable and that there is no confusion instreet names, the following streets and roads shall henceforth be officially recognized by the namesindicated herein:
A road beginning at an intersection with South Main Street and running south through anintersection with Middle Street, thence through an intersection with Front Street and ending at anintersection with Quebec Square shall be Tiffany Street.
A road beginning at a property line approximately 751 feet + or - west of an intersection withTiffany Street and Quebec Square and running easterly approximately 751 feet + or -, thencerunning southerly approximately 537 feet + or -, thence running westerly approximately 718 feet +or - to an end at a property line shall be Quebec Square.
A road running from Wolf Den Road east to an intersection with Pomfret Road and ProvidenceRoad (as shown on a map entitled "Center of Brooklyn/Scale 1" = 50 feet 26 March 1986 Part of
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 49/138
d.
e.
f.
a.
1.
2.
3.
b.
Map 24") shall be Wolf Den Road.
A road running from an intersection with Wolf Den Road southerly to an intersection with HartfordRoad (as shown on a map entitled "Center of Brooklyn/Scale 1" = 50 feet 26 March 1986 Part ofMap 24") shall be Putnam Place.
A road running from an intersection with Hartford Road southerly and easterly to an intersectionwith Canterbury Road (as shown on a map entitled "Center of Brooklyn/ Scale 1" = 50 feet 26March 1986 Part of May 24") shall be Mortlake Road.
A road beginning at the intersection of Wolf Den Road and Putnam Place and runningsoutheasterly, crossing Hartford Road, to Mortlake Road (as shown on a map entitled "Center ofBrooklyn/Scale 1" = 50 feet 26 March 1986 Part of Map 24") shall be Unitarian Way.
Chapter 9. Property Maintenance
§ 9-1. ANTI-BLIGHT REGULATIONS.
§ 9-1.1. Purpose and Declaration of Policy.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
It is hereby found and declared that there may exist within the Town of Brooklyn any number ofblighted premises. It is further found that the existence of these blighted premises adversely affectsneighborhood property values within the Town and may threaten the health, safety, or general welfareof its residents and citizens. This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the Town ofBrooklyn under Connecticut General Statute's section 7-148(c) (7) (H) (xv).
§ 9-1.2. Definitions.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AGRICULTURAL
Shall mean any premises or portion of a premises or parcel of land that is used for agriculturalpurposes as defined in the General Statutes, State of Connecticut, Rev. of 1958; Title 1, Chapter
1
, Sec.
1-1
(q).
BLIGHTED PREMISES
Shall mean:
Any building, structure, or parcel of land that has been determined to pose a serious orimmediate threat to the health, safety or general welfare of the community by the ZoningEnforcement Officer, Building Official, Director of Health, Fire Marshal, or any official actingwithin the scope of their authority as designated by the First Selectman.
Any building, structure, or parcel of land not being maintained as evidenced by two or more ofthe following conditions:
A building or structure in a state of dilapidation or decay.
Missing, broken, or boarded windows or doors.
Collapsing or deteriorating exterior walls, roofs, stairs, porches, or chimneys.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 50/138
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
c.
d.
Exterior walls which contain holes, breaks, loose or rotting materials or are covered bytemporary materials.
Deteriorating foundation walls that contain open cracks or breaks.
Overhang extensions, including but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, awnings,porches, stairways, fire escapes, any of which show dilapidation or improper buildingmaterials or construction, and standpipes and exhaust ducts which contain rust or otherdilapidation.
Exterior evidence of vermin infestation.
Debris.
Trees, shrubs, hedges, grass and plants, which physically hinder or interfere with thelawful use of abutting premises or block or interfere with the use of any public sidewalkand/or private street or right-of-way or any road sign.
Fencing in a dilapidated condition.
Evidence of graffiti or vandalism.
Remains of a structure that has been damaged by fire or other casualty and which is exposedto the elements and no longer serves the purpose for which it was constructed.
Any building, structure or parcel of land which creates substantial and unreasonableinterference with the use and enjoyment of surrounding residential properties as evidenced byneighborhood complaints, fire, public safety or health department reports.
DEBRIS
Shall mean material which is incapable of immediately performing the function for which it wasdesigned, including but not limited to, abandoned, discarded, or unused objects; junk comprised ofequipment such as parts of automobiles, furniture, appliances, cans, boxes, scrap metal, tires,batteries, containers, and garbage. This definition shall not be applicable to premises that are ajunkyard licensed by the State of Connecticut.
DECAY
Shall mean a wasting or wearing away; a gradual decline in strength, soundness or quality; tobecome decomposed or rotten, except a contained compost pile.
DETERIORATING
Shall mean to become or make something worse in quality, value, or strength.
DILAPIDATION
Shall mean to become, or make something become, partly ruined or decayed, especially throughneglect.
MAINTAINED
Shall mean to keep in good condition and take care of so that its value is sustained.
OWNER
Shall mean any person, firm, institution, partnership, corporation, foundation, entity or authoritywho or which holds title to real property or any mortgage or other secured or equitable interest insuch property, as documented in public records.
§ 9-1.3. Prohibition Against Creating or Maintaining BlightedPremises.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 51/138
a.
b.
a.
b.
1.
2.
3.
4.
c.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
No owner of real property within the Town of Brooklyn shall cause or allow blighted premises to becreated, nor shall any owner allow the continued existence of blighted premises.
§ 9-1.4. Exemptions.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
The term blighted premises shall not include:
That portion of any structure, building or parcel of land that can be shown by the owner, at the timeof a complaint, to have been used for agricultural purposes during any period within the precedingfive years.
Any building or structure for which a current building permit has been issued.
§ 9-1.5. Designation and Authority of the Blight EnforcementOfficer.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
The First Selectman shall appoint the Blight Enforcement Officer. The First Selectman reserves theright to use any or all of the following officials to assist in determinations for any service as deemednecessary: the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal, Town Attorney or suchother person as designated by the Town, acting within the scope of such official's authority. The BlightEnforcement Officer shall have the authority to interpret and enforce the provisions of this section.
§ 9-1.6. Complaints, Notice of Violation.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
Signed, written complaints on forms provided by the Town may be submitted to the BlightEnforcement Officer. The Blight Enforcement Officer may also enforce the provisions of thissection without having received a signed, written complaint.
If the Blight Enforcement Officer determines that there exists a violation of this section, the Officershall cause written notice of the violation to be given to the owner or owners of the blightedpremises. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail - return receipt requested to the owner's lastknown address as listed in the Tax Collector's Office and to any other such address the BlightEnforcement Officer reasonably believes may be current. If applicable, such notice shall also besent to any registrant as provided in Section 7-148ii of the Connecticut General Statutes. If suchnotice shall be returned or unclaimed, the Blight Enforcement Officer may have such notice servedby a Judicial Marshal or may choose to serve notice by publication in a newspaper having ageneral circulation in the Town of Brooklyn.
The Notice of Violation shall contain the following information:
The location of the blighted premises.
The exact nature of the violation referencing the provision(s) of this section alleged to havebeen violated.
The time allowed for corrective action (not to exceed 60 days).
The civil penalty.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 52/138
5.
d.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
a.
b.
The name and business address and telephone of the Blight Enforcement Officer.
Prior to the expiration of the time allowed for corrective action as set forth in the Notice ofViolation, the owner may make written request to the Blight Enforcement Officer for an extensionof the time allowed for corrective action. A written extension of up to 60 days may be granted bythe Officer upon a determination that the owner has taken reasonable steps to remedy thecondition and, under the particular circumstances, granting additional time is warranted. Additionalextensions may be granted for good cause but only after consultation and then with the approvalof the First Selectman.
§ 9-1.7. Citation; Fine; Hearing Procedure.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
If the owner fails to take corrective action within the time allowed, (including any extension thatmay be granted) so that the building, structure or parcel of land is still considered a blightedpremises, the Blight Enforcement Officer shall, forthwith, issue a written citation alleging that aviolation of this section exists and that the owners have failed to take corrective action.
The citation shall include the location of the blighted premises, the provisions of this ordinance thathave been violated and the civil penalty for such violation. Such citation shall be given to theowners in the same manner as set forth in subsection
9-1.6b
above.
For each violation of this section, which continues beyond the date set for corrective action by theBlight Enforcement Officer (including any extensions granted) a civil penalty of $50.00, payable tothe Town of Brooklyn, shall be imposed. Each day beyond the expiration of the time allowed forcorrective action shall be considered a separate violation.
Pursuant to Section 7-148aa of the Connecticut General Statutes, any unpaid civil penaltyimposed by the Town, pursuant to the provisions of this section shall constitute a lien upon theblighted premises from the date of such fine. Each such lien may be continued, recorded andreleased in the manner provided by the Connecticut General Statues for continuing, recording,and releasing property tax liens. Each such lien shall take precedence over all other liens filedafter July 1, 1997, and encumbrances except taxes, and may be enforced in the same manner asproperty tax liens.
Any owner aggrieved by the issuance of a citation and/or the imposition of a civil penalty by theBlight Enforcement Officer, may within 10 days of the receipt of the citation, request a hearingbefore a Town Hearing Officer in the manner set forth in Section 7-152c of the ConnecticutGeneral Statutes.
§ 9-1.8. Minimum Standards.
[Ord. 3/4/13]
The provisions in this section shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other statutes,codes, ordinances or regulations that prescribe standards other than are provided in this section.
In any case where a provision of this section is found to be in conflict with a provision of anyzoning, building, fire safety, or health ordinance, regulation or other code of the Town or State, theprovision which established the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health andsafety and property values of the people shall prevail.
Chapter 10. Trailers and Trailer Camps
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 53/138
a.
b.
§ 10-1. DEFINITIONS.
[Ord. 1/15/58 § 1]
As used in this chapter:
AUTOMOBILE TRAILER, TRAILER COACH OR TRAILER
Shall mean any vehicle or structure designed and constructed in such a manner as will permitoccupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons, or the conduct of any businessor profession, occupation or trade (or use as a selling or advertising device), and so designed thatit is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways or city streets,propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power, excepting a device used exclusively uponstationary rails or tracks.
PERSON
Shall be construed to include persons, partnership, firm, company, corporation, tenant, owner,lessee, or licensee, their agents, heirs or assigns.
TRAILER CAMP
Shall mean any park, trailer park, trailer court, court, camp, site, lot, parcel or tract of landdesigned, maintained or intended for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodation forany trailer coach or trailer coaches and upon which any trailer coach or trailer coaches are parkedand shall include all buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment thereof whether acharge is made for the use of the trailer camp and its facilities or not. "Trailer Camp" shall notinclude automobile or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes ofinspection and sale.
UNIT
Shall mean a section of ground in a trailer camp of unoccupied space in an area designed as thelocation for only one automobile and one trailer having a width of not less than 200 feet and adepth of not less than 200 feet.
§ 10-2. TRAILER BOARD.
§ 10-2.1. Members.
[Ord. 1/15/58 § 2]
A Trailer Board consisting of the three Selectmen of the Town, the Director of Health, the Chief ofthe East Brooklyn Fire Department, the Chief of the Mortlake Fire Department, and the Chief ofthe West Wauregan Fire Department, is hereby created with the First Selectman as Chairman.
Duties. It is hereby made the duty of the Board to enforce all provisions of this chapter, and for thepurpose of securing such enforcement, any of the above members of the Board, or their dulyauthorized representative, shall have the right and are hereby empowered to enter upon anypremises on which any automobile trailers are located or about to be located and inspect thesame and all accommodations connected therewith at any reasonable time. The Board is furtherempowered to issue orders granting, renewing and revoking such permits and licenses as areprovided for in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 10-3. LICENSES TO ESTABLISH OR OPERATE A TRAILERCAMP.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 54/138
a.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
b.
c.
a.
b.
c.
d.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain, or permit to be established,operated or maintained upon any property owned or controlled by him, a trailer camp or touristcamp or combination of the two within the limits of the Town of Brooklyn without first havingsecured a license therefor and for each of them from the Trailer Board. Such license shall expireone year from the date of issuance but may be renewed under the provisions of this chapter foradditional periods of one year.
The application for such license or the renewal thereof shall be accompanied by a fee of $10.00for each unit and plot in the existing or proposed camp and license bond in the sum of $1000.00 toguarantee compliance with the terms of this chapter. The application for a license or renewalthereof shall include the name and address of the owner in fee of the tract (if the fee is vested insome person other than the applicant, a duly verified statement by that person, that the applicantis authorized by him to construct or maintain the trailer or tourist camp and make the application),and such a legal description of the premises, upon which the trailer or tourist camp is or will belocated as will readily identify and definitely locate the premises. The application shall beaccompanied by two copies of the camp plan showing the following, either existing or asproposed:
The extent and area used for camp purposes;
Roadways and driveways;
Location of sites or units for trailer coaches;
Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including toilets, washrooms, laundries andutility rooms to be used by occupants of units (in cases where trailers do not have all suchfacilities);
Method and plan of sewage disposal;
Method and plan of garbage removal;
Plan for water supply;
Plan for electrical lighting of units.
Before such license may be issued, the premises must be inspected by the members of the TrailerBoard or their duly authorized representatives and approved representatives and approved by theTrailer Board as complying with all the provisions of this chapter.
§ 10-4. LOCATIONS.
[Ord. 1/15/58]
No occupied trailer shall be located within 50 feet of any street line not less than 50 feet from anyother building or vehicle or the boundary line of the tract on which located.
Every trailer or tourist camp shall be located on a well-drained area, and the premises shall beproperly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or other waters.
Units and trailer plots shall be clearly designated and the camp so arranged that all units and plotsshall face or abut on a driveway of not less than 50 feet in width, giving easy access from all unitsto a public street. Such driveway shall be paved and maintained in good condition, be well lightedat night, and shall not be obstructed.
The Trailer Board may order the construction of a wall or fence on all or a part of the boundary ofthe tract where due to the location of the tract or the topography of the land, such wall or fence is
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 55/138
e.
a.
b.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
necessary for the protection of adjoining property.
Every trailer unit shall be furnished with an electric service outlet which shall be approved by theTrailer Board or its duly authorized representatives.
§ 10-5. DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
[Ord. 1/15/58]
All waste from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets and lavatories shall be wasted into a sewersystem or other disposal means approved by the Town Health Officer.
Each faucet site shall be equipped with facilities for drainage of waste and excess water into thesewer or disposal system. In no case shall any waste water be thrown or discharged upon thesurface of the ground or disposed of by means other than as herein provided.
§ 10-6. OCCUPANTS.
[Ord. 1/15/58]
No trailer may be inhabited by a greater number of occupants than that for which it was designed.
§ 10-7. GENERAL REGULATIONS.
[Ord. 1/15/58]
It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge, together with the licensee to:
Keep at all times a register of all guests (which shall be open at all times to inspection by Stateand Federal Officers and Officers of the Town of Brooklyn, showing for all guests: (1) Names andaddresses; (2) dates of entrance and departure; (3) license numbers of all trailers and towing orother automobiles; (4) states issuing such licenses; (5) place of last location and length of stay.
Maintain the camp in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times.
See that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and enforced and report to the properauthorities any violations of this chapter or any other violations of laws which may come to hisattention.
Report to the Town Health Officer all cases of persons or animals affected or suspected of beingaffected with any communicable disease.
Prevent the running loose of dogs, cats or other animals or pets.
Maintain in convenient places, approved by the Fire Chief, hand fire extinguishers in the ratio of1:4 units.
Prohibit the use of any trailer by a greater number of occupants than that which it is designated toaccommodate.
§ 10-8. REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
[Ord. 1/15/58]
The Trailer Board is hereby authorized to revoke any license issued pursuant to the terms of thischapter if after due investigation it determines that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 56/138
a.
b.
of this chapter or that any trailer camp or tourist camp is being maintained in an unsanitary or unsafemanner or is a nuisance.
§ 10-9. HEARINGS.
[Ord. 1/15/58]
Any person aggrieved by an order of the Trailer Board granting, denying, renewing, or revoking alicense for a trailer camp, under this chapter, may file a written request for a hearing before the Boardwithin 10 days after issuance of such order. The Board shall give notice of a public hearing upon thisrequest to be held in not less than five days after service of the notice on the person requesting thehearing. The Board may also give notice of the hearing to other persons directly interested in the orderin question. The Board shall file its findings and conclusions in writing with the Secretary of the Board.
§ 10-10. APPEALS.
[Ord. 1/15/58]
Any order either granting, denying, renewing or revoking any license under the provisions of thischapter may be appealed to the Court of Common Pleas in and for the County of Windham in thesame manner as is provided for appeals from the Zoning Board of Appeals by the Connecticut GeneralStatutes (1955 Supplement, Sec. 379-D).
§ 10-11. PENALTIES.
[Ord. 1/15/58]
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine notexceeding $100.00 and every day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense and bepunishable as such hereunder.
Chapter 11. Fire Prevention and Protection
§ 11-1. BOARD OF FIRE COMMISSIONERS.
§ 11-1.1. Creation.
[Ord. 1/27/72 § 1]
There is hereby established in the Town of Brooklyn a Board of Fire Commissioners which shall havethe powers and authority set forth in Section 7-301 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut(Revision of 1958), as amended, and shall supervise and assist in the management of the threeexisting volunteer fire companies in the Town.
§ 11-1.2. Members; Terms.
[Ord. 1/27/72 § 2;
Ord. No. 91-3
§ 1;
Ord. No. 97-1
§ 1]
The Board of Fire Commissioners shall consist of seven members consisting of the following:
The First Selectman;
One member of the Board of Finance, to be appointed by the Board and to serve for a term of oneyear;
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 57/138
c.
d.
Two members selected by the Board of Selectmen, one each from a list of three names eachsubmitted to the Board by each of the two existing volunteer Fire Companies, and who shall servefor terms of one year;
Three citizens appointed by the Board of Selectmen, who are not members past or present of anyBrooklyn Fire Company, and who shall serve for terms of three years.
All members shall be sworn and serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified,may be reappointed, and shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursedfor their necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. Vacancies createdby resignation or inability to serve shall be filled by a replacement for the unexpired term to bechosen in the same manner as was the member who created the vacancy by resignation orinability to serve.
§ 11-1.3. Organization and Duties.
[Ord. 1/27/72 § II]
The Board shall elect from its members a Chairman and such other officers as it shall deem necessary.The Board shall make a continuing study of the fire protection needs of the Town and from time to timemake long or short term recommendations to the Town based on such study. In addition to the powersprovided in Section 7-301 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, the Board of FireCommissioners may enter into agreements with any volunteer Fire Company or organized Fire Districtwithin the Town for the fire protection thereof on such conditions as to financial and/or equipmentassistance and the observance of such regulations as they deem in the best interest of the Town.
§ 11-1.4. Financing.
[Ord. 1/27/72 § III]
The Board shall be a budgeted agency and shall submit its account and budget annually to the Boardof Finance. The Board shall submit an annual report to the Town to become a part of the AnnualReport of the Town of Brooklyn. Nothing herein shall prevent the Town or an incorporated Fire Districtfrom appropriating funds to a volunteer Fire Company for services rendered or to be rendered withinthe confines of the Town or Fire District provided the Town or fire district shall deem it in the publicinterest to do so.
§ 11-2. VEHICLES IN DESIGNATED FIRE ZONES OR NOPARKING ZONES PROHIBITED.
[
Ord. No. 06-01
§ 1]
Pursuant to Section 7-148 of the Connecticut General Statutes, no person shall park a vehicle orremain stationary in an area that is clearly marked "NO PARKING" or "FIRE ZONE" by appropriatedevices or markers or by lines upon the surface of ground, indicating parking is prohibited, or for aperiod of time that is longer than allowed by legally installed signs.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to emergency vehicles or maintenance vehicles inthe normal course of business.
§ 11-3. RAPID ACCESS SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.
§ 11-3.1. Purpose.
[
Ord. No. 97-6
; Ord. 9/12/2001]
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 58/138
a.
b.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
c.
d.
e.
f.
In order to provide rapid access by Brooklyn Fire Departments to unoccupied or locked structures thatpose life or property damage hazards while minimizing delay or damage resulting from forcible entry,the following regulation is adopted by the Brooklyn Board of Selectmen and the Brooklyn Board of FireCommissioners on September 12, 2001.
§ 11-3.2. Regulations.
[Ord. 9/12/2001]
After the effective date this section, new commercial buildings, any new structure required by theConnecticut State Building Code or the Connecticut Fire Safety Code to be equipped with anautomatic sprinkler system or an automatic fire alarm system, any new building equipped with anelevator, any new building in which hazardous materials of more than 25 gallons or 200 poundsare stored, any new nonresidential building in which the Brooklyn Fire Marshal determines thatrapid access is necessary for life safety or fire fighting purposes, any property newly equipped withan automatic gate used as a means of controlling access to or from vehicle parking areas, privatestreets, driveways, or parking garages, and new multiple dwellings containing more than tworesidence units shall be equipped with a Rapid Access System.
Locked key vaults shall be mounted in a location specified by the Brooklyn Fire Marshal.
A Rapid Access System consists of a heavy duty key vault, the specifications of which shall beapproved by the Brooklyn Fire Marshal. Locked key vaults shall contain the following, unlessexcepted in writing by the Brooklyn Fire Marshal:
Keys or other devices that operate gates that control access to the property;
Keys or other devices that control locks at points of ingress to the building;
Keys or other devices that allow access to locked mechanical, utility, electrical, boiler orinterior storage rooms;
Keys to elevator controls, fire alarm panels and fire protection systems;
Keys to residential units in multiple dwellings subject to the provisions of this section;
Key cards, integrated circuit "buttons" or other devises that operate exterior or interior lockscontrolled by card system or other non-keyed locking systems;
Materials Safety Data Sheets for hazardous materials stored within the building;
Keys to other areas or other materials required by the Brooklyn Fire Marshal to comply withthe intent of this section.
Contents of the vault shall be clearly labeled. If more than one vault is provided the contents shallbe distributed among the vaults as directed by the Brooklyn Fire Marshal.
Vaults and required contents shall be provided at the expense of the building owner. Buildingowners are responsible for notification of the Brooklyn Fire Marshal in the event that locks oroccupancy changes.
No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for a new or renovated commercial or industrialstructure unless there shall be installed thereon a rapid access system approved by the BrooklynFire Marshal as to specification and location thereof. Key to such rapid access system shall bemaintained exclusively by either the East Brooklyn and or Mortlake Fire Departments.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 59/138
g.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
h.
1.
2.
3.
i.
j.
k.
l.
m.
Upon installation of such rapid access system, the building owner shall, at his or her expense,maintain all components thereof and make repairs or replacements thereof within seven days ofreceipt of written notice to repair or replace from the Brooklyn Fire Marshal.
Structures existing on the effective date hereof that would, if new, fall under the provisions of thissection shall be provided with secure key vaults upon the earliest date of any of the followingconditions:
Completion of alterations or repairs made in any 36 month period costing in excess of 20% ofthe assessed valuation of the structure on the effective date of this section;
A change in ownership of the property;
A change in occupancy causing the structure; if new, to fall under the provisions of paragrapha of subsection
11-3.2
;
Installation of a complete or partial sprinkler system, automatic fire alarm system, elevator orparking gate;
An increase in the floor area of the structure;
Five years from the effective date of this section.
The Brooklyn Board of Fire Commissioners shall adopt within 60 days of the effective date of thissection, and shall modify from time to time as they deem reasonable and necessary, a policy foradministration of the provisions hereof including:
Procedures for obtaining approved key vaults;
Policies and procedures necessary to reasonably assure the security of keys that operate keyvaults;
A requirement that the Brooklyn Fire Marshal publish a list of existing properties affected bythis section within 90 days of the effective date of this section.
Any owner violating the provisions of this section shall be fined $25.00 for each offense. Each dayof violation shall be considered a separate offense. Appeals shall be made within 30 days after theeffect of this section upon any person or entity. Appeals shall be made in writing by certified mailto the Brooklyn Fire Commissioners.
Temporary Key Vaults may be authorized by the Fire Marshal as he may unilaterally determine inorder to protect the health, safety, life or property of people affected by this section.
Single-family/two-family owners are exempt from this section but can apply to the Fire Marshal ifthey want to be part of the system.
This section shall become effective pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes 7-157 (Revision of1958).
§ 11-4. EQUIPMENT AND BUILDINGS USED FOR THE BULKSTORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS FOR RESALE.
§ 11-4.1. Application to Selectmen for Permit.
[Ord. 1/23/63 § 1]
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 60/138
No person shall erect or proceed to erect within the limits of the Town of Brooklyn any equipment andbuildings to be used for the bulk storage of flammable liquids for resale, nor shall any alterations bemade to any equipment and building now existing within the Town of Brooklyn, unless an application isfirst filed for approval of such location and erection or removal or alteration, with the Selectmen of theTown. Such application shall be in writing, and shall state the location of the proposed equipment orbuildings to be erected, removed or altered. Furthermore the Board of Selectmen may request thelocation of buildings immediately adjoining or adjacent thereto, the materials to be used in the erection,removal or alteration and the use for which the equipment and buildings is to be put, a plot plan whichwill show the boundaries of the applicant's property, the location of the equipment and buildingsthereon, and the location of adjacent buildings.
§ 11-4.2. Fee.
[Ord. 1/23/63 § 2]
Each application shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.00 to be paid to the Town of Brooklyn.
§ 11-4.3. Duties of Selectmen.
[Ord. 1/23/63 § 3]
Upon the receipt of an application, the Selectmen shall examine the premises involved and theadjacent properties and buildings and, if in their opinion it is necessary, hold a public hearing on theapplication. After a public hearing has been held, a rehearing may be held in the sole discretion of theSelectmen. The Selectmen in rendering a decision on an application shall take into account the realconditions as to the character and use of adjoining buildings or property in the vicinity, the number ofpersons residing or working in the vicinity, traffic conditions or the like, the creation of hazards from fireor other means that would menace the public security, health or morals, and the reactions and opinionsof the adjoining property owners and residents in the area and in the Town of Brooklyn to the use of theproperty involved for the bulk storage of flammable liquids for resale. The Selectmen shall render theirdecision upon such application within 10 days from the date of the hearing and if the application isgranted, a written permit shall be issued to the applicant.
§ 11-4.4. Notice of Public Hearings.
[Ord. 1/23/63 § 4]
Notice of public hearing on an application shall be given by posting upon the sign posts in the Town aprinted or written notice signed by the Selectmen or a majority of them, and by publishing a like noticein a newspaper having a circulation in the Town of Brooklyn. Such posting and such publication to beat least five days previous to holding the hearing, including the day that notice is given, and anySunday and any legal holiday which may intervene between such posting and publication and the dayof holding such hearing, but not including the day of holding such hearing.
§ 11-4.5. Penalty for Violation.
[Ord. 1/23/63 § 5]
Any person failing to secure a permit required by this section or who shall violate any provisionsthereof, may be fined not more than $100.00.
§ 11-5. FEES FOR PERMITS AND APPROVALS ISSUED BYTHE FIRE MARSHAL.
[Ord. 5/3/10; Ord. 2/17/11]
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 61/138
a.
b.
c.
The purpose of this section is to establish a schedule of fees for permits and plan approvals issued bythe Fire Marshal as permitted under the Connecticut General Statutes.
FEE SCHEDULE
Review of Construction Documents. The fee for the review of construction documents for newconstruction, additions or change of use shall be $50.00 per 1,000 square feet or portion thereof,not to exceed $2,500.00, payable upon submission of the plans.
At the sole discretion of the Fire Marshal, plans for buildings over 50,000 square feet, buildingswhich by their proposed use or occupancy present a special risk or hazard and buildings withunusually complex designs may be required to undergo an independent third party plan review. Acompetent consultant or agency, subject to the reasonable approval of the Fire Marshal, shallconduct the independent plan review and shall furnish the Fire Marshal with a written report of itsfindings and recommendations prior to the Fire Marshal's review and approval of any such plan.The applicant shall pay all costs associated with the independent plan review.
Fees for Required Periodic Inspections.
Blasting Permit
$30.00
Hazmat Annual Truck Inspection — First Truck
$35.00
Each additional truck
$10.00
Liquor Permit — New
$75.00
Liquor Permit — Renewal
$50.00
Group Home Annual Inspection
$50.00
Day Care Facility
$35.00
Health Care Facility — New
$200.00
Health Care Facility — Renewal
$100.00
Smoke Detector
$35.00
Restaurants (Waived if Liquor Permit Inspection is done)
$50.00
Apartment Buildings and Dormitories:
Four or less Units
$100.00
More than Four Units
$150.00
Business Occupancy and Mercantile Establishments:
Less than 10,000 sq. ft.
$50.00
10,000 sq. ft. to 50,000 sq. ft.
$75.00
Over 50,000 sq. ft.
$100.00
Hotels, Motels and Bed & Breakfast Establishments
$100.00
Burn Permit
$10.00
Other required inspections
$50.00
Fees for inspections required for amusement rides and vendors for the Windham CountyAgricultural Association:
The actual time spent by the Fire Marshal for such on-site inspections at his/her current hourlyrate of compensation.
Fees for Other Nonprofit Organizations. The fees applicable to any nonprofit organization shall bethe lesser of the fees set forth in the schedule above or the time expended by the Fire Marshal forthe required on-site inspection at his/her then current hourly rate of compensation.
No final approval of the applicant's plans shall be given or inspection certificates issued by the FireMarshal until the required fee and the costs, if any, associated with any required independent plan
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 62/138
a.
b.
a.
b.
c.
d.
review have been paid in full.
No fees shall be required for any plan approval or inspection for the Town of Brooklyn or any of itsmunicipal agencies, the Brooklyn Library Association, the Quinnebaug Valley Senior Citizens, churchbuildings, Mortlake Fire Department or the East Brooklyn Fire Department.
Chapter 12. Flood Damage Prevention
[Editor's Note: The provisions of this chapter were originally adopted by Ord. 1/1/76, amendedby Ord. 12/4/84, amended by Ord. No. 92-1, and readopted by Ord. No. 97-4, as contained inChapter
12
, Flood Damage Prevention. The effective date of Ord. No. 97-4 is September 17,1997.]
§ 12-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
§ 12-1.1. Statutory Authorization.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 1.1]
The Legislature of the State of Connecticut has in Title 7 delegated the responsibility to localgovernmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and generalwelfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Town Meeting of Brooklyn, Connecticut does ordain as follows.
§ 12-1.2. Findings of Fact.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 1.2]
The flood hazard areas of Brooklyn are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of lifeand property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, allof which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special floodhazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damageuses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood-proofed, elevated or otherwise protectedfrom flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
§ 12-1.3. Statement of Purpose.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 1.3]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and tominimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
To protect human life and health;
To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generallyundertaken at the expense of the general public;
To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 63/138
e.
f.
g.
h.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas ofspecial flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for theiractions.
§ 12-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 1.4]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water orerosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protectedagainst flood damage at the time of initial construction;
Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
Controlling, filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;and,
Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood watersor which may increase flood hazards in other areas.
§ 12-2. DEFINITIONS.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 2.0]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as togive them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonableapplication.
APPEAL
Shall mean a request for a review of the Planning and Zoning Commission's interpretation of anyprovision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING
Shall mean a designated AO or VO zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The baseflood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path offlooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and, velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD
Shall mean the land in the flood plain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance offlooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD
Shall mean the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
DEVELOPMENT
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 64/138
a.
b.
a.
b.
Shall mean any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but notlimited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation ordrilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOMESUBDIVISION
Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured(mobile) home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot onwhich the manufactured (mobile) home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation ofutilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) iscompleted before the effective date of this chapter.
FLOOD OR FLOODING
Shall mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dryland areas from:
The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
Shall mean the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both theareas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY
Shall mean the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes floodprofiles, the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODWAY
Shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must bereserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surfaceelevation more than two feet.
HABITABLE FLOOR
Shall mean any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cookingor recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not an "habitablefloor."
MOBILE HOME
Shall mean a structure that is transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis,and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the requiredutilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Shall mean structures for which the "start of constructions" commenced on or after the effectivedate of this chapter.
NEW MOBILE HOME PARK OR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION
Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more mobile home lots forrent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot (including, at a minimum, theinstallation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the constructionof streets) is completed on or after the effective date of this chapter.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
Shall mean a vehicle which is:
Built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 65/138
c.
d.
a.
b.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters forrecreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
Shall mean the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (other than a mobilehome) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage ofexcavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading,and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it includeexcavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nordoes it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or shedsnot occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For a structure (other than amobile home) without a basement or poured footings, the "start of construction" includes the firstpermanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundation. Formobile homes not within a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, "start of construction"means the affixing of the mobile home to its permanent site. For mobile homes within mobilehome parks or mobile home subdivisions, "start of construction" is the date on which theconstruction of facilities for servicing the site on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including,at a minimum, the construction of streets, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads,and installation of utilities) is completed.
STRUCTURE
Shall mean a walled and roofed building or mobile home that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring thestructure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of thestructure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS
Shall mean any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure taking place within a 10 yearperiod, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either:
Before the improvement or repair is started; or
If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. Forthe purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" — is considered to occur when thefirst alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences,whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
The term does not, however, include either:
a.
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or localhealth, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assuresafe living conditions, or
b.
Any alteration of a structure listed on the national Register of Historic Places or aState Inventory of Historic Places.
VARIANCE
Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in amanner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
§ 12-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 12-3.1. Lands to Which this Chapter Applies.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 66/138
a.
b.
c.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 3.1]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of Brooklyn,Connecticut.
§ 12-3.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special FloodHazard.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 3.2]
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific andengineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the Town of Brooklyn" dated July, 1984, asamended, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated January 3, 1985, and anysubsequent revisions, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. TheFlood Insurance Study is on file at the Town Hall, Town of Brooklyn, Connecticut.
§ 12-3.3. Compliance.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 3.3]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without fullcompliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
§ 12-3.4. Abrogations and Greater Restrictions.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 3.4]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deedrestrictions. However, where this chapter and/or another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deedrestriction conflicts or overlaps, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 12-3.5. Interpretation.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 3.5]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
Considered as minimum requirements;
Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and,
Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
§ 12-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 3.6]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatorypurposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occuron rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter doesnot imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas willbe free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Brooklyn,any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages thatresult reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 12-4. ADMINISTRATION.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 67/138
a.
b.
c.
d.
1.
2.
3.
a.
b.
§ 12-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 4.1]
A Development Permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area ofspecial flood hazard established in subsection
12-3.2
. Application for a Development Permit shall bemade on forms furnished by the Planning and Zoning Commission and may include, but not be limitedto plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of thearea in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and thelocation of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;
Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;
Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood proofing methods forany nonresidential structure meet the flood proofing criteria in subsection
12-5.2b
; and,
Description of the extent to which any watercourses will be altered or relocated as a result ofproposed development.
§ 12-4.2. Designation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 4.2]
The Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapterby granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 12-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Planning and ZoningCommission.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 4.3]
The duties and responsibilities of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall include, but not be limitedto:
Permit Review.
Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapterhave been satisfied.
Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtainedfrom those Federal, State or local governmental agencies from which prior approval isrequired.
Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development adversely affectsthe flood carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard.
For purposes of this chapter:
ADVERSELY AFFECTS
Shall mean that the cumulative effect of proposed development when combined with allother existing and anticipated development increases the water surface elevation of thebase flood more than one foot at any point.
Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided inaccordance with subsection
12-3.2
, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, thePlanning and Zoning Commission shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 68/138
1.
(a)
(b)
2.
3.
c.
1.
2.
d.
e.
1.
2.
3.
(a)
(b)
(c)
4.
a.
elevation data available from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer subsections
12-5.2a
, Specific Standards, Residential Construction, and 12-5.2b, Specific Standards,Nonresidential Construction.
Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.
Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest habitablefloor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures.
For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level), and
Maintain the flood proofing certifications required in subsection
12-4.1c
.
Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.
Alteration of Watercourses.
Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Environmental Protection prior to anyalteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to theFederal Insurance Administration.
Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of thewatercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location ofthe boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be aconflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting thelocation of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation asprovided subsection
12-4.4
.
§ 12-4.4. Variance Procedure.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 4.4]
Appeal Board.
The Brooklyn Inland-Wetlands Commission as established by the Selectmen shall hear anddecide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
The Inland-Wetlands Commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is anerror in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Planning and ZoningCommission in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
Those aggrieved by the decision of the Inland-Wetlands Commission, or any taxpayer, mayappeal such decision to the Superior Court for the Judicial District of Windham, as provided inSection 22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, (Revision of 1958) as amended.
In deciding such appeals, the Inland-Wetlands Commission shall consider all technicalevaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effectof such damage on the individual owner;
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 69/138
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
5.
6.
7.
1.
2.
3.
(a)
(b)
(c)
4.
b.
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
The availability of alternative locations, for the proposed use, which are not subject toflooding or erosion damage;
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plainmanagement program for that area;
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergencyvehicles;
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, includingmaintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, andwater systems, and streets and bridges.
Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to beerected on a lot of 1 1/2 acres in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existingstructures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (a) to (k) in subsection 12-4.4a4 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond 1 1/2 acres, the technicaljustification required for issuing the variance increases.
Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 12-4.4a4 and the purposes of this chapter, theInland-Wetlands Commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as itdeems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall maintain the records of all appeal actions andreport any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
Conditions for Variances.
Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structureslisted on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places,without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levelsduring the base flood discharge would result.
Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimumnecessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
Variances shall only be issued upon:
A showing of good and sufficient cause;
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship tothe applicant; and
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, causefraud on or victimization of the public as identified on subsection 12-4.4a4, or conflict withexisting local laws or ordinances.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 70/138
5.
a.
1.
2.
b.
1.
2.
3.
c.
1.
2.
3.
4.
d.
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structurewill be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation andthat the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting fromthe reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 12-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 12-5.1. General Standards.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 5.1]
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to preventflotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
Construction Materials and Methods.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials andutility equipment resistant to flood damage.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods andpractices that minimize flood damage.
Utilities.
All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminateinfiltration of flood waters into the system;
New and replacement sanitary sewage or septic systems shall be designed to minimize oreliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems intoflood waters; and,
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contaminationfrom them during flooding.
Subdivision Proposals.
All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as septic, gas, electrical,and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flooddamage; and,
Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposeddevelopment which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
§ 12-5.2. Specific Standards.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 5.2]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth insubsection
12-3.2
, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or subsection
12-4.3b
,Use of Other Base Flood Data, the following provisions are required:
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 71/138
a.
1.
2.
3.
b.
1.
2.
3.
c.
a.
Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residentialstructure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above base floodelevation.
Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or together with attendant utility and sanitaryfacilities, shall:
Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with wallssubstantially impermeable to the passage of water;
Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads andeffects of buoyancy; and
Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of thissubsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth insubsection 12-4.3c2.
Minimum Federal Standards.
Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH andAE on sites (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (2) in a newmanufactured home park or subdivision, (3) in an expansion to an existing manufacturedhome park or subdivision, or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision onwhich a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shallbe elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured homeis elevated to or above the base flood elevation and shall be securely anchored to anadequately anchored foundation system to resist floatation, collapse and lateral movement.
Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites in an existingmanufactured home park or subdivision, within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE that are not subjectto the provisions of subsection
12-5.2
above shall be elevated so that either (a) lowest floor ofthe manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or (b) the manufactured homechassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalentstrength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored toan adequately anchored foundation system to resist floatation, collapse, and lateralmovement.
Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE shall either (a) be onthe site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, (b) be fully licensed and ready for highway use,or (c) meet all the general standards of subsection
12-5.1
and the elevation and anchoringrequirements of subsection
12-5.1
. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on itswheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities andsecurity devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
§ 12-5.3. Floodways.
[
Ord. No. 97-4
§ 5.3]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection
12-3.2
are areas designated asfloodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters withdebris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and otherdevelopment unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provideddemonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during theoccurrence of the base flood discharge.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 72/138
b.
c.
a.
b.
If paragraph a above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall complywith all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section
12-5
, Provisions for Flood HazardReduction.
Prohibit the placement of any mobile homes.
Chapter 13. Streets and Sidewalks
§ 13-1. EXCAVATION AND OBSTRUCTIONS OF HIGHWAYSAND STREETS.
§ 13-1.1. Permit Required to Excavate in Streets or Place anObstruction.
[Ord. 9/20/79 § 1;
Ord. No. 93-3
§ 1]
No persons, firm or corporation shall excavate within or under, or place any obstruction or substructionwithin, under, upon or over, or interfere with construction, reconstruction or maintenance or drainagefrom any highway or street maintained by the Town without the written permission of the FirstSelectman. The First Selectman may fill in or close any such excavation or remove or alter anyobstruction or substruction made without his permission, and the expense incurred by the FirstSelectman in such filling or removing or altering shall be paid by the person, firm or corporation whomade such excavation or place such obstruction or substruction existing within, under, upon or overany highway or street on October 1, 1979, or at the discretion of said First Selectman, any excavation,obstruction or substruction made after that date without a permit or in violation of the provisions of apermit shall be removed or altered by the person, firm or corporation making or maintaining the samewithin 30 days from the date when the First Selectman sends by registered or certified mail, postagerepaid, a notice to such person, firm or corporation ordering such removal or alteration. Any person,firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be fined not more than $100.00 each daythe violation exists.
§ 13-1.2. Surety Required.
[
Ord. No. 93-3
§ 2]
None of the provisions of this section shall apply to the grading, improvements and utilities andservices in connection with any approved subdivision plan; provided that, the subdivider has filed withthe First Selectman a surety company bond or cash bond or savings account assignment securing tothe Town the actual construction and installation of such improvements and utilities as required in thesubdivision and resubdivision regulations of the Town.
§ 13-1.3. Trench and Pavement Restoration.
[
Ord. No. 93-3
§ 3]
Pavement Cuts. Cuts in pavement will be made along straight, neat lines with a saw made forsuch purposes.
Color Coded Marking Tape. A color coded marking tape shall be placed at least 18 inches and notgreater than 2 1/2 feet below final grade above all underground utility installations except sewersand drains running in straight lines between surface catch basins, manholes, or posts identifyingthe underground installation. Tape shall be durable non-degradable plastic, not less that two
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 73/138
c.
d.
e.
f.
a.
b.
[1]
inches wide by 0.004 inches thick and in the following colors for the particular underground utility:Blue - Water, Red - Electric Cable, Yellow - Gas, Orange - Telephone, Green - Sewer.
Backfill of Trenches. Backfill in trenches within the roadway limits and paved areas shall be placedin layers not more than 12 inches thick and shall be thoroughly compacted by tamping or otherapproved means to the satisfaction of the First Selectman or his designated agent.
Temporary Trench Patch. Upon completion of trench backfill and temporary pavement, thepermittee will be required to maintain the temporary patch for at least a 12 month period. Duringthis period the permittee shall inspect the trench at such regular intervals as may be necessary tomaintain the trench in satisfactory condition. The temporary patch shall be a minimum of 1 1/2inch thick hot mix asphalt. Cold mix asphalt may only be used when hot mix is not available andupon approval of the First Selectman or his designated agent.
Permanent Trench Patch. At the end of the 12 month maintenance period, or as soon thereafteras weather conditions permit and hot mix is available, the permittee shall be required to replacethe temporary pavement unless otherwise instructed by the First Selectman or his designatedagent. A neat, straight saw cut shall be made at least two feet outside of the temporary trenchpatch and the material removed to a depth of six inches. Three inches of processed gravel shallbe placed and thoroughly compacted upon which two courses of hot mix asphalt each 1.5 inchesthick shall be placed. Prior to paving the saw cut joint shall be painted with an acceptable tackcoat material. After the final pavement has been placed and compacted, the joints will be sealedwith a hot bituminous asphalt sealer approved by the First Selectman.
Other Restoration. All other items damaged by the permittee shall be restored in accordance withthe requirements of the First Selectman. These items include, but are not limited to, curbing,lawns, driveways, pavement markings, and signs. Pavement markings shall be replaced with likematerial.
§ 13-1.4. Moratoria on Street Excavations.
[
Ord. No. 93-3
§ 4]
New Streets. No excavation shall be permitted in new or reconstructed streets for a period of fiveyears after the wearing surface is placed on such street. When, in the opinion of the FirstSelectman, it becomes necessary to excavate in such streets due to emergency or other reason,the entire width of the street within the limits of excavation shall be overlayed with 1.5 inches ofhot mix asphalt. In addition the permittee shall comply with the other applicable requirements ofthe Connecticut General Statutes.
Old Streets. No excavation shall be permitted in streets that have been overlayed with hot or coldmix asphalt, or treated with a sealcoat for a period of two years after such overlay or treatment.When, in the opinion of the First Selectman, it becomes necessary to excavate in such streets dueto emergency or other reason, the entire width of the street within the limits of excavation shall beresurfaced with a like treatment or other process satisfactory to the First Selectman. In additionthe permittee shall comply with the other applicable requirements of the Connecticut GeneralStatutes.
§ 13-2. CLEARING STREETS FOR SNOW REMOVAL.
[Ord. 3/24/88]
See Chapter
7
, Traffic, for regulations prohibiting parking on streets between November 1st and April1st for snow removal.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 74/138
[1]
a.
b.
a.
§ 13-3. ADOPTION OF MUNICIPAL LIABILITY FOR ICE ANDSNOW ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS.
§ 13-3.1. Adoption.
[Ord. 9/8/93 § 1]
The provisions of Connecticut General Statutes 7-163a are hereby adopted, and are set forth insubsections
13-3.2
and
13-3.3
hereof.
§ 13-3.2. Town Not Liable for Injuries Due to Snow or Ice onSidewalks.
[Ord. 2/21/89 § 2]
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13a-149 of the General Statutes or any other GeneralStatute or Special Act, the Town of Brooklyn shall not be liable to any person injured in person orproperty caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk, other than land used as ahighway or street, provided the Town of Brooklyn shall be liable for its affirmative acts with respect tosuch sidewalk.
§ 13-3.3. Owner's Responsibility.
[Ord. 2/21/89 § 3]
The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall have thesame duty of care with respect of the presence of ice or snow on the sidewalk toward the portionof the sidewalk abutting his property as the municipality has prior to the effective date of thissection
[1]
adopted pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. 7-163a and shall be liable to personsinjured in person or property where a breach of duty is the proximate cause of an injury.
Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved on February 21, 1989 and published on September 8,1993.
No action to recover damages for injury to the person or to property caused by the presence of iceor snow on a public sidewalk against a person who owns or is in possession and control of landabutting a public sidewalk shall be brought but within two years from the date when the injury isfirst sustained.
§ 13-4. PERMIT REQUIRED TO LOCATE PRIVATEDRIVEWAYS INTO TOWN ROADS.
§ 13-4.1. Permit Required.
[Ord. 9/20/79 §§ 1,2]
No person, firm or corporation shall construct a new driveway or relocate an existing drivewayleading onto a Town road without first obtaining a written permit from the First Selectman of theTown of Brooklyn. In determining the advisability of issuing such permit, the First Selectman shallinclude in his consideration, the location of the driveway with respect to its effect on highwaydrainage, highway safety, the width and character of the highway affected, the density of trafficthereon, and the character of such traffic.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 75/138
b.
a.
b.
a.
The person to whom such permit is issued shall comply with the provisions and restrictionscontained therein at his own expense.
§ 13-4.2. Violations; Penalty.
[Ord. 9/20/79 §§ 3,4]
Failure of any person constructing or locating such new driveway to first obtain such a permit shallconstitute a violation of the ordinance. Each day such driveway is permitted or suffered to remainshall constitute a separate violation. In addition, the First Selectman shall have the right ofinjunctive relief against such violator or violators.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this section shall be fined not more than$25.00.
§ 13-4.3. Right to Appeal.
[Ord. 9/20/79 § 5]
Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the First Selectman shall have the right of appeal tothe Board of Selectmen.
§ 13-5. SCENIC ROAD DESIGNATION.
§ 13-5.1. Title and Purpose.
[
Ord. No. 04-3
§ I]
This section shall be known as the Scenic Road Regulations of the Town of Brooklyn, and is adoptedpursuant to recommendations made by the 1999 Plan of Conservation and Development and the 1993Open Space and Conservation Plan. The purpose of the section, which is consistent with residentsurveys consistently ranking protection of Brooklyn's rural character as a top priority, is to help protectBrooklyn's rural character and scenic beauty by allowing the Town a measure of protection of the areasalong its rural roadways, consistent with the requirements of safe travel. This section is designed toenable the preservation of stone walls, mature street trees and other specimen trees, as well as therural scale of roads, view sheds and other valued features. The section is intended to apply to anyaccepted Town roadway whether designated as a "road" or "highway" or equivalent term.
§ 13-5.2. Authority to Designate Scenic Roads.
[
Ord. No. 04-3
§ II]
The authority to designate a Town road or highway or any portion thereof as a Scenic Road is herebydelegated to the Planning and Zoning Commission, with the procedures for such designation as setforth in this section. No State highway or portion thereof may be designated as a Scenic Road underthis section.
§ 13-5.3. Application and Rescission Procedures.
[
Ord. No. 04-3
§ III]
Application Requirements. Any Town resident or property owner may apply to the Planning andZoning Commission for designation of any Town highway or portion thereof as a Scenic Road.Such an application on a form to be prescribed by the Commission, shall include the following:
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 76/138
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
b.
c.
1.
d.
The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, who may be a person or otherlegal entity, including corporations and partnerships.
The name of the highway and the total length of the portion to be designated a Scenic Road.
A brief description of the highway and a statement as to how the highway or portion thereofmeets the designation criteria specified in subsection
13-5.4
, below.
A map showing lot boundaries, the amount of lot frontage, and the names of all owners ofrecord of each lot located along any portion of the Town highway to be designated as aScenic Road.
A statement or statements of approval of the proposed Scenic Road designation, signed bythe owners of the majority of lot frontage abutting the portion of the highway proposed forsuch designation. Each such statement shall also contain the name, address and the amountof relevant lot frontage of each signing owner.
A copy of each such application, including the statements of signing owners described in thepreceding paragraph, shall also be filed in the Office of the Town Clerk.
An application fee of $50.00.
Rescission Procedures. Any person desiring to rescind a designation of a town highway as aScenic Road shall make application for rescission on a form prescribed by the Planning andZoning Commission. Such application shall include the following:
The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, who may be a person or otherlegal entity, including corporations and partnerships.
The name of the highway and the total length of the portion previously designated as a ScenicRoad to now be rescinded.
A brief description of the highway and a statement as to how the highway or portion thereofno longer meets the designation criteria specified in subsection
13-5.4
, below.
A map showing lot boundaries, the amount of lot frontage, and the names of all owners ofrecord of each lot located along any portion of the town highway to be designated as a ScenicRoad.
A statement or statements of approval of the proposed rescission of Scenic Roaddesignation, signed by the owners of the majority of lot frontage abutting the portion of thedesignated highway. Each such statement shall also contain the name, address and theamount of relevant lot frontage of each signing owner.
A copy of each such application, including the statements of signing owners described in thepreceding paragraph, shall also be filed in the Office of the Town Clerk.
An application fee of $50.00.
Referral to Conservation Commission. All applications for designation of Scenic Roads, orrescission of Scenic Roads, shall be referred by the Planning and Zoning Commission to theConservation Commission for its recommendation prior to public hearing.
Hearings, Notice and Decision.
When the Planning Commission receives an application for designation or rescission of aScenic Road, it shall conduct a public hearing on the proposal. The notice of and deadlinesfor such hearing shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-26d and 8-26e of theConnecticut General Statutes. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall send notice of
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 77/138
2.
3.
4.
e.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
a.
b.
such public hearing to the Board of Selectmen, the Director of the Highway Department, andthe Tree Warden. The applicant shall mail copies of the notice by certified mail, return receiptrequested, to each owner of property having frontage on the portion of the Town highwayproposed for designation as a Scenic Road. Such mailings shall be made at least 15 daysbefore the date of the hearing. The applicant must submit proof of such mailing to theCommission at or before commencement of the public hearing.
The Commission shall make its decision on the application within 35 days after the close ofthe public hearing. The Commission may approve the application as submitted or maydesignate a lesser portion of the highway as a Scenic Road. If the Commission fails to actupon the application within the time frame set forth in this subsection, the application shall bedenied in its entirety. In such case, the applicant shall be allowed to resubmit an applicationeffective immediately, with no additional filing fee. If an application is denied by vote of theCommission, no Scenic Road application involving the same highway or portion of highwaymay be submitted for a period of one year from the date of publication of the denial.
The Commission shall publish a notice of any decision it renders on an application in anewspaper of general circulation in the Town of Brooklyn no later than 15 days after the dateof the decision. If the Commission approves the application, it shall notify the Board ofSelectmen, Director of the Highway Department, Conservation Commission, Inland WetlandsCommission, and the Tree Warden of the designation within 15 days after the date of thedecision, specifying the scenic characteristics warranting protection. The failure to send suchnotice shall not affect the validity of the designation.
Following the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall vote on theproposed designation. The designation shall become effective upon such date as thePlanning and Zoning Commission may establish.
Appeal of Designation or Rescission. Any person or party aggrieved by a designation or rescissionof designation of a highway or portion of a highway as a Scenic Road pursuant to this section mayappeal in the manner and utilizing the same standards of review provided for appeals from thedecisions of Planning and Zoning Commissions under Section 8-8 of the Connecticut GeneralStatutes.
§ 13-5.4. Designation Criteria.
[
Ord. No. 04-3
§ IV]
In evaluating an application for designation or rescission of a designation of Scenic Road, thePlanning and Zoning Commission must find that such highway or portion of a highway is free ofintensive commercial development and intensive vehicular traffic, and furthermore meets at leastone of the following criteria:
The road is unpaved;
The road is bordered by mature trees or stone walls;
The travel portion of the road is no more than 20 feet wide;
The road offers scenic views;
The road blends naturally into the surrounding terrain; or
The road parallels or crosses over brooks, streams, lakes or ponds.
The Commission is not bound to find multiple criteria in order to designate a road as a ScenicRoad, and may base its designation upon the criteria as it, in its discretion, determines is
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 78/138
a.
b.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
c.
appropriate. The Commission may consider the recommendation of the Conservation Commissionas part of its deliberative process, but is not bound to accept the recommendation of theConservation Commission.
§ 13-5.5. Maintenance, Alteration and Reconstruction of ScenicRoads.
[
Ord. No. 04-3
§ V]
No road which has been designated as a Scenic Road under this section shall be altered orimproved, including but not limited to, widening the travel portion of the road, paving, changes ofgrade, removal of stone bridges, road straightening, removal of stone walls, and removal ofmature trees, except for good cause as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Priorto the Planning and Zoning Commission approving any alteration or improvement of a roaddesignated as a Scenic Road under this section, the Planning and Zoning Commission shallschedule a public hearing on the proposed alteration or improvement. The Planning and ZoningCommission shall notify the Selectmen, the Director of the Highway Department, and owners of lotfrontage abutting the highway or portions of the highway designated as a Scenic Road of theproposed alteration and improvement and scheduled public hearing. Hearing notices anddeadlines shall be in accordance with the provisions of Sections 8-26d and 8-26e of theConnecticut General Statutes. Following the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commissionshall vote on the proposed alterations and improvements and shall state the reasons for any suchapproved alterations or improvements in the Planning and Zoning Commission's minutes.
The Town of Brooklyn shall maintain any highway or portion of any highway designated as aScenic Road in good and sufficient repair and in passable condition. Nothing in this section shallprohibit a person who owns or occupies land abutting a Scenic Road from maintaining andrepairing the land that abuts the Scenic Road if the maintenance or repair occurs on land notwithin the paved or unpaved right-of-way of the Scenic Road.
In maintaining roads in good repair, the Town shall conduct routine maintenance in a manner toprotect and maintain scenic qualities to the extent feasible. "Routine maintenance" shall include:
Winter road maintenance;
Road cleaning;
Removal of dead, seriously diseased or damaged trees and branches that pose a threat tosafety in accordance with Section 23-59 of the Connecticut General Statutes; pruning to allowschool buses and emergency vehicles to pass; removing of brush, rocks and other obstaclesto travel or obstructions to sight lines; cutting for utility lines in accordance with Section 16-234 of the Connecticut General Statutes; and trimming and removal of brush to enhance andprotect scenic views, stone walls, street trees, and other scenic features as set forth in itsdesignation as a Scenic Road;
The repair of road drainage systems including, but not limited to, the removal of shrubs, trees,silt, and other material, and the replacement of culverts, catch basins and relatedinfrastructure;
Repaving, repair or retreatment of paved surfaces not requiring widening of the traveled way,the removal of trees or stone walls, or grade change;
Graveling and grading to smooth the surface of unpaved roads, provided that the nature andcharacteristics of the material used remain the same or the surface is restored using materialssuch as crushed stone, native stone or an equivalent; and
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 79/138
7.
d.
a.
1.
2.
3.
b.
c.
Installation of reflectors and warning, speed limit and other signs in the interest of safety,provided they are kept to the minimum necessary to adequately serve their purpose.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may propose alternatives to alterations affecting the right-of-way of any Scenic Road in order to preserve historic stone walls, trees, views, and otherfeatures. This may include but is not limited to driveway entrance placement and treatment, guardpost placement, removal of trees and vegetation for highway and utility maintenance, anddrainage improvements. Use of materials that complement and blend in with scenic features of thehighway are recommended, including, but not limited to, stone and timber in the construction andrepair of bridges, guard rails and other structures.
§ 13-6. PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS.
§ 13-6.1. Purpose.
[Ord. 6/28/89]
It is hereby found that rapid growth and development within the Town of Brooklyn are placingunprecedented strain upon Town roads and appurtenant drainage systems, culverts, and catch-basins.
To alleviate that siltation, and as empowered by Section 7-148(c) of the General Statutes, and theBoard of Selectmen are herby authorized to develop such regulations as they may deemappropriate to carry out the following purposes:
To provide the proper alignment, width, and grades and pavements of existing Town roadsserving as a right-of-way to any proposed such-division, to ensure that such existing Townroads remain safe and continue to conform to the plan of development of the Town;
To provide adequate and sufficient storm drainage systems for carrying off increased stormdrainage created by any proposed subdivision and associated access road improvements,whether such additional drainage would impact upon existing Town improvements or privatelands;
To provide that adequate and sufficient culverts, manholes, and catch-basins be installed tocarry run-off water from the road surface and to divert road water from the proposedsubdivision beneath or around existing roads without causing significant increases in erosionor sedimentation.
Compliance with the regulations adopted by the Board of Selectmen shall be a conditionprecedent to any application for subdivision of property within the Town of Brooklyn. Failure tocomply shall be adequate cause for denial of any such application.
§ 13-6.2. Amendment to Section 2-3.8 Driveways of the PublicImprovement Specifications.
[
Ord. No. 04-4
]
2.3.8 Driveways:
All driveway construction shall conform to the Standard Details (See figures 4 and 5). Driveways shallbe paved with a minimum thickness of two inches of bituminous concrete for at least 20 feet from theroad or such as is required by the Board or its designated agent. All driveways that contain slopes of10% or greater shall be paved for that length. No driveway shall have a slope greater than 12%.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 80/138
Driveway approaches shall be constructed so that they match the grade at the gutter line of the road. Alanding area equal to one car length (20 feet) and no greater than 3% slope shall be constructedadjacent to the Town road to facilitate sight line distance exiting the driveway.
In some instances an as-built plan may be required to ensure compliance with this regulation.
Prior to commencement of any driveway construction an application shall be approved and the Board'sdesignated agent shall be notified at least 48 hours in advance.
Chapter 14. Solid Waste Management
§ 14-1. SOLID WASTE REGULATIONS.
§ 14-1.1. Purpose.
[
Ord. No. 92-3
§ 1]
The purpose of this section is to regulate the storage, collection, transportation, processing anddisposal of solid waste; to provide for disposal of solid waste; and to provide penalties for violations ofthe provisions of this section.
§ 14-1.2. Definitions.
[
Ord. No. 92-3
§ 2]
As used in this section:
APPROVED INCINERATOR
Shall mean an incinerator which complies with all current regulations of the responsible local andState citing, licensing and pollution control agencies and is in conformance with local Planning andZoning Regulations and is licensed by the Brooklyn Resource Recovery Authority.
BRRA
Shall mean Brooklyn Resource Recovery Authority.
BULKY WASTE
Shall mean nonputrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and/or noncombustible wastematerials from dwelling units, commercial, industrial, institutional, or agricultural establishmentswhich are either too large or too heavy to be safely and conveniently loaded in solid wastetransportation vehicles by solid waste collectors with the equipment available therefor.
COLLECTION
Shall mean removal of solid waste from its place of storage to the transportation vehicle.
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTOR
Shall mean a person who collects and transports solid waste from any location to the town solidwaste facility for a fee.
DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION WASTE
Shall mean waste materials from the construction or destruction of residential, industrial orcommercial structures.
DISPOSABLE SOLID WASTE CONTAINER
Shall mean a disposable plastic or paper sack specifically designed for storage of solid waste.
DWELLING UNIT
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 81/138
Shall mean any room or group of rooms, located within a structure and forming a single habitableunit, with facilities which are used, or are intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking andeating.
FACILITY
Shall mean the Town Landfill.
GARBAGE
Shall mean putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation,cooking, serving or consumption of food.
MAY
Is permissive.
MULTIPLE HOUSING FACILITY
Shall mean a housing facility containing more than one dwelling unit under one roof.
OCCUPANT
Shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall be in actual possessionof any dwelling unit or of any other improved real property, either as an owner or as a tenant.
PERSON
Shall mean any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association,joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, or organization of any kind, or their legalrepresentative, agent or assigns.
PROCESSING
Shall mean incinerating, composting, baling, shredding, salvaging, compacting, separating andother processes whereby solid waste characteristics are modified or solid waste quantity isreduced.
REFUSE
Shall mean solid waste.
SHALL
Is mandatory.
SOLID WASTE
Shall mean unwanted or discarded waste materials in a solid or semisolid state, including but notlimited to garbage, street refuse, rubbish, animal and agricultural wastes, discarded appliances,special wastes, industrial wastes, and demolition and construction wastes.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER
Shall mean a receptacle used by any person to store solid waste during the interval between solidwaste collections.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL
Shall mean the process of discarding or getting rid of unwanted material.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY
Shall mean the Town landfill.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Shall mean the entire solid waste system of storage, collection, transportation, processing anddisposal.
SPECIAL WASTES
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 82/138
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
a.
b.
Shall mean clean fill, scrap metal and white goods, tires, bulky items and items such as furniture,mattresses, rugs and similar nonmetallic items.
STORAGE
Shall mean keeping, maintaining or storing solid waste from the time of its production until the timeof its collection.
TOWN
Shall mean Town of Brooklyn, Connecticut.
TRANSPORTATION
Shall mean the transporting of solid waste from the place of collection or processing to a solidwaste processing facility or solid waste disposal area.
YARD WASTES
Shall mean grass clippings, leaves, tree trimmings, weeds, garden plants, shrubs, branches,limbs, brush and similar materials grown on and emanating from premises within the Town.
§ 14-1.3. Prohibited Disposal Practices.
[
Ord. No. 92-3
§ 3]
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
Dispose of solid waste, which is generated outside the corporate limits of the Town, at any locationwithin the corporate limits of the Town unless written permission has been given by the BRRA.
Dispose of solid waste generated inside the corporate limits of the Town of Brooklyn at any facilityor location within the corporate limits of the Town other than the Town Solid Waste Facility unlessapproved in writing by the BRRA.
Deposit solid waste in any solid waste container other than his own without the written consent ofthe owner of such container.
Burn solid waste unless an approved incinerator is provided or unless permission has beenobtained from the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
Engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste withinthe corporate limits of the Town without a permit from the BRRA or operate under an expiredpermit, or operate after a permit has been suspended or revoked.
Deposit, throw, rake or distribute leaves, branches, trash, garbage, or waste upon any street,sidewalk, right of way, storm sewer, catch basin, gutter or upon any Town-owned property.
Fail to take corrective measures ordered by the BRRA under authority of subsection 14-1.11.
§ 14-1.4. Authority or BRRA to Promulgate and Enforce Rulesand Regulations; Copies on File.
[
Ord. No. 92-3
§ 4]
The BRRA shall make, amend, revoke and enforce reasonable and necessary rules andregulations governing the operation of solid waste disposal facilities in the Town.
Any and all rules and regulations made and promulgated under the provisions hereof shall bepresented at a public hearing no less than 15 days prior to their effective date. Copies of the
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 83/138
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
a.
b.
a.
b.
a.
regulations adopted subsequent to the hearing shall be made available to the public no less thanfive days prior to their effective date and a copy shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 14-1.5. Duties of Occupant.
[
Ord. No. 92-3
§ 5]
The occupant of every dwelling unit and of every governmental, institutional, commercial orbusiness, industrial or agricultural establishment, producing solid waste within the corporate limitsof the Town, shall:
Provide sufficient solid waste containers for the storage of all solid waste, except bulkyrubbish and demolition and construction waste, to serve each such dwelling unit and/orestablishment. Such containers shall be so constructed and so maintained as to prevent thedispersal of waste placed therein upon the premises served, upon adjacent premises or uponan adjacent public right-of-way.
Place all solid waste to be collected in solid waste containers, except as otherwise providedherein.
Keep containers covered at all times except when depositing waste therein or removing thecontents thereof.
Maintain containers at all times in good repair.
Maintain containers and the area surrounding them in a clean, neat and sanitary condition atall times.
Residential solid waste containers shall be stored upon residential premises. Commercial solidwaste containers shall be stored upon private property unless the owner shall have been grantedwritten permission from the Town to use public property for such purposes. The storage site shallbe well drained and fully accessible to collection equipment, public health personnel and FireDepartment personnel.
§ 14-1.6. Commercial Solid Waste Collectors.
[
Ord. No. 92-3
§ 6]
Commercial solid waste collectors, permitted by the BRRA, shall be responsible for the collectionof solid waste from the point of collection to the transportation vehicle provided the solid wastewas stored in compliance with this section. Any spillage or blowing litter caused as a result of theduties of the solid waste collector shall be collected and placed in the transportation vehicle of thecommercial solid waste collector.
No portion of this section shall be construed so as to prevent residents of the Town fromtransporting to the Landfill waste generated at their residence or business establishment locatedwithin the Town.
§ 14-1.7. Transportation Vehicle Specifications, Inspections andUse.
[
Ord. No. 92-3
§ 7]
All transportation vehicles which are used by commercial solid waste collectors shall bemaintained in a safe, clean and sanitary condition, and shall be so constructed, maintained and
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 84/138
b.
c.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
a.
b.
c.
d.
operated as to prevent spillage of liquid or solid waste therefrom. All vehicles to be used bycollectors for transportation of solid waste shall be constructed with watertight bodies and withcovers, which may be an integral part of the vehicle or which may be a separate cover of suitablematerial with fasteners designed to be secured whenever the vehicle is transporting solid waste,or, as an alternative, the entire bodies thereof may be enclosed with only loading hoppersexposed.
Town-owned vehicles may be used to haul solid waste to the facility when public necessityrequires it or to haul solid waste generated by Town government operations or under suchconditions as the BRRA shall permit.
Any vehicles used to transport waste to the landfill shall be constructed and operated in such away that refuse shall not blow or fall off the vehicle and create an unsightly or dangerous roadsidecondition.
§ 14-1.8. Solid Waste Facility; Prohibited Deposits; SpecialWastes; Use Restricted; Permits for Disposal at Locations NotWithin the Town of Brooklyn.
[
Ord. No. 93-3
§ 8]
Pursuant to authority granted to the Town of Brooklyn by Section 22a-220a of the ConnecticutGeneral Statutes, solid waste generated by any person within the corporate limits of the Townshall be deposited for disposal at the Town solid waste facility, and disposal of solid waste at anyother area outside the boundaries of the Town is prohibited unless approved in writing by theBoard of Selectmen in accordance with subsection
14-1.8
paragraph i. The following materials,however, shall not be accepted at the Town solid waste facility:
Contaminating liquids.
Products from the clearing, demolition, excavation, construction or reconstruction of any Stateor Interstate road or highway.
Toxic or radioactive materials, dangerous chemicals, explosive wastes, inflammables,pathological wastes, infectious disease ("red bag") wastes, pesticides and pesticidecontainers, liquid waste, sewage, and sludge from septic systems, and dead animals.
Ash or residue from incinerators, unless immobilized by glass encapsulation, impediment in acemented binder, or treatment by some alternate process acceptable to the BRRA. In additionsuch disposal must be permitted by the BRRA.
Motor vehicles or major body or chassis components of motor vehicles.
Certain wastes may require special handling at the facility and shall be disposed of only in amanner acceptable to the BRRA and shall meet all local, State and Federal regulations. Disposalof such wastes shall be at the discretion of the BRRA and shall be arranged prior to delivery to thelandfill.
Solid waste generated by any person outside the corporate limits of the Town may not bedeposited at the facility without the written permission of the BRRA, except as providedhereinafter. Any such person shall be subject to all the provisions of this section. No Class A (asprovided in subsection 14-1.10) permits shall be issued to nonresidents of the Town.
If another Town or subdivision of the State is allowed to deposit solid waste it shall be on the basisof a contract between the Town of Brooklyn and such other town or subdivision which contractshall be approved by the BRRA and the Board of Selectmen and the Town meeting.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 85/138
e.
f.
g.
h.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
i.
The use of the Town solid waste facility by any person under the terms of this section shall be atthe risk of the person and upon the following conditions: In consideration of the grants andprivileges to use the facility, the person using the solid waste facility shall, as a conditionprecedent, release the Town from any right of action, claim or demand which may otherwiseaccrue to him by reason of the loss of any of his property while in, upon or about the premises atthe Town solid waste facility and further agrees for such consideration to indemnify the Town andsave it harmless from all claims, demands, actions, costs and charges to which the Town may besubject, or which it may have to pay by reason of injury to any person or property or loss of life orproperty suffered or sustained by any person while, in, upon or about the premises of the Townsolid waste facility.
No person shall go upon the solid waste facility for the purpose of depositing materials thereinwithout the permission of the BRRA nor shall any person deposit material at the solid waste facilityexcept in accordance with the provisions of this section and any rules and regulationspromulgated hereunder.
No person shall salvage, collect, or remove any refuse or other material from the landfill withoutthe permission of the BRRA.
Any person disposing of waste at the solid waste facility shall place such waste at a location orlocations designated by the attendant.
Any person wishing to dispose of solid wastes which are generated within the Town of Brooklyn atany location outside of the Town may apply for a permit from the Board to authorize such disposal.Applications for such permits shall be submitted to the Board on forms prescribed by the Board.The Board shall make a determination as to whether the application shall notify the applicant inwriting of its determination. Upon a determination by the Board that the application is complete,the Board shall provide notice to the public and the applicant of a hearing date, and shall hold ahearing concerning the application. At the hearing, the Board shall consider any evidencepresented by the applicant, the BRRA, or any other interested party. Following the conclusion ofthe hearing, the Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application, and providenotice to the applicant of its decision. In making its decision, the Board shall consider:
The effect of the application on the Town's solid waste disposal program;
The amount of waste to be disposed of at the proposed alternate disposal site;
The hauling distances from the source of the waste to the Town solid waste facility, and fromthe source of the waste to the proposed alternate disposal site;
The permit status of the proposed alternate disposal site;
The impact of the Town's loss of tipping fee revenue, which would result from the diversion ofthe waste from the Town solid waste facility, upon the Town's ability to operate a solid wastedisposal program for all of its residents in a manner that is environmentally sound andcomplies with the requirements of the Connecticut General Statutes and the Regulations ofthe Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection;
The impacts, if any, on the public health, safety and welfare from the transportation to anddisposal of the waste at the proposed alternate disposal site.
§ 14-1.9. Solid Waste Facility: Determination of Charges.
[
Ord. No. 92-3
§ 9]
The Town of Brooklyn shall determine the amount of any toll, fee, charge or other rate to be paid underthis section.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 86/138
a.
b.
c.
1.
2.
d.
e.
f.
g.
§ 14-1.10. Vehicle Admission Permits to the Solid Waste Facility.
[
Ord. No. 92-3
§ 10]
Permit Required. Admission to the Town solid waste facility for the purpose of dumping ordisposing of solid waste shall be by motor vehicle permit issued by the BRRA. These permits shallbe issued only to property owners or residents of the Town of Brooklyn or commercial solid wastecollectors who operate within the Town unless an exception is granted in writing by the BRRA.Permits must be affixed to the vehicle for which they are obtained. Permits shall be issued for oneyear periods and all permits expire on June 30 of each year.
Class A Permit. A Class A permit shall be required for admission to the Town facility by any personwho conveys solid waste collected and/or accumulated on his or her dwelling unit or businessestablishment within the corporate limits of the Town to the facility in a passenger car, van orpickup truck. A Class A permit may be obtained by the property owner, resident, or his or heragent at the office of the First Selectman upon presentation of proof of residency or ownership ofproperty in the Town of Brooklyn.
Class B Permits. A Class B permit shall be required for admission to the facility by any motorvehicle other than those defined in paragraph b hereinabove, which are used for the disposal ofwaste accumulated at the dwelling unit or business establishment of the owner, lessor or personrenting the vehicle, such dwelling unit or establishment being located within the corporate limits ofthe Town.
Class C or D Permits. A Class C or D permit shall be required for admission to the facility of anymotor vehicle owned, leased or rented and operated by a commercial solid waste collector inconnection with his business. Application for such permit shall be made by the collector or hisagent on a special form furnished by the Town and filed at the office of the First Selectman.
A Class C permit shall be required to be obtained for each and every vehicle operated by acommercial solid waste collector which transports for disposal at the landfill or for recycling nomore than 1,000 pounds of waste per week.
A Class D permit shall be required to be obtained for each and every vehicle operated by acommercial solid waste collector which transports for disposal at the landfill or for recyclingmore than 1,000 pounds of waste per week.
Fees for Class A, B, C, or D Permits. The fee for a Class A, B, C, or D permit shall be paid to theTown Treasurer at the time the permit is obtained or the application is filed.
Replacement Transfer. If a Class B, C or D motor vehicle permit is lost, misplaced or mutilated,there shall be a charge for each replacement which shall be paid by the owner or his agent to theTown Treasurer prior to the issuance of same. The owner shall not transfer the permit issued forone vehicle to any other vehicle.
Weighing. For purposes of assuring compliance with subsection 14-1.10d1, the BRRA mayrequire the weighing of vehicles at nearby scales. Failure of any operator of a vehicle to followrequests by the BRRA relative to such weighing shall be deemed a forfeit of the Class C or ClassD permit for such vehicle.
§ 14-1.11. Inspections; Violations of this Section; Notice;Suspension or Revocation of Permit.
[
Ord. No. 92-3
§ 11]
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 87/138
a.
b.
c.
The BRRA is authorized, upon determination of a violation of this section or the rules andregulations authorized herein, to order corrective measures, to suspend permits, to revokepermits, and to order the payment of a fine of not more than $100.00 per violation. The BRRA orits designee is further authorized to receive and investigate complaints, and to inspect all phasesof solid waste management within the Town of Brooklyn, except that no inspections shall be madeof any premises unless authorized by the owner or occupant or by die process of law. In all casesin which investigations and/or inspections indicate violation of this section or the rules andregulations authorized herein, the BRRA shall notify the person subject to the investigation and/orinspection by certified mail that it will hold a hearing to determine whether there has been aviolation. The BRRA shall hold a hearing not less than seven nor more than 30 days after themailing of the notice, and the person subject to the investigation and/or inspection shall have theright to be heard and to participate in the hearing, and shall be allowed to be represented bycounsel. At the conclusion of the hearing, the BRRA shall make a determination as to whether aviolation has occurred, and shall issue written notice of its decision by certified mail to the personsubject to the investigation and/or inspection. If the BRRA determines that a violation hasoccurred, written notice shall specify the type of violation or violations found, including the timeand date of each violation, the corrective measures, if any, to be taken and the time in which saidcorrective measures shall be taken, the amount of the fine, if any, for each violation, the dates ofsuspension, if any, of the permit or permits held by the violator, and the date of revocation, if any,of the permit or permits held by the violator.
Failure to take corrective measures within the time ordered by the BRRA shall constitute aseparate offense for which the BRRA may order the amount of a fine of not more than $100.00. Inthe case of unabated standing violations, each day shall constitute a separate violation for whichthe BRRA may order the payment of a fine of not more than $100.00.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the BRRA ordering corrective measures, suspension orrevocation of a permit, or a fine, may appeal to the Board of Selectmen within 10 days from themailing of the decision. The appeal shall be in writing, shall state the basis of the aggrievement,and shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk. The Board of Selectmen shall hold a hearing onthe appeal within 30 days from the date it is filed, and notice of the time and place of the hearingshall be provided to the appellant and BRRA by certified mail not less than seven days prior to thehearing. The appellant and BRRA shall have the right to be heard and to participate in the hearing,and shall be allowed to be represented by counsel. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board ofSelectmen shall make a decision on the appeal, and shall issue written notice of its decision bycertified mail to the appellant and the BRRA.
§ 14-1.12. Emergencies.
[
Ord. No. 92-3
§ 12]
The BRRA may suspend all or part of the regulations applying to the collection, transportation anddisposal of solid wastes or the provisions of this section in circumstances where the public health,safety, well being, or convenience are jeopardized. Such suspension shall be for the shortestpracticable time period. Other reasonable rules and regulations governing the handling and disposal ofsolid waste may be imposed during these times.
§ 14-2. MANDATORY RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS.
§ 14-2.1. Purpose.
[Ord. 10/11/90 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to make recycling mandatory in the Town of Brooklyn in compliance withPublic Act 87-544, codified in Sections 22a-241 through 22a-24lh of the Connecticut General Statutes,which requires every municipality in Connecticut to establish a mandatory recycling program no later
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 88/138
than January 1, 1991. Public Act 87-544 sets forth a statewide strategy to recycle not less than 25% ofthe solid waste generated in the State after January 1, 1991. The Town of Brooklyn recognizes thatrecycling conserves valuable material resources and energy, and reduces the overall amount of solidwater presently disposed of, thus saving valuable landfill space and tax dollars.
§ 14-2.2. Definitions.
[Ord. 10/11/90 § 2]
As used in this section:
BRRA
Shall mean the Brooklyn Resource Recovery Authority.
CARDBOARD
Shall mean corrugated boxes and similar corrugated and kraft page material which have aminimum of contamination by food or other material.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Shall mean buildings, or portions of building used for business purpose and not for residentialdwelling purposes.
COMPOSTING
Shall mean an accelerated biological process in which organic materials, such as yard wastes, arebroken down.
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTOR
Shall mean a BRRA permit holder who collects and transports solid waste and recyclablematerials from any location to the Town solid waste facility for a fee.
DEP
Shall mean the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
DIRECTOR
Shall mean the Town Director of Solid Waste Management.
DRY-CELL BATTERY
Shall mean device used for generating electric current through a chemical reaction, including butnot limited to, nickel-cadmium, batteries, carbon batteries and alkaline batteries.
DWELLING UNIT
Shall mean any room or group of rooms, located within a structure and forming a single habitableunit, with facilities which are used, or are intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking andeating.
GARBAGE
Shall mean putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation,cooking and eating.
GLASS FOOD CONTAINER
Shall mean a glass bottle or other glass container which contains foods that are suitable forhuman or animal consumption.
H.D.P.E. PLASTIC CONTAINER
Shall mean a high density polyethylene bottle or jar of any size or shape used to package food,household laundry products, or crankcase oil.
INTERMEDIATE PROCESSING CENTER
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 89/138
Shall mean a facility which can recycle an item or items and market or deliver for reuse theresulting material product or products. Such facilities may be owned by public or private entities orcombinations thereof and may offer service on a state, regional, municipal, or submunicipal level.
LEAVES
Shall mean the foliage of trees.
LOCAL PROCESSING SYSTEM
Shall mean a facility or technique authorized by a municipality and acceptable to the DEP whichcan recycle an item or items and market or deliver for reuse the resulting material product orproducts.
MARKET
Shall mean to sell a recyclable item to a costumer or consumer who will reuse it or dispose of it forreuse in a material product.
METAL FOOD CONTAINER
Shall mean an aluminum, bi-metal, steel, tin-plate steel, or other metallic can, plate or tray of anysize or shape used to package food product suitable for human or animal consumption.
MULTIPLE HOUSING FACILITY
Shall mean a housing facility containing more than one dwelling unit one roof.
NEWSPAPER
Shall mean used or discarded newsprint which has a minimum of contamination by food or othermaterial.
NEWSPRINT
Shall mean that class or kind of paper chiefly used for printing newspapers and weighing morethan 24.5 pounds but less than 35 pounds for 500 sheets of paper 2 x 3 feet in size, on rolls whichare not less than 13 inches wide and 28 inches in diameter and having a brightness of less than60.
OCCUPANT
Shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall be in actual possessionof any dwelling unit, or commercial establishment, or any other improved real property, either asan owner or as a tenant.
OFFICE PAPER
Shall mean used or discarded high-grade white paper and Manila paper including, but not limitedto, paper utilized for file folders, tab cards, writing, typing, printing, computer printing, andphotocopying, which is suitable for recycling and which has a minimum of contamination. For thepurposes of this section office paper generated by household dwelling units is excluded.
PERSON
Shall mean any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association,joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, or organizations and associations of anykind, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns.
P.E.T. PLASTIC FOOD CONTAINER
Shall mean a polyethylene terephthalate container of any size or shape used to packagebeverages.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Shall mean and include cardboard, glass food containers, leaves, metal food containers,newspaper, office paper, scrap metal, storage batteries or batteries, waste oil, and any othermaterials specifically designated as recyclables by DEP regulations, state statutes or BRRAregulations.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 90/138
RECYCLE
Shall mean to separate or divert an item or items from the solid waste stream for the purposes ofprocessing it or causing it to be processed into a material product, including the production ofcompost, in order to provide for the disposition of the item or items in a manner, other thanincineration or landfilling, which will best protect the environment. Nothing in this definition shallpreclude the use of waste oil as fuel in an oil burner.
RECYCLING CENTER
Shall mean the area at the solid waste facility designated by the BRRA for the handling ofrecyclable materials.
REFUSE
Shall mean solid waste.
REGIONAL PROCESSING CENTER
Shall mean an intermediate processing center which is authorized by a group of municipalities ordesignated by the Commissioner which can recycle an item or items and market the resultingmaterial product or products.
SCRAP METAL
Shall mean wastes such as white goods and other metal containers which consist predominantlyof ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, copper, lead, chromium, tin, nickel or alloys thereof.
SCRAP TIRES
Shall mean rubber or synthetic rubber tires used by or manufactured for vehicles including but notlimited to automobiles, trucks, buses and trailers.
SHALL
Is mandatory, while "may" is permissive as used herein.
SOLID WASTE
Shall mean unwanted or discarded materials, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or containedgaseous materials. Such wastes include but shall not be limited to garbage, street refuse, rubbish,animal and agricultural wastes, discarded appliances, special wastes, industrial wastes, anddemolition and construction wastes, and shall exclude hazardous wastes as defined in Section22a-115 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY
Shall mean the Town landfill.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Shall mean the process of storing, collecting, transporting, processing and disposing of wastes.
SPECIAL MATERIALS
Shall mean clean fill, scrap metal, white goods, tires and bulky items and items such as furniture,mattresses, rugs, and similar nonmetallic items.
STORAGE BATTERY OR BATTERY
Shall mean lead acid batteries or other batteries used in motor vehicles such as automobiles,airplanes, boats, recreational vehicles, tractors and like applications.
TOWN
Shall mean the Town of Brooklyn, Connecticut.
TRANSPORT
Shall mean the transporting of solid waste or recyclable materials from the place of collection tothe solid waste facility or local, regional, or intermediate processing center.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 91/138
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
a.
1.
2.
b.
c.
WASTE OIL
Shall mean crankcase oil which has been utilized in internal combustion engines.
YARD WASTES
Shall mean grass clippings, leaves, tree trimmings, weeds, garden plants, shrubs, branches,limbs, bushes, and similar materials grown on and emanating from premises within the Town.
§ 14-2.3. Prohibited Disposal and Collection Practices.
[Ord. 10/11/90 § 3]
This section applies to all persons within the Town of Brooklyn. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
Deliver materials designated as recyclable materials to the Solid Waste Facility for disposal.
Handle recyclable materials in any manner which is inconsistent with this section or withregulations adopted by the BRRA pursuant to this section concerning recycling.
Collect or transport recyclable materials owned by other persons without a permit issued by theBRRA pursuant to the Town's Solid Waste Regulations, or pursuant to this section.
Collect or transport recycling materials from outside the Town for disposal at the Solid WasteFacility or for recycling at the recycling center without prior written permission from the BRRA.
Violate any other provision of this section.
§ 14-2.4. Separation and Delivery of Recycling Materials.
[Ord. 10/11/90 § 4]
All materials designated as recyclable materials shall be separated from non-recyclable materialsat dwelling units, commercial establishments, and multiple housing facilities in an orderly fashionsuch that the surrounding area is maintained in a clean, neat, and sanitary condition at all timesand so as not to constitute a nuisance or otherwise be objectionable. Failure to separaterecyclable materials in accordance with this paragraph shall be a violation of this section.
All material designated by the BRRA as recyclable materials shall be collected and delivered asfollows:
Recyclable materials may be collected and delivered by any BRRA permit holder to therecycling center during operation hours. Town residents and commercial establishments maycontract with any commercial solid waste collector for collection and delivery of recyclablematerials. Recyclable materials shall be transported in secure vehicles subject to inspectionby and approval of the BRRA.
Recyclable materials may be placed at the curbside for collection by the BRRA. Collectionsshall be carried out in accordance with a schedule and route to be established and publishedregularly by the BRRA.
Failure to collect and deliver recyclable materials as set forth in this paragraph shall be a violationof this section.
Recyclable materials which are delivered to the recycling center must be placed in the containersdesignated for each recyclable material. Ownership of all recyclable materials shall be transferredto the Town at the moment that such materials are delivered to the recycling center; provided,however, that the BRRA and Town reserve the right to reject those recyclable materialsdetermined by BRRA or the Town to be contaminated or otherwise unacceptable recyclable
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 92/138
d.
e.
f.
materials shall be delivered by the BRRA permit holder delivering such materials to the solidwaste facility for disposal. Failure to separate and/or place recyclable materials in the appropriatecontainer shall be violation of this section.
Recyclable materials placed at the curbside for collection must be separated into the propergroups and each group of recyclable materials must be properly secured. The proper methods forseparating recycled materials into groups and securing such materials shall be designated by theBRRA in the BRRA regulations. Materials designated as recyclable materials must be placedproperly at the curbside and shall not be deposited in the travel portion of the road or street.Ownership of recyclable materials placed at the curbside shall be transferred to the Town at themoment such materials are picked up by the BRRA; provided, however, that the BRRA and Townreserve the right to reject those recyclable materials determined by BRRA or the Town to becontaminated or otherwise unacceptable recyclable center. The BRRA may establish by regulationa limit on the amount of recyclable materials which will be picked up at curbside at any address bythe BRRA, and require that the remainder of recyclable materials above the limit must betransported at that addressee's sole expense to the recycling center by either a BRRA permitholder or the BRRA (in its discretion) for a fee to be determined under subsection
14-2.6
.Contaminated or otherwise unacceptable recyclable materials shall be delivered by the BRRApermit holder delivering such materials to the solid waste facility for disposal. Failure to separate,secure, or properly place recyclable materials at the curbside on the designated day shall beviolation of this section. The purposeful contamination of recyclable materials also shall be aviolation of this section.
Any collector who has reason to believe that a person from whom he collects solid waste orrecyclable materials in violation of this section or BRRA regulations shall promptly notify theBRRA. Upon the request of the BRRA, the collector shall provide a warning notice, by tag or othermeans, to any person suspected by the collector or BRRA of violating separation requirements.
The BRRA shall promulgate and publish regulations under subsection 14-3.7 which further specifythe duties and responsibilities of all persons pursuant to this section, including but not limited tothe location and timing of routes to be followed by the BRRA for curbside collection, andrequirements for separating and securing recyclables for curbside collection. Without limiting thegenerality of the foregoing, the BRRA is authorized to require, by regulation, commercial haulersto periodically submit a list of Town customers to assist the Town in enforcing the provision of thissection. Failure to comply with said regulations shall be a violation of the section.
§ 14-2.5. Composting and Other Lawful Method of Recycling.
[Ord. 10/11/90 § 5]
Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent or discourage any person from lawfully taking anddisposing of recyclable material outside of the Town or from lawfully composting or otherwise lawfullyutilizing recyclable material such that they never enter the waste stream, particularly with respect toleaves and other yard wastes.
§ 14-2.6. Fees.
[Ord. 10/11/90 § 6]
The Town at a Town meeting shall determine the amount of any toll, fee, charge or other rate, if any, tobe paid under this section for curbside collection of recyclable materials and/or delivery of recyclablematerials to the recycling center, and shall publish notice of changes to such toll, fee, charge or otherrate no later than 10 days prior to the effective date of such change. The BRRA by regulation adoptedin accordance with subsection
14-2.7
, may determine the amount of any toll, fee, change, or rate, ifany, to be paid under this section unless and until the Town, at a Town meeting, exercises its powerunder this section.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 93/138
a.
b.
a.
1.
2.
3.
4.
b.
§ 14-2.7. Regulations.
[Ord. 10/11/90 § 7]
The BRRA shall make, amend, revoke, and enforce any necessary rules and regulationsgoverning recycling in the Town.
Any and all regulations proposed by the BRRA under the provisions of this section shall bepresented at a public hearing no later than 15 days prior to their proposed effective date. Copiesof any regulations to be adopted by BRRA subsequent to the hearing shall be filed with the TownClerk and made available to the public no later than 10 days prior to their effective date. Theeffective date shall be stated in the regulations.
§ 14-2.8. Enforcement Generally.
[Ord. 10/11/90 § 8]
This section, and any regulations promulgated by the BRRA pursuant to this section, shall be enforcedby the BRRA and its agents and assigns, by the Director and his agents and assigns, and by the Boardof Selectmen and its agents and assigns. The Director and any other agents specifically designated byboth the BRRA and the Board of Selectmen are hereby authorized to issue written warnings andcitations to violators of this section in accordance with Public Act 88-221 shall be conduct by the BRRAwith respect to all such citations and all other complaints of violations of this section. The enforcementprovisions of this section are to be implemented only as a last resort, when responsible efforts toachieve voluntary compliance have failed.
§ 14-2.9. Written Warning and Citations.
[Ord. 10/11/90 § 9]
The Director or other duly authorized party, upon a determination that a violation of this section orany regulations promulgated hereunder has occurred or is occurring, is authorized to issue awritten warning to the violator or violators. Such written warning shall be delivered by certifiedmail, shall provide notice of the alleged violations, shall enclose a copy of this section, and shalldirect the violator or violators to cease violating this section and/or take appropriate correctiveactions.
If, within 10 days after receipt of the written warning by the violator or violators, the Director orother duly authorized party determines that the violations are continuing and/or have not beencorrected, the Director or other duly authorized party may issue to the violator or violators acitation, the citation may order corrective measures, suspension or revocation of a permit, and/orpayment of a fine of not more than $100.00 for individuals or $500.00 for commercialestablishments per violation. Such citation shall advise the person cited of the followinginformation, as appropriate:
The allegations against him;
Any corrective actions ordered;
Any permit suspension or revocation, and/or the amount of any fines, penalties, costs or feesdue;
His right to contest his liability before the BRRA by delivering in person or by mail writtennotice to the Director or other duly authorized party within 10 days of the date thereofrequesting a hearing;
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 94/138
5.
6.
a.
b.
His failure to request such a hearing will result in an assessment of fines, penalties, costs offees and final decision being entered against him; and
Such final decision may issue without further notice. If the person who is sent notice pursuantto this section wishes not to contest his responsibility for any alleged violation or the sanctionsimposed in the citation, he may, without requesting a hearing, comply with the citation byconducting any corrective measures ordered, returning the permit in the event of asuspension or revocation, and paying the full amount of any uncontested fines, penalties,costs of fees in person or by mail to the BRRA. Such actions or payment shall be inadmissiblein any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other persontaking these actions or making the payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail awritten request for a hearing within 10 days of the date such person received the citation shallbe deemed to have admitted the allegations of the citation and the responsibility therefor, andthe Director or other duly authorized party shall certify such person's failure to respond to theBRRA. The BRRA shall thereupon enter its final decision, and shall, if a fine, penalty, cost orfee has been assessed, follow the procedures set forth in subsection 14-2.10c below.
§ 14-2.10. Hearings.
[Ord. 10/11/90 § 10]
Any person who requests a hearing pursuant to subsection
14-2.9b
hereof shall be given writtennotice of the date, time and place for the hearing by the BRRA. Such hearing shall be held notless than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of notice, provided theBRRA shall grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by an interested party forpostponement or continuance. Original or certified copies of the written warning and citationissued by the Director of other duly authorized party shall be filed and retained by the BRRA, andshall be deemed to the business records within the scope of Section 52-180 of the ConnecticutGeneral Statutes and evidence of the Facts contained therein. The presence of the Director orother duly authorized party shall be required at the hearing if such person so requests. A personwishing to contest his responsibility for any alleged violation or the sanctions imposed in thecitation shall appear at the hearing, may present evidence in his behalf, and may be representedby counsel. A designated Town official, other than a member of the BRRA, may present evidenceon behalf of the Town. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the ChiefExecutive Officer of the Town, provided that in the event the hearing might result in the suspensionor revocation of a permittee, the hearing shall be conducted by all of the members of the BRRA. Ifsuch person fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter a decision be default against him upon afinding of proper notice and liability under this section. The hearing officer may accept from suchperson copies of investigatory and citation reports and other official documents by mail and maydetermine thereby that the appearance of such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shallconduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as it deems fair andappropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but alltestimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce his decisionat the end of the hearing. If the hearing officer determines the person is not responsible for thealleged violations or the sanctions imposed in the citation, he shall dismiss the matter and enterhis determination in writing accordingly. If the hearing officer determines that the person isresponsible for the alleged violations or the sanctions imposed in the citation, he shall forthwithenter his determination in writing and assess any fines, penalties, costs or fees against suchperson as provided by this section.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the BRRA ordering corrective measures, suspension orrevocation of a permit, or a fine, penalty, cost or fee, may appeal to the Board of Selectmen within10 days of the BRRA decision. The appeal shall be in writing, shall state the basis of theaggrievement, and shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk. The Board of Selectmen shall holda hearing on the appeal within 30 days from the date it is filed, and notice of the time and place ofthe hearing shall be provided to the appellant and BRRA by certified mail not less than seven days
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 95/138
c.
prior to the hearing. The appellant and BRRA shall have the right to be heard and to participate inthe hearing, and shall be allowed to be represented by counsel. At the conclusion of the hearing,the Board of Selectmen shall make a decision on the appeal, and shall issue written notice of itsdecision by certified mail to the appellant and the BRRA.
If any assessment under this section is not paid on the date of its entry, the BRRA shall send byfirst class mail notice of the assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30days nor more than 12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment withthe Clerk of the Superior Court for the geographical area in which the Town is located togetherwith an entry fee of $8.00. The certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a recordof assessment. Within such twelve-month period, assessments against the same person may beaccrued and filed as one record of assessment and court costs of $8.00, against such person infavor of the Town.
§ 14-2.11. Judicial Review.
[Ord. 10/11/90 § 11]
A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this section is entitled to judicialreview by way of appeal. An appeal shall be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of suchassessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in an amount equal tothe entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to Section 52-259 of the Connecticut General Statutes,in the Superior Court for the geographical area in which the Town is located. The institution of such anappeal shall entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with the rules of the Judges of the SuperiorCourt.
§ 14-2.12. Emergencies.
[Ord. 10/11/90 § 12]
The BRRA may suspend all or part of the regulations applying to the collection, transportation anddisposal of recyclable materials or the provisions of this section in circumstances where the publichealth, safety, well being, or convenience are jeopardized. Such suspension shall be for the shortestpracticable time period. Other reasonable rules and regulations governing the handling and disposal ofrecyclable materials may be imposed during these times.
Chapter 15. Sewers
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Capital Connection Fee Schedule
Article I. SEWER REGULATIONS
§ 15-1. PURPOSE.
[Ord. 1/20/79 A1]
In order to protect, preserve and insure the public health of the residents of the Town of Brooklyn itshall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be placed or deposited upon public orprivate property, or to discharge into any natural outlet within the Town of Brooklyn, or in any areaunder the jurisdiction of the Town of Brooklyn, any human excrement, garbage, sanitary sewage,industrial or commercial waste or any polluted water except in places designated for such purposes bythe Town of Brooklyn and where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with thesubsequent provisions of this Article
I
.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 96/138
In furtherance of the above purposes and in order to insure proper removal and disposal of sewagewastes and sewage waters within the Town of Brooklyn, to insure the proper operation andmaintenance of public sanitary sewers and private septic systems, sewage pumping facilities within theTown; and to provide for the keeping of adequate records of sewers, private septic disposal systems,and appurtenances and connections thereto, the following regulations for the construction,maintenance, installation, use, repair, alteration and discontinuance or abandonment of sewers andprivate septic systems and appurtenances and connection thereto, including pipes discharging directlyor indirectly into and through the sewers and appurtenances of the Public sanitary sewer system of theTown of Brooklyn and including discharge into private septic systems, as provided in Section 7-245 etseq. of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut; (Revision of 1958, as amended), is herebyenacted.
§ 15-2. DEFINITIONS.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AII]
As used in this section:
BOD (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND)
Shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter understandard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN
Shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives thedischarge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys itto the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER
Shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
CHLORINE DEMAND
Shall mean the amount of chlorine which must be added to waters or wastes to produce a residualchlorine in such waters or wastes.
COMBINED SEWER
Shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
COMMERCIAL WASTES
Shall mean the liquid wastes from commercial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
EASEMENT
Shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
FLOATABLE OIL
Shall mean oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity fromwastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be consideredfree of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with thecollection system.
GARBAGE
Shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from thehandling, storage, and sale of produce.
HEALTH OFFICER
Shall mean the Health Officer of the Town of Brooklyn.
HEARING BOARD
Shall mean that Board appointed according to provision of Section
15-19
.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 97/138
INDUSTRIAL WASTES
Shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET
Shall mean rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs and otherbodies of water, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through orborder upon the boundaries of the Town of Brooklyn.
ON-PREMISES RESTAURANT KITCHEN
Shall mean the kitchen facilities situated in a commercial restaurant open to the public where thefood prepared therein is consumed on the premises.
PERSON
Shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group.
pH
Shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter ofsolution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE
Shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, which have beenshredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normallyprevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER
Shall refer to the provisions and requirements of the Sewer Ordinance, Public Health Code,Building Code, Zoning Ordinance, Planning Regulations, Subdivision Regulations, InlandWetlands Ordinance, and any other statute, ordinance or regulation of the Town of Brooklynand/or the State of Connecticut.
PUBLIC SEWER
Shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which iscontrolled by public authority.
REASONABLE LENGTH OF TIME
Shall mean 90 days, weather permitting.
SANITARIAN
Shall mean that person designated by the Sewer Authority to implement and enforce theprovisions of this chapter, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative, in addition to theauthority conferred upon such Sanitarian by the Public Health Code, Building Code, ZoningRegulations, and other laws and ordinances of the Town of Brooklyn and/or the State ofConnecticut.
SANITARY SEWER
Shall mean a sewer which carries wastewater and to which storm, surface, and ground waters arenot intentionally admitted.
SEPTIC TANK OR PRIVATE SEPTIC DISPOSAL SYSTEM
Shall mean an on-site, subsurface waste disposal system constructed and maintained inaccordance with all requirements of the Public Health Code, Building Code, Zoning Ordinance,Sewer Ordinance, and any other regulations, laws or ordinances of the Town of Brooklyn and/orthe State of Connecticut.
SEWAGE
Shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings,institutions and industrial establishments, excluding however, all those industrial and commercialwastes other than from toilets, normal bathroom use, or on-premises restaurant kitchens.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 98/138
SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITIES
Shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
SEWER
Shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER AUTHORITY
Is defined in Chapter 103 of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958), as demanded.
SHALL
Is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
SLUG
Shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of anygiven constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutesmore than five times the average 24 hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
STORM SEWER OR STORM DRAIN
Shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage.
STORM WATER
Shall include the run-off or discharge of rain and melted snow or other water from roofs, surfacesof public or private lands, or elsewhere. Storm water shall also include Subsoil Drainage asdefined in this section.
SUB-SOIL DRAINAGE
Shall include water from the soil percolating into sub-soil drains and through foundation walls,basement floors or from underground pipes or from similar sources.
SUITABLE FACILITIES
Shall mean public sanitary sewer, or septic tank.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS
Shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, orother liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
TOWN
Shall mean the Town of Brooklyn, Connecticut.
UNCONTAMINATED COOLING WATER
Shall mean process water in general used for cooling purposes which has such characteristicsthat it may be discharged to natural receiving waters in accordance with all Town, State andFederal Regulations.
WASTEWATER
Shall mean the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be acombination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and storm waterthat may be present.
WATERCOURSE
Shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
§ 15-3. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
§ 15-3.1. Depositing Garbage or Excrement Regulated.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 99/138
[Ord. 1/20/79 AIII § 3.1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitarymanner on public or private property within the Town of Brooklyn or in any area under the jurisdiction ofsaid Town, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
Customary agricultural utilization and disposition of animal excrement in a sanitary manner upon publicor private property shall be lawful within the Town of Brooklyn.
§ 15-3.2. Discharge of Sewage or Polluted Water into NaturalOutlet.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AIII § 3.2]
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town of Brooklyn, or any area under thejurisdiction of said Town, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment hasbeen provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Article and the appropriate permit(s)obtained from the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 15-3.3. Proximity to Sewer Line; Connections Required.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AIII § 3.3]
The owner of all existing or subsequently constructed houses, buildings or properties used or to beused for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose, situated within the Town on aparcel of land having its nearest property line not more than 100 feet from a public sanitary sewer ofthe Town is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet, bathroom and kitchen facilitiestherein, as appropriate to its use, and to connect such facilities directly with the public sanitary sewer inaccordance with the provisions of this Article, within six months after date of official notice to do so.
§ 15-3.4. Buildings Not Accessible to Sewers.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AIII]
All existing or subsequently constructed homes, businesses, buildings, institutions and industrialestablishments not accessible to a public sanitary sewer shall have a suitable private septic disposalsystem, the design, installation, operation and/or repair of which shall be subject to the inspection,supervision and approval of the Sanitarian (which approval by the Sanitarian shall be deemed toinclude approval of proposed private septic systems prior to construction of such systems), his deputyor agent in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Building Code, Zoning Ordinance, PublicHealth Code, regulations of the Planning and Zoning Commission, regulations of the Sewer Authorityand this chapter.
§ 15-4. MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE SEPTIC DISPOSALSYSTEMS.
§ 15-4.1. Construction of Private Septic Disposal System.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AIV]
Except as herein provided it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any private septic disposalsystem or other facilities intended or used for the disposal of sewage unless such construction ormaintenance is accomplished in accordance with the provisions of this Article
I
.
§ 15-5. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 100/138
§ 15-5.1. Permit Required to Disturb Public Sewer.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AV § 5.1]
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, ordisturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from theSanitarian.
Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial change in the volume orcharacter of pollutants that are being discharged into the system shall notify the Sanitarian at least 45days prior to the proposed change or connection.
§ 15-5.2. Classes of Building Sewer Permits.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AV § 5.2]
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits; (a) for residential and commercial service, and(b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agentshall make application on a special form furnished by the Town. The permit application shall besupplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment ofthe Sanitarian. A permit and inspection fee as established by the Town for a residential or commercialbuilding sewer permit and for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the Town at the timethe application is filed.
§ 15-5.3. Discharge into Sewers; Amount Limited.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AV § 5.3]
No person shall discharge to any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, from single source, domesticsewage in excess of 5,000 gallons per day, industrial wastes, and/or cooling water without firstobtaining a permit from the Sanitarian and the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection(DEP).
§ 15-5.4. Cost for Installation of Sewer.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AV § 5.4]
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borneby the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may directly orindirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 15-5.5. Separate Sewer for Each Building; Exception.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AV § 5.5]
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where onebuilding stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can beconstructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewerfrom the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one buildingsewer.
§ 15-5.6. Use of Old Building Sewers.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AV § 5.6]
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 101/138
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found onexamination and test by the Sanitarian to meet all requirements of this Article
I
.
§ 15-5.7. Conforming to Building and Plumbing Code.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AV § 5.7]
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be usedin excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to therequirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Town.In the absence of Code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth inappropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
§ 15-5.8. Soil Vent Pipe.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AV § 5.8]
No building shall be connected to a public sewer unless the plumbing system of the building has a soilvent pipe extended to a point above the roof. The Sewer Authority may require that no running trap,main house trap or other device which might prevent the free flow of air throughout the whole course ofthe building sewer, house drain and soil vent pipe be allowed.
§ 15-5.9. Elevation of Sewer Line; Lift Station.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AV § 5.9]
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below thebasement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the publicsewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means anddischarged to the building sewer. Plans and specifications of the lift station shall be submitted to theConnecticut Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). Copies of the DEP approval must besubmitted to the Sewer Authority before a connection permit will be issued.
§ 15-5.10. Surface Water or Groundwater Prohibited.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AV § 5.10]
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, orother sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which, in turn, isconnected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 15-5.11. Connections.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AV § 5.11]
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of theBuilding and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Town, or the proceduresset forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All suchconnection shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures andmaterials must be approved by the Sanitarian before installation.
§ 15-5.12. Inspection of Building Sewer.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AV § 5.12]
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 102/138
a.
b.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Sanitarian when the building sewer is readyfor inspection and connection to the public sewer. The Sanitarian or his representatives shall beafforded all reasonable opportunity to oversee the construction of all parts of any building sewerconnected directly or indirectly, or intended to be connected, to any public sewer of the Town and toobtain and record the location and other pertinent facts with respect to such sewer.
§ 15-5.13. Excavation to be Guarded.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AV § 5.13]
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights soas to protect the public hazard. Streets, sideways, parkways, and other public property disturbed in thecourse of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town.
§ 15-5.14. Proximity to Water Well.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AV § 5.14]
No building sewer shall be constructed within 25 feet of water supply well. If a building sewer isconstructed within 25 to 75 feet of a water supply well it shall be constructed of extra heavy cast iron(ASTM 74-69) with leaded joints, ductile iron or P.V.C. (S.D.R.35) whose infiltration/exfiltration rateshall not exceed 25 gallons/diameter per mile per day.
§ 15-6. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
§ 15-6.1. Discharges Prohibited.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVI § 6.1]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roofrunoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters toany sanitary sewer.
§ 15-6.2. Unpolluted Drainage to Storm Sewer.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVI § 6.2]
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewer as are specificallydesignated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Sanitarian. Uncontaminated coolingwater or unpolluted process water may be discharged on approval of the Sanitarian and theConnecticut Department of Environmental Protection, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet.
§ 15-6.3. Chemical Discharges Prohibited.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVI § 6.3]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes toany public sewers:
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosives liquids, solid, or gas.
Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity,either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatmentprocess, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazardin the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 103/138
c.
d.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
1.
h.
Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0, or having any other corrosive property capableof causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstructions to theflow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, butnot limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails andpaper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
§ 15-6.4. Limitation on Discharges.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVI § 6.4]
The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be limited in discharges toconcentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process, orequipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger life,limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The Sanitarian may set limitations lower than thelimitation established in the regulations below, if in his opinion they are necessary to meet the aboveobjectives. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Sanitarian will giveconsideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities inthe sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacityof the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materialsor characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharge to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violatedwithout approval of the Sanitarian are as follows:
Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 Fahrenheit (65 Celsius).
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between32 degrees and 150 degrees F (0 and 65 degrees C) and free in excess of 25 mg/l.
Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat, or grease.
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see Section
15-2
, Definitions). Garbagegrinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants,hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from thepreparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served bycaterers.
Any waters or wastes containing metallic ions and salts thereof including but not limited to iron,chromium, copper, zinc, cyanides, nickel, lead, tin, silver, mercury and similar objectionable ortoxic substances, whether neutralized or not, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorinerequirement will be subject to the following: submission of technical information and appropriateengineering data to the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection regardingthe nature and strength of the proposed waste including appropriate pretreatment, if necessary, tobe reviewed and approved by the Department of Environmental Protection prior to initiation of thedischarge.
Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may beestablished by the Sanitarian.
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limitsestablished by the Sanitarian in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
Materials which exert or cause:
Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth,lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved, solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 104/138
2.
3.
4.
i.
j.
a.
b.
c.
d.
chloride and sodium sulfate.)
Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanningsolutions).
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as toconstitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by thewastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree thatthe wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of the DEP, which hasjurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system,release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, orcreate a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes or which may cause theeffluent limitations of the DEP Permit for the wastewater treatment plant to be exceeded.
§ 15-6.5. Substances Having a Deleterious Effect.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVI § 6.5]
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, whichwaters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection
15-6.4
, andwhich in the judgment of the Sanitarian may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute apublic nuisance, the Sanitarian may:
Reject the wastes;
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes.
If the Sanitarian permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation ofthe plants and equipment shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, andlaws.
§ 15-6.6. Removal of Grease, Oil and Sand.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVI § 6.6]
Grease, oil, and sand removal shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Sanitarian, it is necessaryfor the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammablewastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such removal shall not be required for privateliving quarters or dwelling units. Removal facilities shall be of a type and capacity approved by theSanitarian, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
§ 15-6.7. Owner to Provide Preliminary Treatment.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVI § 6.7]
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 105/138
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, theyshall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 15-6.8. Control Manhole.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVI § 6.8]
When required by the Sanitarian, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carryingindustrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters andother appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of thewastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall beconstructed in accordance with plans approved by the Sanitarian. This manhole shall be installed bythe owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 15-6.9. Monitoring of Discharges.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVI § 6.9]
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which referenceis made in this Article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methodsfor the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association,and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the controlmanhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall beconsidered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which thebuilding sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflectthe effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life,limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24 hour composite of alloutfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally,but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24 hour composite of alloutfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples). All industries discharging into apublic sewer shall perform such monitoring of their discharges as the Sanitarian and/or other dulyauthorized employees of the Town may reasonably require, including installation, use, andmaintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping records and reporting the results of such monitoring tothe Sanitarian. Such records shall be made available upon request by the Sanitarian to other agencieshaving jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters.
§ 15-6.10. Special Agreements.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVI § 6.10]
No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement orarrangement between the Brooklyn Sewer Authority and any industrial concern whereby an industrialwaste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Brooklyn Sewer Authority fortreatment, subject to payment therefore, by the industrial concern. No such agreements shallcontravene any requirements of existing Federal Laws and are compatible with any User Charge andIndustrial Cost Recovery system in effect.
§ 15-6.11. Compliance with Department of EnvironmentalProtection Water Compliance Unit.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVI § 6.11]
Prior to initiating any type of industrial waste discharge to the sanitary sewer, the industrial orcommercial concern must comply with all the requirements of the Department of EnvironmentalProtection (DEP), Water Compliance Unit in obtaining a Permit. These requirements include
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 106/138
compliance with the provisions of Title 22A Chapter 446K of the Connecticut General Statutes and theDEP regulations and procedures.
§ 15-7. DRAIN LAYING FOR BUILDING DRAINS ANDSEWERS.
§ 15-7.1. Licensing of Drain Layer.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVII § 7.1]
The Town of Brooklyn may license as a drain layer any person, firm or corporation found to be suitableand competent who shall have applied to it on forms to be provided for that purpose and who shallhave furnished the surety bond, and insurance required by Section
15-10
and Section
15-11
hereof.
§ 15-7.2. Authorized Persons.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVII § 7.2]
No person other than those described in subsection
15-7.1
shall construct, repair, alter or remove anysewer, building drain, building sewer, or sewer line connected to or with or discharging directly orindirectly to or into, any public sanitary sewer of the Town or intended to discharge thus at some futuretime, regardless of whether the work is located in a public street or in public or private land.
§ 15-7.3. Persons Authorized to Work on Sewers.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVII § 7.3]
The following may, as indicated, construct, repair, alter or remove sewers, subject to supervision andapproval by the Sewer Authority: (a) Regular forces of a contractor employed by the Town, operatingunder orders of the Sewer Authority and in the performance of work for the Town. (b) Regular forces ofthe Town and/or the State Highway Department operating under and subject to permit for the particularjob to be issued by said Sewer Authority or the Sanitarian and while engaged in the regular work andoperations of the Town or State Highway Department. (c) Regular forces of any public utilitycorporation authorized by State law to construct, maintain and operate pipes or ducts within publichighways within the Town while engaged in work incidental to the regular structures of the utilitycompany and operating under and subject to the conditions of a permit for the particular job issued bythe Sewer Authority or the Sanitarian.
§ 15-7.4. Plumbers.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVII § 7.4]
The limitations as to persons who may construct, alter or repair building drains and building sewers asprovided in subsection
15-7.1
shall not restrict the usual work of plumbers or others when operating inaccordance with local Plumbing and Building Codes of the Town when they are working on pipes withinor not more than five feet outside the walls of a building or similar structure; provided, no plumber orother person shall make any connection to a public sewer of the Town without a permit therefore, evenif the sewer is located under or immediately adjacent to any building or similar structure; and provided,all fixtures within the building or structure and all use made of them shall conform to the requirementsof this Article as to what may and may not be permitted to be discharged into public sanitary sewers.
§ 15-7.5. Owner Performance.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 107/138
a.
b.
c.
d.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVII § 7.5]
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the owner of a building or structure from personally installingthe building sewer on his own property enter the conditions herein specified:
Approval of plans and final approval by the Sanitarian shall be obtained;
A permit shall be secured as herein provided before the work in performed;
Permit fees shall be paid, and application made for inspections; and
All work shall be performed by the owner himself in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
§ 15-7.6. Assistance of Sewer Authority.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVII § 7.6]
The Sewer Authority or its representatives may assist in the installation, repair and alteration ofconnections to public sewers and of building connections, by furnishing such information as may be intheir possession and proper to be furnished to the party performing such work, by taking levels andstaking out grades for sewers and building connections where deemed expedient, and in similar ways.
§ 15-7.7. Reimbursement to Town.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVII § 7.7]
The Sewer Authority may in any case where the quantity or expense of work by Town forces incidentalto the construction, repair or inspection of any sewer or sewer connection warrants such arequirement, require that the owner of property concerned or the drain layer shall reimburse the Townfor the cost of services of Town employees engaged in work or inspections incidental to the sewerconnection. The Sewer Authority or its representative may make a suitable provision for suchreimbursement a condition precedent to the issuance of any permit for construction, alteration or repairof such sewer or sewer connection, subject to such direction as the Sewer Authority may issue.
§ 15-8. PERMITS.
§ 15-8.1. Permit Required to Perform Sewer Work.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVIII § 8.1]
No person, other than those working for and under the direction of the Town, shall make anyexcavation for or construction, install, lay, repair, alter or remove any sewer, building drain, buildingsewer, sewer connection, or appurtenance thereof or connect to such sewer within the Town, which isin any way connected to or discharges directly or indirectly to or into any public sanitary sewer of theTown, or is intended at some future time to be so connected or so discharged, until the person or partyshall have applied for and secured from the Sanitarian a permit for doing such work. Such permits maybe issued only to those qualified to perform such work as provided in subsection
15-7.1
.
§ 15-8.2. Application for Permit.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVIII § 8.2]
Every application for a permit shall be made in writing on forms to be provided by the Town for thatpurpose and shall be signed by the drain layer or other qualified person or party, or an authorizedagent thereof. The application shall state the location and ownership of the property to be served bythe sewer in question, the post office address of the property owner, a brief description of the work tobe done, and shall contain an agreement that the permittee will do the work in accordance with the
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 108/138
requirements of Town and local laws, ordinances, regulations and permits as those laws, etc., mayapply to the particular locations or work and will save the Town and others harmless from damages,loss, damage claim, etc., in accordance with the terms of the drain layer's surety bond provided for inSection
15-11
hereof. The Sanitarian shall require as a prerequisite to the issuance of any permit thathe be furnished evidence (a) any and all necessary permits, etc., to open public streets, public orprivate grounds or property have been or will be issued; (b) that the agent of the applicant is properlyauthorized to sign the application in question; (c) that the devices used or provisions made to preventthe entry into public sanitary sewers of any substances forbidden entry by this Article will be provided,maintained and operated as required by Sections
15-5
and
15-6
hereof; and any other information orproof pertinent to the particular job in question.
§ 15-8.3. Permits; Fees.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVIII § 8.3]
Any person who applies for a permit to connect into a public sanitary sewer or sewer line shall pay theprescribed fee for each such permit. Permits shall not be transferable or assignable by the permittee.Permits shall be kept on the premises where and at all times when work is in progress and shall beshown to any proper person asking to see the same. All persons operating under such permits shall beheld responsible for conformity to the requirements thereof and of this Article.
§ 15-8.4. Suspension or Termination of Permit.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AVIII § 8.4]
Any permit, in whole or in part, may be suspended, canceled or terminated by the Sewer Authority orthe Sanitarian on written notice to the permittee for violation of the conditions thereto or for the violationof the requirements of this Article.
§ 15-9. CONDUCT OF PERMITTEE.
§ 15-9.1. Drain Layers Conduct.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AIX § 9.1]
Each drain layer licensed in accordance with subsection
15-7.1
hereof shall be responsible for theproper performance of all work performed under the permits issued to him and for the conduct of allwork and all materials furnished on work by his employees or agents. No work shall be sublet by adrain layer of full control and responsibility for all parts of the work.
§ 15-10. DRAIN LAYER RESPONSIBILITY.
§ 15-10.1. Town Saved Harmless.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AX § 10.1]
Each drain layer shall save the Town of Brooklyn, its agents and servants harmless from all loss orclaims of loss, damage or injury arising from the operations of the drain layer under any permits issuedhim by reason of his negligence in performing the work in which he has been issued a permit. He shallfile with the Town a certificate or certificates of Public Liability and Property Damage Insurance, whichshall remain in effect for a period of one year from date of its completion. The insurance shall be notless than $50,000.00 for each person and not less the $100,000.00 for each accident, and propertyinsurance shall not be less than $50,000.00.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 109/138
§ 15-11. SURETY BOND.
§ 15-11.1. Submission of Surety Bond.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AXI § 11.1]
Every person making application for permit shall file with the Town a satisfactory bond of a suretycompany authorized to transact such business in the State of Connecticut, and having an agent withinthe limits of Windham County, in a form satisfactory to the Sewer Authority or the Sanitarian. The bondshall be in an amount not less than $5,000.00, to be determined by the Sanitarian, conditioned uponthe applicant substantially and properly performing all work to be done under the permits issued to himin a workmanlike manner and upon his using proper materials; upon the applicants restoring thatportion of any street or public place, which he has excavated in accordance with the rules contained inthe permit issued him and maintaining the same for a period of one year; upon the applicantsreimbursing the Town for any expense for repairs to such street or public place made necessary byreason of the excavation.
§ 15-12. ENFORCEMENT.
§ 15-12.1. Violations.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AXII § 12.1]
If any person shall construct, install, alter or repair any sewer, building drain, building sewer orconnection to any public sanitary sewer of the Town in violation of the requirements of this Article, or,having obtained a permit as provided in this Article, shall construct, install, alter or repair any sewer,building drain, building sewer or connection thereto without having given the Sanitarian or hisauthorized representative adequate notice, time, opportunity and assistance, during regular workinghours, to inspect such sewer, connection and the work and materials used thereon. The Sanitarianshall order or direct the person who constructed, installed, altered or repaired such sewer, etc., may belocated or which may be served thereby, or in whose interest and employ the work was done, touncover and fully expose any or all portions of such sewer, etc., and afford the Sanitarian and hisauthorized representatives adequate opportunity to examine and inspect such sewer, etc., and tosecure such records thereof as may be proper. If such sewer, etc., and the appurtenances thereof shallbe found not to be in full accord with the requirements of this Article and the standards establishedunder its provision, then the Sanitarian shall order and direct such person, owner or lessee to makesuch changes in or additions to or remove portions of appurtenances of such sewer, etc., as may benecessary to insure that such sewer, etc., will conform to the requirements of this Article and of thestandards established under its provisions. All of such work shall be performed by the person, owner orlessee without delay and without expense to the Town.
§ 15-12.2. Failure to Take Remedial Action.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AXII § 12.2]
If any person, after proper order or direction from the Sanitarian fails to take the remedial steps orperform the acts required by this Article, or fails thereof, as required by this Article, the Sewer Authorityor the Sanitarian, by such agents and /or facilities as it or he may choose, may disconnect the sewer,etc., which was wrongfully connected, altered, repaired or used, or through which improper wasteswere discharged into the public sanitary sewer system of the Town.
§ 15-12.3. Easements; Entrance to Private Properties.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 110/138
a.
b.
c.
d.
a.
[Ord. 1/20/79 AXII § 12.3]
The Sanitarian and other duly authorized representatives of the Sewer Authority having propercredentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the Townholds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within theeasement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in accordance withthe terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
§ 15-13. CONNECTION REQUIRED TO SEWER SYSTEM.
§ 15-13.1. Time Limitation for Connection.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 13.1; Ord. 9/20/79 § 13-1]
Within 60 days after a public sanitary sewer in a public street becomes operational, the SewerAuthority may order the owner of any building to which a sewerage system is available to connectsuch building with the system.
No such order shall be issued until after a public hearing with respect thereto after due notice inwriting to such property owner.
Such order, when issued, shall notify such property owner that he or she must connect with thesewer within six months after such notification.
Failure to obtain a permit to make such connection shall be prima facie evidence that noconnection has been made.
§ 15-14. PRIVATE SEPTIC DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
§ 15-14.1. Connection to Private System.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 14.1]
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section
15-3
, the building sewershall be connected to a private septic disposal system complying with the provisions of this Article, thePublic Health Code of Connecticut and the requirements of the Northeast District Department ofHealth.
§ 15-14.2. Permits Required.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 14.2]
No subsurface sewage disposal system shall be approved, installed or repaired after the effective dateof this regulation without compliance with the standards of this Article and the Public Health Code ofthe State of Connecticut, unless otherwise approved by the Director of Health.
§ 15-14.3. Sewage Disposal.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 14.3]
No permit shall be issued for a subsurface sewage disposal system in an area where publicsewers are available and connection to the public sewer is deemed feasible by the BrooklynSewer Authority.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 111/138
b.
c.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
a.
b.
a.
b.
Subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be designed, constructed and operated in such amanner as to prevent failure of the system, resulting in a public nuisance as defined in the PublicHealth Code of the State of Connecticut or pollution of the waters of the State as defined in C.G.S.522a-423.
System Failure. A subsurface sewage disposal system may be deemed a failure, and a publicnuisance and/or pollution problem when: 1. Sewage reaches the ground surface or overflows inthe building served. 2. Leaching field leachate reaches the ground surface within 50 feet of aleaching system. 3. Leaching field leachate reaches a surface water body or a subsurface drainwithin 50 feet of a leaching field.
§ 15-14.4. Minimum Requirements for Subsurface SewageDisposal.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 14.4]
No approval or permit for a subsurface sewage disposal system shall be issued where siteconditions within the proposed leaching area, or within 25 feet of the proposed leaching area areunsuitable for sewage disposal purposes. Unsuitable conditions exist where:
The percolation rate is slower than one inch in 60 minutes.
Fractured or consolidated bedrock is less than four feet below the original ground surfaceunless the area is prepared and demonstrated to be suitable in accordance with theprovisions of this Article.
The groundwater table is less than two feet below the original ground surface for a period ofone month or longer during the wettest season of the year, unless the area is prepared anddemonstrated to be suitable in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
The surface slope exceeds 25%.
Three or more of the conditions deemed of special concern (in subsection
15-14.6
) arepresent.
An environmental assessment for the purpose of determining the effect of the installation of one ormore subsurface sewage disposal systems on natural and man-made conditions may be requiredby the Director of Health or the Brooklyn Sewer Authority.
§ 15-14.5. Site Testing Requirements.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 14.5]
A minimum of two deep test pits and one percolation test hole shall be provided for inspection bythe Northeast District Department of Health for each proposed subsurface disposal system. Onedeep test pit and one percolation test shall be provided in the proposed leaching area and onedeep pit in the proposed reserve area. Additional percolation tests may be required by the Directorof Health when a strata of compact soil is present which may affect system performance or inwhich portions of the system may be installed. All soil tests must be accurately located, identified,and shown on subdivision plans and engineered plans submitted to the Northeast DistrictDepartment of Health.
Where there is a question as to the maximum groundwater level, soil tests may be required duringa time of high groundwater, as determined by the Director of Health. All soil tests for purposes ofapproval shall be conducted or witnessed by an agent of the Northeast District Department ofHealth. When in the opinion of the Director of Health the percolation test has been performed
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 112/138
c.
d.
e.
a.
b.
1.
2.
c.
during a period of low or moderate soil moisture he may require that the system size be increasedby one sizing category based on the system sizes contained in the Public Health Code of theState of Connecticut.
In addition to percolation tests and deep test pits, the Northeast District Department of Health mayrequire whatever other testing, sampling and analysis as may be necessary to determine siteconditions and the environmental and health effect of the proposed development of the property.Such tests may include, but are not limited to, soil permeability, hydraulic analysis, soil borings,groundwater level monitoring wells or pipes, compaction tests, sieve analysis tests and additionalpercolation and deep tests.
Plan Requirements, Application for a Discharge Permit. Before a site investigation is made, theapplicant shall submit to the Northeast District Department of Health either a surveyor's plan or aplan prepared from information on the deed or land records. Such plan shall show buildingsetbacks, easements, and inland Wetland boundaries. The Director of Health may require that theproposed sewage disposal system, reserve area, building, well, property lines, building setbacks,easements, wetlands, and other proposed improvements be located by field stakes and markersbefore a permit is issued.
Application for Subdivision Review. Subdivision plans submitted to the Northeast DistrictDepartment of Health must contain the following minimum information: property boundaries,proposed lot boundaries, water courses, inland wetlands, all attempted or completed test holes,site improvement locations, ledge rock outcroppings, easements, road drainage systems, catchbasins, and cuts or fills greater than five feet.
§ 15-14.6. Areas of Special Concern.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 14.6]
Areas within a proposed leaching area or within 25 feet of a proposed leaching area with: (1) aminimum soil percolation rate slower than 30 minutes per inch but faster than 60 minutes per inch;(2) fractured or consolidated bedrock less than six feet but greater than four feet below originalground surface; (3) anticipated or actual maximum groundwater level less than 30 inches butgreater than 24 inches below original ground; (4) slope greater than 15% but less than 25%; shallrequire special concern in the site investigation, design and installation for subsurface sewagedisposal systems.
An area of special concern shall be considered unsuitable for sewage disposal until it has beenshown that a subsurface sewage disposal system may be constructed to function properly asdefined in subsection
15-14.3b
. For this purpose, the design plan must be approved by theDirector of Health and the proposed sewage system located by staking on the site before theproperty is determined to be suitable for on-site sewage disposal. An area of special concern, ifproposed for subdivision, must be identified on the subdivision map and a note placed on the planindicating that an engineered subsurface sewage disposal system is required and that theNortheast District Department of Health must be contacted for the details of the specialrequirements for building on the property.
In areas of special concerns and areas defined as unsuitable in subsection
15-14.4
.
Where the anticipated maximum groundwater table is less than 30 inches soil tests shall beconducted during a time of high ground water as determined by the Director of Health.
Plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Connecticut andsubmitted to the Northeast District Department of Health for approval. Such plans shallinclude all pertinent information as to the basis of design, soil conditions, test pit locations,maximum groundwater, ledge rock, original and finished contours and elevations, sewerinvert, surface water and groundwater drains, water courses, neighboring wells within 200
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 113/138
3.
4.
a.
b.
a.
feet of the proposed sewage disposal system and water service lines. Plans shall be drawn toa scale of one inch to 20 feet and original and finished contours at two foot intervals.
A study of the capacity of the surrounding natural soil to absorb or disperse sewage effluentwithout overflow or breakout may be required by the Director of Health.
The Director of Health may require that the sewage disposal system be constructed under aninspection schedule approved by the Director of Health. Inspections shall be done by aprofessional engineer, who shall certify that the constructed system meets or exceeds thespecifications of the approved plan and the requirements of the Director of Health. After thefinal inspection is made by the Director of Health, the engineer shall make a record drawing ofthe system as installed and submit one copy to the Northeast District Department of Health.
§ 15-14.7. Minimum Separating Distances.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 14.7]
The following minimum horizontal separating distances shall be preserved between any part of asubsurface sewage disposal system, including a reserve leaching area, and the following points.These distances shall be mandatory save that any lot of record in existence prior to the effective dateof this Article may comply with the existing provision of the Public Health Code of the State ofConnecticut.
Any dug well
100 feet
Discharge point of surface or storm drain
25 feet
Any well where ledge is less than eight feet from surface
100 feet
Any well installed in an area where the soil percolation rate is faster than twominutes per inch
100 feet
Any well located down grade from a septic system
100 feet
Any river, stream, brook, lake, pond, marsh, swamp, bog, wetland or other watercourse
50 feet
Any surface or groundwater drain located at a lower elevation
50 feet
Top of embankment or slope exceeding 25 percent
25 feet
Property line
25 feet
§ 15-14.8. Septic Tanks.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 14.8]
Septic tanks shall be equipped with clean out manholes located over the inlet and outletmanholes. Clean out manholes shall be located a maximum of 12 inches below finished grade.
The use of garbage grinders in connection with a new subsurface sewage disposal system isprohibited unless the size of the septic tank is increased 50% over the size otherwise required.
§ 15-14.9. Leaching Systems.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 14.9]
General Requirements. In the construction of a leaching system: where trenches are installed atthe same elevations, the ends shall be connected. Where trenches are installed at differentelevations, serial distribution shall be used. Where serial distribution is required, the slope of the
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 114/138
b.
1.
2.
3.
a.
pipe in the leaching trenches shall not exceed one inch in 75 feet, distribution boxes shall be usedat all overflow and control points and the overflow invert of distribution boxes shall be a minimumof three inches higher than the inlet invert. Leaching trenches shall be installed parallel to slopecontours to the greatest lateral extent possible. A minimum of six inches of soil shall be placedover leaching trenches and the area graded and stabilized so as to direct surface water away fromthe leaching system. Embankments shall be graded to a maximum three to one slope. All leachingsystems shall be protected from siltation and erosion during and after construction.
Additional requirements for multi-family or commercial subsurface sewage disposal systems. Theminimum size leaching system for a multi-family dwelling where the percolation rate is less thanfive minutes per inch, shall be 495 square feet. The minimum size of a leaching system for acommercial building shall be based on an application rate of a maximum of 1.6 gallons per day perfoot of effective leaching area. For multi-family dwellings and commercial buildings the Director ofHealth shall require that the reserve area, where necessary, be prepared with fill and otherwiseimproved, before approval is granted for the use of a subsurface sewage disposal system on theproperty.
§ 15-14.10. Groundwater Control Drains.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 14.10]
Where groundwater control drains are proposed as a means of lowering groundwater so as to providea suitable area for subsurface sewage disposal either graded aggregate, filter fabric, or otherconstruction approved by the Director of Health shall be used. The operational effectiveness of eachgroundwater control system must be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director of Health. Theeffectiveness shall be confirmed by installing the drain and monitoring test pits or wells during highgroundwater periods. Before installation and monitoring the Director of Health may require thesubmission of engineering calculations of hydraulic conductivity to demonstrate the effectiveness of agroundwater control drain.
§ 15-14.11. Fill.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 14.11]
In certain areas of special concern and areas deemed unsuitable for subsurface sewage disposal,fill may be used to meet the requirements of this Article. Such systems placed in fill must meet theapplicable standards of subsection
15-14.6
. When fill is to be used to make an area suitable, aplan of construction satisfactory to the Director of Health shall be prepared and implemented.Such plans shall include but are not limited to:
A plan for preparing the site and existing soil to receive fill,
A specification for fill material to be used,
A plan for the emplacement of the fill.
§ 15-14.12. Enforcement.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 14.12]
The Brooklyn Sewer Enforcement Authority authorizes the Northeast District Department of Health tobe the enforcement agency for Section
15-14
. Should the Northeast District Department of Health bedissolved or by action of a Town Meeting cease to be the enforcement agency for the Public HealthCode of the State of Connecticut in the Town of Brooklyn, the enforcement of this Article becomes theresponsibility of the Brooklyn Sewer Authority and the Director of Health for the Town of Brooklyn.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 115/138
a.
b.
a.
b.
§ 15-15. PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 15.1]
Any person who willfully breaks, damages, destroys, or injures any structure, appurtenance, orequipment which is a part of the public sanitary sewer system shall be subject to the penalties imposedunder Section 53a-117 of the Connecticut General Statutes (Rev. 1958, as amended).
§ 15-16. AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 16.1]
The Sewer Authority, the Sanitarian and other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing propercredentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose ofinspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of thisArticle.
§ 15-17. PENALTIES.
§ 15-17.1. Violations; Notice.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 17.1, § 17.2]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article except Section
15-15
shall be served bythe Town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a time limit for thesatisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,permanently cease all violations.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article may be fined not more than $100.00.Each day that any violation of this Article continues and each day that person continues todischarge prohibited wastes or substances into any public sanitary sewer shall be deemed aseparate offense for the purpose of applying the above penalty.
§ 15-18. VALIDITY.
[Ord. 1/20/79 § 18.1]
If any provision, requirements, or section of this Article shall be adjudged invalid or unenforceable byreason of conflict with some other provision of law, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of anyother provision hereof but all other provisions, sections and requirements of this Article shall bedeemed valid and effective and shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 15-19. HEARING BOARD.
[Ord. 1/20/79 §§ 19.1, 19.2]
A Hearing Board shall be appointed as needed for arbitration of differences between theSanitarian and sewer users and/or private septic users on matters concerning interpretation andexecution of the provisions of this Article by the Sanitarian.
One member of the Board shall be appointed by the Sewer Authority; one member shall beappointed by the aggrieved party; and one member shall be appointed by the appointees of boththe Sewer Authority and the aggrieved party.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 116/138
a.
b.
c.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Article II. ADDITIONAL SEWER REGULATIONS
§ 15-20. APPROVAL OF SEWERAGE FACILITIES REQUIREDPRIOR TO NEW CONSTRUCTION.
[Ord. Town Meeting 1960]
No dwellings, apartments, boarding houses, hotels or commercial buildings shall be constructed inthe Town of Brooklyn unless the sewerage facilities in connection with the same have beenapproved by the Director of Health of the Town, or any inspector appointed by him. The Director ofHealth or any inspector approved by him shall approve any such sewerage facilities when suchfacilities meet the requirements of the Sanitary Code of the State of Connecticut.
All applications for approval of the sewerage facilities shall be filed with the Director of Health orthe inspector appointed by him. All applications for approval shall be accompanied by a plan of theproposed sewerage facilities. The fee, which shall accompany the application, shall be $15.00payable to the Town of Brooklyn.
The owner or agent of any building who shall violate any provision of this section shall be deemedguilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not to exceed $25.00 for each and every day thatsuch violations shall continue.
§ 15-21. OPTIONAL METHODS OF PAYMENT OF SEWERASSESSMENT BY ELDERLY PROPERTY OWNERS.
[Ord. 5/16/80]
Pursuant to Section 7-253a of the Connecticut General Statutes, optional methods of payment ofsewer assessments by any property owner who is eligible for tax relief for elderly taxpayers underthe provisions of Section 12-129b and Section 12-170aa are hereby authorized.
Such optional methods of payment shall be subject to approval by the Water Pollution ControlAuthority of the Town of Brooklyn and shall include an option to pay only the annual interestcharge, as provided in Section 7-253 of the Connecticut General Statutes, on any deferredpayments or outstanding balance of principal.
Any eligible property owner desiring any such optional method of payment shall apply for thesame to the Water Pollution Control Authority, and all such optional methods of payment shall besubject to annual review by the Authority.
Upon transfer of title to the property subject to such assessment and optional method of paymentor upon the death of such property owner, the outstanding balance of principal shall become dueand payable.
§ 15-22. through § 15-29. (RESERVED)
Article III. SEWER CAPITAL COLLECTION FEE
§ 15-30. SEWER AUTHORITY OF THE TOWN OF BROOKLYNSEWER CAPITAL CONNECTION FEE.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 117/138
1.
2.
3.
a.
b.
a.
b.
c.
1.
d.
§ 15-30.1. Facilities and Improvements Subject to CapitalConnection Fee.
[
Ord. No. 06-5
§ 1]
The Sewer Authority shall charge and collect a capital connection fee for:
Each new connection to the sewer system; and
Each improvement to a facility connected to the sewer system that has the effect of any oneor more of the following: (a) Increasing the estimated sewage discharge by greater than orequal to 200 gallons/day; (b) Increasing the number of Equivalent Dwelling Units ("EDU") in amulti-unit residential facility; (c) Improvements to a facility resulting in the issuance of acertificate of occupancy for a building which (1) does not currently and for the prior two yearsdid not possess a certificate of occupancy, or was not otherwise suitable for occupancy or usefor the prior two years; and (2) which was not previously subject to a Capital Connection Feeas in effect on the effective date, or (d) In the case of a commercial laundry, or facility forwashing vehicles, manufacturing or processing facilities or other high water use processesutilizing at least 1,000 gallons per day water consumption, in addition to an improvement tothe facility, a change in the number or type of washing or other equipment resulting in anincreased discharge of greater than or equal to 200 gallons/day. In the case of a facility thatfalls within the scope of clause (c) and any other clause, the Capital Connection Fee shall bebased on clause (c).
The issuance of a DEP (general/industrial) discharge permit or modification of an existingpermit.
In the case of subsection 15-30.1a2 clauses (a), (b) and (d), the Capital Connection Fee shall beapplied to the increase in EDUs resulting from the change in the facility, and in the case ofsubsection 15-30.1a2(c), the EDUs discharged by the facility. In the case of subsection 15-30.1a3,the Capital Connection Fee shall be applied (1) in the case of a new permit, the maximumallowable discharge, and (2) in the case of a permit modification, the increase, if any, in themaximum discharge permitted by the modification. This subsection
15-30.1b
is subject to theprovisions of subsection
15-30.2d
.
§ 15-30.2. Determination of Capital Connection Fee.
[
Ord. No. 06-5
§ 2]
New Connections and Improvements shall be assessed a Capital Connection Fee in accordancewith the Connection Fee Schedule, provided the facility or improvement is listed thereon. Wherethe facility or improvement requires a DEP (general/industrial) discharge permit, the CapitalConnection Fee will be based on the maximum allowable discharge as outlined in the permit anddetermined in accordance with these regulations.
Each EDU of wastewater discharge to the system shall constitute a connection charge due andpayable of $2,500.00; each fraction of an EDU shall constitute a connection charge due andpayable of such fractional EDU multiplied by $2,500.00.
Each Use Unit of the Capital Connection Fee Schedule shall constitute one EDU. Each fractionalUse Unit shall constitute the same fraction of one EDU.
The Capital Connection Fee for Improvements shall be determined based on incrementaldischarge. The Capital Connection Fee due for an improvement resulting in incremental
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 118/138
2.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
1.
2.
3.
j.
discharge of greater than or equal to one EDU shall equal (a) where a Capital ConnectionFee was previously paid with respect to the facility, the Capital Connection Fee due based onthe total discharge of the facility after taking into account the improvement, minus thedischarge applicable to the Capital Connection Fee previously received by the Authority withrespect to the facility, or (b) where a Capital Connection Fee was not previously paid withrespect to the Facility, the incremental number of EDUs resulting from the improvementdetermined in accordance with this section by comparing such discharge from the facilitybefore and after the improvement. Clause d1(a) discharges shall be determined by referenceto the Capital Connection Fee Schedule.
The pre-improvement discharge of a facility for which no Connection Fee has been paid shallbe the average yearly water consumption of the facility to be improved over the past threeyears determined from the date of the Sewer Authority Connection Fee Permit application.This clause shall not apply to a subsection 15-30.1a2(c) Improvement.
In the event the facility or improvement or discharge is not adequately described by the foregoingprocedures, the WPCA may take into account other information in arriving at the estimateddischarge and Capital Connection Fee, including design capacity, similar uses or facilities,discharge data including but not limited to that from DEP or engineering firms, or permitinformation.
For a Mixed Use Facility the number of EDUs shall be determined by treating each use separatelyand applying the Capital Connection Fee separately to each use. The sum of the EDUs for eachuse shall constitute the number of EDUs applicable to the facility.
In the event a connection to the System serves more than one structure, building, facility, use orparcel, the Capital Connection Fee shall be the sum of each Capital Connection Fee determinedseparately as to each structure, building, facility, use or parcel, accessing the Sewer Systemthrough the connection. Except as provided in subsection
15-30.3
, no connection to the SewerSystem shall be permitted unless the Capital Connection Fee is paid in full prior to the connection,(or increase of discharge to an existing connection, if applicable) and in accordance with thisregulation with respect to each facility or improvement served by the connection. No further oradditional connections or use of the Sewer System other than that encompassed by the CapitalConnection Fee paid pursuant to the Regulations shall be permitted without the approval of theAuthority and payment of the Capital Connection Fee for such further or additional connection, useor Improvement.
Where a facility or improvement is capable of different uses having different Capital ConnectionFees, and the actual uses are not known at the time the Capital Connection Fee is payable, theCapital Connection Fee shall be the average of the Capital Connection Fees due with respect tothe likely uses. Upon actual use, the Capital Connection Fee shall be recalculated based upondetermination of the actual use, and any Capital Connection Fee balance owed shall immediatelybe paid to the Authority, and any overpayment refunded, as applicable.
The owner shall be liable for payment of the Capital Connection Fee. The Authority shall pay allrefunds to the owner of the property connected to the Sewer System, unless otherwise directed bythe owner. In the event of disputes as to the proper recipient of the refund, the Authority may holdrefunds in escrow pending resolution by the disputing parties.
Exception for relocations within the Town that do not cause additional Sewer System burden. NoConnection Fee shall be due where the improvement or facility is for:
A business or purpose that vacates its location of operation within the Town;
Relocates its operations to another location within the Town;
The owner of the relocated business or entity does not change in any respect;
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 119/138
4.
5.
a.
1.
2.
b.
c.
Constructs improvements or a facility to replace the same purpose (including for purposes ofthe Connection Fee Schedule categorization) as that vacated, and
The improvements or facility constructed do not result in a New Connection, or in an increasein discharge compared to the discharge from the vacated location, determined on the basis ofapplying the Connection Fee Schedule to the vacated facility and the facility at the newlocation, including improvements.
Examples of the application of this subsection include but are not limited to: the relocation ofmanufacturing facilities to a building that must be improved to accommodate it; the relocation of abusiness conducted in office space to rental space that was not previously used as office space;the relocation of a restaurant. Examples to which this subsection do not apply include but are notlimited to: the owner of rental office space sells the building, and builds new rental office space;the owner of a condominium or apartment development sells its condominium or apartmentdevelopment and builds new developments. This subsection shall not apply to any owner, itsfacility or improvement that is rental space; or to any owner, its facility or improvement consistingof building space or units thereof for sale or lease.
§ 15-30.3. Payment of Capital Connection Fee.
[
Ord. No. 06-5
§ 3]
The Capital Connection Fee shall be due and payable in full prior to and as a condition to theissuance of a Sewer Authority Permit to Connect, for the facility or improvement, provided thatwhere the connection occurs within one month of the completion of the extension of the SewerSystem authorized to be financed by Town debt, the first $2,500.00 of the Capital Connection Feemay be payable over a 20 year period plus interest at the rate charged to the Town to finance theproject. If the connection charge is paid in installments the Sewer Authority shall record a lienevidencing the charge on the land records and proceed with its collection in accordance with law.In no event shall a certificate of occupancy for a facility or improvement be issued unless theCapital Connection Fee has been paid in full, and a Sewer Authority Permit to Connect has beenissued.
The Capital Connection Fee shall be due and payable for the entire facility or improvement asa condition of the issuance of a Sewer Authority Permit to Connect and certificate ofoccupancy. A Sewer Authority Permit to Connect shall be required for any facility orimprovement for which a building permit is requested. The improvement or facility to whichthe Capital Connection Fee applies shall take in account the scope of the building permit. Forexample, the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any floor or portion of an officebuilding, or any portion or store of a shopping center requires payment of the CapitalConnection Fee due for the entire office building or shopping center. For the issuance of acertificate of occupancy for any one condominium or apartment unit in a condominium orapartment development, the Capital Connection Fee owed shall be for the number ofcondominiums or apartment units for which a building permit has been issued.
If a building permit has been issued for a facility or improvement prior to the effective date, theConnection Fee shall be due and payable in full upon the earlier of (a) physical connection tothe Sewer System or (b) issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
This Regulation and the Capital Connection Fee shall take effect and be applicable to all facilitiesand improvements on the effective date. The Connection Fee shall be phased-in based upon thedate of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The applicant shall pay the Connection Fee in fullas provided in subsection
15-30.3
for all Sewer Permits or Building Permits issued on or after theeffective date, and the phase-in will be accomplished by refunding to the applicant a portion of theConnection Fee where the provisions of this section are complied with.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 120/138
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
d.
e.
f.
a.
b.
No Connection Fee shall be due or payable for any facility or improvement that has receiveda certificate of occupancy on or before May 1, 2006.
If a facility or improvement receives a certificate of occupancy on or before September 1,2006, the Capital Connection Fee shall be 50% of the subsection
15-30.2d
amount.
If a facility or improvement receives a certificate of occupancy after September 1, 2006, theCapital Connection Fee shall be 100% of the subsection 15-30.2d1 and 2 amount.
In applying the provisions of clauses with respect to condominiums, apartments and otherfacilities or improvements containing discreet uses, units or structures for which a certificateof occupancy has been issued for a portion of the uses, units or structures, the remaininguses, units, or structures or improvements for which a certificate of occupancy has not beenissued by the applicable time frame (whether or not they are constructed or underconstruction pursuant to the same building permit or permits as those that received thecertificate of occupancy within the applicable phase-in time frame), shall not receive thebenefit of the phase-in provided by such clause.
In addition to the phase-in of the amount of the Connection Fee set forth in this subsection,the timing of payments shall be phased-in with respect to apartment or condominiumdevelopments which received a building permit prior to the effective date, and notwithstandingsubsection 15-30.3b1 and 2, the Connection Fee for such apartment and condominiumdevelopments shall be due and payable as certificates of occupancy are issued for individualunits, and payment shall be a precondition of issuance of a certificate of occupancy for eachsuch unit.
The Connection Fee imposed by this regulation shall take effect on May 1, 2006.
In no event, shall work or construction physically connecting a facility or improvement to the SewerSystem or making, improving or repairing an existing connection, or adding users, facilities, orimprovements thereto, commence or be permitted unless the Capital Connection Fee has beenpaid and a Sewer Authority Connection Permit issued to the applicant.
The Authority shall discontinue sewer service, including making the Sewer System unavailable toreceive discharge, and not connect to the Sewer System any facility, including any facility orimprovement that does not pay the Capital Connection Fee in accordance with these regulations.
In the case of a DEP (general/industrial) discharge permit or modification thereof, the CapitalConnection Fee shall be due and paid as a condition to the Authority's approval of the proposedpermit or permit modification.
§ 15-30.4. Sewer Authority Connection Fee Permit.
[
Ord. No. 06-5
§ 4]
Any person or entity who (1) proposes to make a New Connection to the System, or (2) constructan improvement to a facility connected to the System, shall obtain a sewer permit prior thereunto,whether or not the new Connection or improvement will result in an increased wastewaterdischarge.
The applicant shall submit an application on forms prescribed by the Authority. The Authority shallissue a Sewer Authority Connection Fee Permit upon a determination that the proposeddischarge; (1) is adequately described; (2) is suitable for the proposed physical connection to thesystem; and (3) commencing May 1, 2006, the Capital Connection Fee, if any, has been paid,unless the provisions of subsection
15-30.3a
apply; and (4) such other considerations necessaryor proper to ensure the safe, efficient and proper operation of the Sewer System.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 121/138
c.
The Consent of the Owner of the property against which a lien may be recorded to securepayment of the Capital Connection Fee shall appear on the Sewer Authority Connection FeePermit Application.
§ 15-30.5. Power of the Authority.
[
Ord. No. 06-5
§ 5]
The Authority shall possess all powers conferred by law to levy, lien, foreclose and collect the CapitalConnection Fee on and from property, facilities, improvements, persons and entities subject to or liablefor the Connection Fee, whether located within the Town of Brooklyn or outside of its geographicboundaries.
§ 15-30.6. Severability.
[
Ord. No. 06-5
§ 6]
The invalidity of any provision or section shall not affect the validity of other provisions of thisregulation.
§ 15-30.7. Definitions.
[
Ord. No. 06-5
§ 7]
As used in this Article:
APPLICANT
Shall mean the person or entity that has filed an application for a Sewer Authority ConnectionPermit, or is otherwise subject to pay the Connection Fee.
AUTHORITY
Shall mean the Sewer Authority of the Town of Brooklyn Water Pollution Control Authority(WPCA).
BUILDING PERMIT
Shall mean the first permit issued pursuant to Section 29-263 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
CAPITAL CONNECTION FEE
Shall mean the fee payable to the Water Pollution Control Authority (WPCA) pursuant to thisregulation, as result of connecting and discharging wastewater to the Sewer System, or increasingsuch discharge, or obtaining a permit authorizing the increase of such discharge.
CAPITAL CONNECTION FEE SCHEDULE
Shall mean the "Schedule of Sewer Use Charges" as approved and amended by the WPCA fromtime to time.
EDU
Shall mean each 200 gallon/day of discharge from a facility as determined from the CapitalConnection Fee Schedule shall constitute one EDU.
EFFECTIVE DATE
Shall mean the date this regulation and the Capital Connection Fee take effect, and shall be May1, 2006.
FACILITY
Shall mean a building, structure, or property, or improvement thereto.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 122/138
IMPROVEMENT
Shall mean the renovation, repair, refurbishment, replacement, expansion or addition to, or reuseof a facility connected to the Sewer System, or the issuance of a DEP (general/industrial)discharge permit, or modification of such permit authorizing an increase in the maximumdischarge.
MIXED USE FACILITY
Shall mean a facility, which combines one or more use types (e.g. commercial lease andresidential).
MULTI-UNIT RESIDENTIAL FACILITY
Shall mean a residential facility with two or more separate units for rent, lease, use, or occupancyas a residence including a two or more family home, rental apartments, condominiums (includingboth attached and detached units), or boarding house.
NEW CONNECTION
Shall mean a) a connection to the system of a facility not currently connected to the system or forwhich the connection must be replaced.
REGULATION
Shall mean this Sewer Capital Connection Fee.
SEWER AUTHORITY CONNECTION FEE PERMIT
Shall mean the required permit described in section 4 prior to constructing a facility orimprovement as more fully set forth in this regulation.
SEWER SYSTEM
Shall mean all of the facilities, services and operations of the Town of Brooklyn sewage treatmentfacilities, including connections, lateral sewers, force mains, pump stations, wastewater treatmentplant, operated to collect, treat and discharge wastewater.
§ 15-30.8. Capital Connection Fee Schedule
The Capital Connection Fee Schedule can be found as an attachment to this chapter.
Chapter 16. Right to Farm
§ 16-1. PROTECTION OF FARMLAND.
§ 16-1.1. Purpose.
[Ord. 7/22/93 § 1]
Pursuant to the powers conferred upon by Section 7-148 (c) (7) (e), (8), and (10) (A), and infurtherance of the goals of Section 19 a-341 of the General Statutes, the Town of Brooklyn adopts thischapter to recognize the importance of protecting prime farmland, to identify those parcels for whichpreservation is a priority, and to foster farming as a way of life by declaring this municipality's supportof the farmer's right to farm.
§ 16-1.2. Definitions.
[Ord. 7/22/93 § 2]
As used in this chapter.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 123/138
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
AGRICULTURE AND FARMING
Except as otherwise specifically defined, the words shall mean and include cultivation of the soil,dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural or horticultural commodity, including theraising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management of livestock, including horses,bees, poultry, fur-bearing animals and wildlife, and the raising or harvesting of oysters, clams,mussels, and other molluscan shellfish or fish; the operation management, conservation,improvement or maintenance of a farm and its buildings, tools and equipment, or salvaging timberor cleared land of brush or other debris left by a storm, as an incident to such farming operations;the production or harvesting of maple syrup or maple sugar, or any agricultural commodity,including lumber, as an incident to ordinary farming operations or the harvesting of mushrooms,the hatching of poultry, or the construction, operation of maintenance or ditches, canals, reservoirsor waterways used exclusively for packaging, processing, freezing, grading, storing or delivering tostorage or to market, or to a carrier for transportation to market, or for direct sale any agriculturalor horticultural commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or, in preparation of suchfruits or vegetables as an incident to the direct sale.
AQUACULTURE
Shall mean the production of protein food, including fish, oysters, clams, mussels and othermolluscan shellfish, on leased, franchised and public underwater farm lands.
FARM
Shall include farm buildings, and greenhouse, hoophouses and other temporary structures orother structures used primarily for the raising and, as an incident to ordinary farming operations,the sale of agricultural or horticultural commodities.
§ 16-1.3. The Right to Farm.
[Ord. 7/22/93 § 3]
Notwithstanding any general statute or municipal ordinance or regulation pertaining to nuisances to thecontrary, no agricultural or farming operation, place, establishment or facility, or any of itsappurtenances, or the operation thereof, shall be deemed to constitute a nuisance, either public orprivate, due to alleged objectionable:
Odor from livestock, manure, fertilizer or feed;
Noise from livestock, or farm equipment used in normal, generally acceptable farming procedures;
Dust created during plowing or cultivation operations;
Use of chemicals, provided such chemicals and the method of their application conform topractices approved by the commissioner of environmental protection or, where the commissionerof environmental protection or, where applicable, commissioner of health services; or
Water pollution from livestock or crop production activities, except the pollution of public or privatedrinking water supplies, provided such activities conform to acceptable management practices forpollution control approved by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection; provided suchagricultural or farming operation, place, establishment or facility has been in operation for one yearor more and has not been substantially changed and such operation follows generally acceptedagricultural practices. Inspection and approval of the facility by the Commissioner of Agriculture orhis designee shall be prima facie evidence that such operation follows generally acceptedagricultural practices.
§ 16-1.4. Willful or Reckless Misconduct Not Protected.
[Ord. 7/22/93 § 4]
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 124/138
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply whenever a nuisance results from negligence or willful orreckless misconduct in the operation of any such agricultural or farming operation, place,establishment or facility, or any of its appurtenances.
§ 16-1.5. Impact Upon Zoning.
[Ord. 7/22/93 § 5]
Nothing contained in this chapter shall restrict the power of the Brooklyn Planning and ZoningCommission under Chapter 124 of Title 8 of the Connecticut General Statutes. That Commission isurged to adopt regulations consistent with this chapter, and to make the permanent preservation offarmland within this Town, a criterion in its planning and policy decisions.
Chapter 17. (Reserved)
Chapter 18. (Reserved)
Chapter 19. (Reserved)
Chapter 20. Fees for Land Use Applications
§ 20-1. ESTABLISHING LAND USE APPLICATION FEES.
[Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinances 3/1/88, 8/15/88, 91-2, 04-5 and 06-4]
§ 20-1.1. Purpose.
[Ord. 5/3/10]
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a reasonable and equitable Schedule of Fees, pursuant toSection 8-1c and 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes, to defray the administrative costs andany additional costs, including professional consulting fees, incurred by the Planning and ZoningCommission, Inland Wetlands Agency and Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Brooklyn (each a"Land Use Agency") for the processing and subsequent monitoring of Land Use applications.
§ 20-1.2. Definitions.
[Ord. 5/3/10]
LAND USE APPLICATION
Shall mean an application for (1) any permit(s) or approval(s) required by any Land Use Agencyregulations for the use of any land, building or structure; (2) proposed amendments to suchregulations or the zoning map; (3) a request for a zoning variance; (4) an appeal of a decision ofthe Zoning Enforcement Officer or (5) a certificate of location approval and or appropriatenesspursuant to Section 14-67 and/or Section 14-321 of the Connecticut General Statutes, submittedby any person, organization or corporation (the applicant).
STAFF
Shall mean any employee or appointee of the Town of Brooklyn or employees of the NortheastConnecticut Council of Governments "NECCOG" who, as part of his or her duties, render advice
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 125/138
a.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
b.
c.
or assistance to any land use agency. Planning Staff shall be the Zoning Enforcement Officer,Town Planner or employees of NECCOG.
§ 20-1.3. Determination of Fees Charged for Land UseApplications.
[Ord. 5/3/10]
Base Fees. The base fees established hereby are based on a reasonable estimate of the directand indirect costs for time spent by staff in reviewing and evaluating each type of land useapplication and, except as noted, the cost of any public hearing. The base fee plus the estimatedcosts for advertising and required legal notices shall be paid at the time the land use application isfiled.
Additional Fees.
In addition to the base fees set forth herein, a Land Use Agency may require the applicant topay an "additional fee" to defray other costs and expenses incurred by the Land Use Agency.Such additional fee shall be assessed to the applicant when the Planning Staff and/or theLand Use Agency determines that there is a need for the assistance of one or more thirdparty consultants for review, evaluation or processing the land use application (consultationservices). Consultants may be engaged to render engineering, architectural, environmentaland planning services including traffic studies. Consultation services may include, but not belimited to, consultation with Town staff or the Town Attorney, discussions with the applicant orits agents, rendering such information and research that the Land Use Agency may request,the preparation of written findings and recommendations, written or oral testimony at anypublic hearing and post-approval inspections to ascertain that all terms and conditions of anypermit have been met.
The additional fee shall be equal to the reasonable cost incurred by the Land Use Agency forsuch consultation services.
Upon the determination by the Town staff and/or Land Use Agency that consultation servicesare necessary, the Town Staff shall provide to the Land Use Agency, for its approval, areasonable estimate of the cost based on the nature and the extent of the consultationservices deemed necessary. Such determination shall be made as soon as practicable afterthe receipt (filing) of the land use application by the Land Use Agency and, upon approval bythe Land Use Agency, the applicant shall be billed an additional fee in an amount equal to125% of such estimate. Such additional fee shall be due and payable 10 days after receipt.
Upon receipt of an additional fee from the applicant, the Land Use Agency shall create anapplication specific account and shall document the amount of the additional fee and allpayments made for consultation services. The Land Use Agency shall render periodicaccounting to the applicant. Any balance remaining after the land use application has beenacted upon shall be refunded to the applicant, provided there has been a determination by theStaff that all terms and conditions of the permit have been met.
Upon the failure of the applicant to pay such additional fee when due, the land use applicationshall be deemed to be incomplete and may be denied by the Land Use Agency for thatreason with or without prejudice. No land use application shall be approved until the base fee,the additional fee, if any, and costs of advertising and legal notices have been paid in full.
No fees shall be required for any land use application submitted by the Town of Brooklyn or any ofits municipal agencies.
§ 20-1.4. Effective Date; Validity.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 126/138
[Ord. 5/3/10]
In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-1c, upon its effective date the fee structureset forth in this chapter shall supersede any fee schedule adopted by any Land Use Agency (thisschedule was adopted May 3, 2010). If any provision or fee imposed by this chapter is, for any reason,found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidation shall not affect the validity ofthe remaining portions of this chapter and the fees imposed.
§ 20-1.5. Amendment of Schedule.
[Ord. 5/3/10]
The Board of Selectmen, acting pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-157(a), may, by ordinance, amend the Schedule of Base Fees from time to time after consultation withthe Land Use Agency(ies).
§ 20-1.6. Fee Schedule.
[Ord. 5/3/10; Ord. 11/2/11]
Base Land Use Application Fees
ZONING FEES
Text Amendment to Regulations
$250.00
Zoning Map Change
$250.00
Home Occupation
$50.00
Special Permit
$100.00 plus site plan review
Site Plan Review
2,500 sq. ft. or less
$300.00
Over 2,500 sq. ft.
$300.00 plus $15.00 per each additional1,000 sq. ft.
Site Plan Review (multi-family/active adult or elderly)
$300.00 plus $20.00 per unit
Amendment to Site Plan After Submission
$150.00
Special Permit (Sand and Gravel)
$250.00 +
< 1,000 cu. yds.
$200.00
1,000 to 20,000 cu. yds.
$300.00
21,000 to 50,000 cu. yds.
$750.00
51,000 to 100,000 cu. yds.
$2,500.00
> 100,000 cu. yds.
$5,000.00
Annual Sand and Gravel Renewal
$100.00
ZONING PERMITS
New Residential Dwelling
$200.00
Residential Accessory Uses/Additions
$50.00
Addition/Modification of a Nonresidential Building
$75.00
New Commercial Building
$250.00
Change of Use in Existing Commercial Building
$75.00
Sign Permit
$20.00
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 127/138
a.
SUBDIVISION APPROVALSUBDIVISION APPROVAL
Basic Application
$250.00
Subdivision Plan Review
$250.00 per lot
Engineering Review for New Road(s) and Drainage
*
Inspection and Supervision of Road Construction and Utilities
*
Text Amendment to Subdivision Regulations
$250.00
*Included in Plan Review Fee but may be subject to the payment of additional fees as set forth in thischapter.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
All Applications
$250.00
INLAND WETLANDS APPLICATION FEES
Residential (Single Lot)
$150.00
Subdivision Application
$150.00 plus $150.00 per lot in theregulated area
Commercial/Industrial
$200.00
Additional fee based on total impervious surface included in commercial/industrial application
< 20,000 sq. ft.
$400.00
20,001—50,000 sq. ft.
$1,200.00
> 50,000 sq. ft.
$800.00
Additional Fee for Significant Activity Requiring PublicHearing
$250.00
All fees payable pursuant to this chapter are nonrefundable.
In addition to any other remedies permitted by law, any land use application submitted after work hasstarted on a project shall be subject to a surcharge of $500.00.
In addition to the fees set forth above payable to the Town of Brooklyn, each application is subject to anadditional charge payable to the State of Connecticut, which, as of the effective date of this chapter is$60.00.
§ 20-2. CITATION PROCEDURES AND FINES FOR ZONINGAND WETLANDS VIOLATIONS.
§ 20-2.1. Issuance of Citations; Schedule of Fines.
[Ord. 8/1/13]
The Brooklyn Land Use Officer is authorized to issue citations for violations of the Zoning Regulationsand the Wetlands Regulations of the Town of Brooklyn to the extent and manner provided by thissection and the Connecticut General Statutes 7-152c. Any such citation may be served either by handor by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person named in such citation. If the person(s)named in the citation sent by certified mail refuses to accept such mail, the citation may be sent byregular United States mail. The Land Use Officer shall file and retain an original or certified copy of thecitation, as served.
Citations may be issued for those types of zoning and wetlands violations specified in paragraph bbelow.
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 128/138
b.
a.
b.
c.
d.
The fine for each citation shall be in accordance with this schedule:
ZONING REGULATIONS
Nature of Violation
Amount of Fine
Construction of any building without Zoning approval
$150.00
Alteration of any building without Zoning approval
$100.00
Conducting an unauthorized use
$150.00
Illegal Sign
$100.00
Building beyond foundation without prior Foundation as-built orerosion control approval
$150.00
Failure to comply with an approved Site Plan, Special Permit,Subdivision or Re-subdivision including any conditions ofapproval
$150.00
Any other violation of the Zoning Regulations
$100.00
INLAND WETLAND REGULATIONS
Nature of Violation
Amount of Fine
For each violation
$1,000.00
* In the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuation of the violation shall be deemed aseparate and distinct violation.
§ 20-2.2. Citation Hearing Officers.
[
Ord. No. 06-3
§ 3]
The Chief Executive Officer shall appoint one or more Citation Hearing Officers, other than PoliceOfficers or employees or persons who issue citations, to conduct the hearings authorized by thissection.
§ 20-2.3. Notice.
[
Ord. No. 06-3
§ 4]
At any time within 12 months from the expiration of the final period for the uncontested payment offines, penalties, costs or fees for any citation issued under any ordinance adopted pursuant to section7-148 or section 22a-226d, for an alleged violation thereof, shall send notice to the person cited:
Of the allegations against him and the amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees due;
That he may contest his liability before a Citation Hearing Officer by delivering in person or by mailwritten notice within 10 days of the date thereof;
That if he does not demand such hearing, an assessment and judgment shall be entered againsthim; and
That such judgment may issue without further notice.
§ 20-2.4. Liability; Payment of Fines; Costs.
[
Ord. No. 06-3
§ 5]
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 129/138
If the person who is sent notice pursuant to subsection
20-2.3
wishes to admit liability for any allegedviolation, he may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties, costs or feesadmitted to in person or by mail to the Land Use Officer. Such payment shall be inadmissible in anyproceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person making thepayment. Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within 10 days of thedate of the first notice provided for in subsection
20-2.3
shall be deemed to have admitted liability, andthe Land Use Officer shall certify such person's failure to respond to the Hearing Officer. The HearingOfficer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by theapplicable ordinances and shall follow the procedures set forth in subsection
20-2.5
.
§ 20-2.5. Hearing.
[
Ord. No. 06-3
§ 6]
Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the date, time and place for thehearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days not more than 30 days from the date of themailing of the notice, provided the Hearing Officer shall grant upon good cause shown any reasonablerequest by any interested party for postponement or continuance. An original certified copy of the initialnotice of violation issued by the Land Use Officer or Police Officer shall be filed and retained by theTown of Brooklyn, and shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of CGS 52-180 andevidence of the facts contained therein. The presence of the Land Use Officer or Police Officer shall berequired at the hearing if such person so requests. A person wishing to contest his liability shall appearat the hearing and may present evidence in his behalf. The Land Use Officer may present evidence onbehalf of the Town of Brooklyn. If such person fails to appear, the Hearing Officer may enter anassessment by default against him upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the applicablestatutes or ordinances. The Hearing Officer may accept from such person copies of Police reports,investigatory and citation reports, and other official documents by mail and may determine thereby thatthe appearance of such person is unnecessary. The Hearing Officer shall conduct the hearing in theorder and form and with such methods of proof, as he deems fair and appropriate. The rules regardingthe admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath oraffirmation. The Hearing Officer shall announce his decision at the end of the hearing. If he determinesthat the person is not liable, he shall dismiss the matter and enter his determination in writingaccordingly. If he determines that the person is liable for the violation, he shall forthwith enter andassess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as provided by the applicableordinances of the Town of Brooklyn.
§ 20-2.6. Notice of Assessment Which is Unpaid.
[
Ord. No. 06-3
§ 7]
If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing officer shall send by first class maila notice of assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the Clerk of a SuperiorCourt facility designated by the Chief Court Administrator together with an entry fee of $8.00. Thecertified copy of notice of assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within such twelve-month period, assessments against the same person may be accrued and filed as one record ofassessment. The Clerk shall enter judgment, in the amount of such record of assessment and courtcosts of $8.00, against such person in favor of the Town of Brooklyn. Notwithstanding any provision ofthe General Statutes, the Hearing Officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall havethe effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of execution on such judgment may issue withoutfurther notice to such person.
§ 20-2.7. Appeal.
[
Ord. No. 06-3
§ 8]
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 130/138
a.
1.
2.
3.
b.
c.
A person against whom an assessment has been made pursuant to this section is entitled to judicialreview by way of appeal. An appeal shall be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of the notice ofsuch assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in an amountequal to the entry fee for small claims case pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (Revision of1958) 52-259, at a Superior Court facility designated by the Chief Court Administrator, which shallentitle such person to a hearing in accordance with the rules of the Judges of the Supreme Court.
§ 20-3. PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS.
[Ord. 6/28/89 § 1]
It is hereby found that rapid growth and development within the Town of Brooklyn are placingunprecedented strain upon Town roads and appurtenant drainage systems, culverts, and catch-basins.
To alleviate that siltation, and as empowered by Section 7-148 (c) of the General Statutes, theBoard of Selectmen are hereby authorized to develop such regulations as they may deemappropriate to carry out the following purposes:
To provide the proper alignment, width, and grades and pavements of existing Town roadsserving as a right of way to any proposed subdivision, to ensure that such existing Townroads remain safe and continue to conform to the plan of development of the Town;
To provide adequate and sufficient storm drainage systems for carrying off increased stormdrainage created by any proposed subdivision and associated access road improvements,whether such additional drainage would impact upon existing Town improvements or privatelands;
To provide that adequate and sufficient culverts, manholes, and catch-basins be installed tocarry run-off water from the road surface and to divert road water from the proposedsubdivision beneath or around existing roads without causing significant increases in erosionor sedimentation.
Compliance with the regulations adopted by the Board of Selectmen shall be a conditionprecedent to any application for subdivision of property within the Town of Brooklyn. Failure tocomply shall be adequate cause for denial of any such application.
If any portion of this section is deemed by a court of competent jurisdiction to be impermissible, itsremaining sections shall continue to be valid and enforceable.
Appendix
Appendix A. Special Acts of the Legislature
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Special Acts of the Legislature
§ A-0. List of Special Acts of the Legislature in Reference to theTown of Brooklyn, Connecticut
AppendixNumber
Date of Approval
Short Title
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 131/138
AppendixNumber
Date of Approval
Short Title
A-1
May 11, 1786
Act of the General Assembly of the State of Connecticut,Incorporation of the Town of Brooklyn
A-2
October, 1791
Private Laws and Special Acts--1791 Discontinuing aHighway
A-3
5/27/1819
Public Statute Laws--Book II--May 1819 Erection ofCourthouse and Gaol
A-4
5/26/1820
Public Statute Laws--Book II--May 1820 Establish Use ofCourthouse and Gaol at Brooklyn
A-5
May, 1830
Private Laws and Special Acts-1830 page 5: IncorporatingProprietors of Brooklyn Academy
A-6
May, 1831
In Alterations passed May, 1831 Amend Trustees ofBrooklyn Academy to elect any Number of Trustees, notexceeding thirteen
A-7
6/11/1872
Special Acts-1872 page 268 Incorporating the BrooklynSavings Bank
A-8
6/27/1873
Special Acts---May 1873 page 71 Construction of Railroad
A-9
3/8/1882
Special Acts--January 1882 page 858 Property changedfrom District Six to District One
A-10
4/12/1883
Special Acts--January 1883 page 863 Established TwoVoting Districts
A-11
4/25/1893
Approved Special Laws--1893 page 305 Incorporating theBrooklyn Town Library Association
A-12
5/11/1899
Special Laws, Vol. XIII--1899-1901 Reimburse Town forImprovement of Public Roads
A-13
3/15/1899
Special Laws, Vol. XIII--1899-1901-Amending the Charter ofthe Borough of Danielson and Incorporating Brooklyn FireDistrict
A-14
5/14/1901
Special Acts--January 1901-page 815 School Property in theTown of Brooklyn
A-15
5/26/1905
Special Acts-January 1905-page 717 School District NumberSeven in the Town of Brooklyn is Authorized to Raise Moneyto Care for Cemeteries
A-16
3/24/1915
Special Acts--1915 Approved Amending the Charter of theBrooklyn Savings Bank
A-17
5/27/1921
Special Laws--January 1921-page 674 Care of Burial Lot ofWilliam Briggs
A-18
5/8/1929
Special Acts-House Bill 911-January 1929 Providing forBiennial Election in the Town of Brooklyn
A-19
5/8/1931
Special Acts-January 1931-page 333 Amending an ActProviding for Biennial Elections in the Town of Brooklyn
A-20
5/9/1939
Special Acts--1939-page 152 Authorizing the Town ofBrooklyn to Transfer Trust Funds to the Brooklyn SouthCemetery Associated, Incorporated
A-21
4/19/1949
Special Acts-January 1949-page 835 Authorizing theBrooklyn Fire District to Issue Bonds
Disposition List
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 132/138
Chapter DL. Disposition List
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
The following Ordinances adopted by the Town of Brooklyn have been included in the "Code of theTown of Brooklyn, 2009."
Ord. No.
DateAdopted/Approved
Short Title
Chapter
Supp. No.
5/29/1942
Town meeting book--Volume 2: SelectmenEmpowered to EnactOrdinances
Administration
4/8/1953
Erection, Construction,Alteration, Repairing,Destruction or Removal ofBuildings or Structures
Building and Housing
1/15/1958
Regulating the Parking andLocation of AutomobileTrailers
Trailers and Trailer Camps
-/-/1960
Sewage DisposalOrdinance
Sewers
1/23/1963
Removal, Repair, orDemolition of any Buildingor Structure
Building and Housing
1/23/1963
Bulk Storage of FlammableLiquids for Resale
Fire Prevention
4/16/1964
Justices of the Peace;Election of
Administration
12/10/1965
Creating a PlanningCommission
Administration
12/28/1966
Recreation and ParkCommission; Creation
Administration
6/22/1967
Participation in RegionalPlanning
Administration
10/19/1967
Creating an EconomicDevelopment Commission
Administration
6/10/1970
Retirement System for theEmployees
Personnel Policies
8/21/1970
Amend Planning andZoning Commission
Administration
9/24/1970
State Building Code
Building and Housing
4/8/1971
Building Permit Fees
Building and Housing
6/29/1971
Establishment of a SewerAuthority
Administration
1/27/1972
Board of FireCommissioners
Fire Prevention andProtection
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 133/138
Ord. No.
DateAdopted/Approved
Short Title
Chapter
Supp. No.
2/28/1974
Brooklyn Inland WetlandsCommission; Creation
Administration
1/8/1976
Minimization of FloodDamage
Flood Damage Prevention
9/20/1979
Permits to Locate PrivateDriveways
Streets and Sidewalks
9/20/1979
Excavation andObstructions of Highwaysand Streets
Streets and Sidewalks
9/20/1979
Snow Removal
Streets and Sidewalks
9/20/1979
Sewer Ordinance
Sewers
9/20/1979
Amendment to Section
13-1
of the Brooklyn SewerOrdinance
Sewers
1/29/1979
Appointment of anAssessor; Duties
Administration
5/6/1980
Amending Recreation andParks Commission
Administration
5/6/1980
Designating the WaterPollution Control Authority
Administration
5/30/1981
Administrative Assistant ofthe Water Pollution Control
Administration
4/30/1981
Building Permits; RepealsOrd. of 5/8/53-Repair ofBuildings
Building and Housing
4/30/1981
Amend State Building Codeby Adding PenaltyProvisions
Building and Housing
4/30/1981
Peddlers, Solicitors andSalesmen
Licensing and BusinessRegulations
12/4/1984
Flood Damage Prevention
Flood Damage Prevention
11/25/1986
Brooklyn ResourceRecovery Authority
Administration
3/26/1987
Regional Council ofGovernments
Administration
3/19/1987
Visible Street NumbersRequired
Building and Housing
3/29/1988
Brooklyn Solid WasteOrdinance
Solid Waste Management
3/24/1988
Clearance of Streets forSnow Removal
Streets and Sidewalks
6/18/1988
Individual Cost Based Feesfor Municipal Land UseApplications
Land Use Regulations
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 134/138
Ord. No.
DateAdopted/Approved
Short Title
Chapter
Supp. No.
2/21/1989
Inspection of StructuresContaining Multiple DwellingUnits
Building and Housing
2/21/1989
Municipal Liability for Iceand Snow on PublicSidewalks
Streets and Sidewalks
6/28/1989
Public ImprovementSpecifications
Not sent by town
5/19/1990
Ordinance Reforming theBrooklyn Inland WetlandsCommission and theBrooklyn ConservationCommission
Administration
10/11/1990
Mandatory RecyclingOrdinance
Solid Waste Management
10/11/1990
Two Shifts of ElectionOfficial
Administration
3/21/1991
Brooklyn Code of Ethics
Administration
3/21/1991
Fees for Municipal LandUse Application of the Townof Brooklyn
Land Use Regulations
6/26/1991
Amend Board of FireCommissioners
Fire Prevention
6/26/1991
Purchasing Procedure
Administration
8/8/1991
Amend ExpandMembership of theConservation Commission
Administration
92-1
4/7/1992
Amend Flood DamagePrevention
Flood Damage Prevention
92-2
3/4/1992
Amending the OrdinanceCreating a Recreation andParks Commission
Administration
92-3
4/4/1992
Amend Brooklyn SolidWaste Ordinance
Solid Waste Management
93-1
7/22/1993
Ordinance Regarding TaxAbatements for Dairy Farms
Tax Abatements andExemptions
93-2
7/22/1993
Ordinance concerning theRight to Farm in the Town ofBrooklyn
Preservation of Farm
93-3
7/22/1993
Relating to the Control ofExcavation andObstructions of Highwaysand Streets Maintained bythe Town
Streets and Sidewalks
93-4
7/22/1993
Creating a Single VotingDistrict in the Town ofBrooklyn
Administration
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 135/138
Ord. No.
DateAdopted/Approved
Short Title
Chapter
Supp. No.
94-1
8/11/1994
Establishing a TaxExemption for ForestLandowners
Tax Abatement andExemption
94-2
8/11/1994
Brooklyn Building CodeOrdinance of 1994
Building and Housing
94-3
8/11/1994
Concerning Loitering orObstructing Passagewayson Public Property or Roads
Offenses, MiscellaneousProvisions
94-4
8/11/1994
Concerning the Parking ofVehicles on Public Propertyand Roads
Traffic
94-5
8/11/1994
Concerning SpecialActivities or Events
Licensing and BusinessRegulations
94-6
11/28/1994
Establishing a TaxExemption for Certain Non-profit Organizations
Tax Abatements andExemptions
95-1
12/5/1995
Concerning withholding ofApproval of BuildingApplication when Taxes areDelinquents
Building and Housing
97-1
1/14/1997
Amending the OrdinanceCreating a Board of FireCommissioners and theAmendment to AidOrdinance
Fire Prevention andProtection
97-2
5/29/1997
Relating to Loitering,Littering and PublicConsumption of AlcoholicBeverages
Offenses, MiscellaneousProvisions
97-3
7/31/1997
Authorizing the Appointmentof a Municipal Collector ofTaxes
Administration
97-4
8/27/1997
Relating to Flood DamagePrevention
Flood Damage Prevention
97-5
11/19/2001
Creating the Brooklyn LandAcquisition Fund
Administration
97-6
11/19/2001
Rapid Access System forFirefighters
Fire Prevention andProtection
02-1
9/26/2002
Amending the OrdinanceCreating an EconomicDevelopment Commissionand the Amendment toChange the Membershipand Terms
Administration
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 136/138
Ord. No.
DateAdopted/Approved
Short Title
Chapter
Supp. No.
03-1
1/22/2003
Amending the OrdinanceCreating an EconomicDevelopment Commissionand Amendment to AddTwo (2) Alternate Members
Administration
04-1
2/16/2004
Creating the Brooklyn GolfAuthority
Administration
04-2
6/10/2004
Amending the Brooklyn GolfAuthority
Administration
04-3
10/27/2004
Scenic Road Designation
Streets and Sidewalks
04-4
10/27/2004
Amendment to ExistingDriveway RequirementsContained in the RoadwayDesign and ConstructionRequirements
Streets and Sidewalks
04-5
10/27/2004
Amend to Increase the Feefor Zoning Board of AppealsApplication to $250.00
Land Use Regulations
04-6
10/27/2004
Amend to Add an AlternateMember to the BrooklynGolf Authority
Administration
05-1
6/8/2006
Concerning the Designationof the BrooklynConservation Commissionas the Town's AquiferProtection Agency
Administration
06-1
8/10/2006
Concerning the Parking ofVehicles in Designated FireZones and No ParkingZones
Traffic
06-2
8/10/2006
Amendment to BrooklynBuilding Code Ordinance of1994
Building and Housing
06-3
8/10/2006
Establishing CitationProcedures and Fines forZoning and WetlandsViolations
Land Use Regulations
06-4
10/10/2006
Amendment to March 21,1991 OrdinanceEstablishing Individual CostBased Fees for MunicipalLand Use Application
Land Use Regulations
06-5
4/26/2006
Notice of Adoption of SewerCapital Connection Fee
Sewer
07-01
4/24/2007
Declaration of a LocalDisaster Emergency
Administration
07-02
4/24/2007
Amending Brooklyn GolfAuthority Ordinance
Administration
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 137/138
Ord. No.
DateAdopted/Approved
Short Title
Chapter
Supp. No.
08-01
11/18/2008
Amending Ordinancescreating the BrooklynAcquisition Fund
Administration
09-01
12/30/2009
Create the AgriculturalCommission
Administration
5/3/2010
Adopt the Code of the Townof Brooklyn, 2009
Adopting Ordinance
5/3/2010
Amend Land UseApplication Fees
Land Use Application Fees
5/3/2010
Add Fees for Permits andApprovals Issued by theFire Marshal
Fire Prevention andProtection
2/17/2011
Add Constables
Administration
1
2/17/2011
Amend Parking ProhibitedDuring Certain Months forSnow Removal
Traffic
1
2/17/2011
Amend Fees for Permitsand Approvals Issued bythe Fire Marshal
Fire Prevention andProtection
1
11/2/2011
Inland Wetlands ApplicationFees
Fees for Land UseApplications
2
11/10/2011
Recreation and ParkCommission
Administration
2
7/16/2012
Purchasing procedures, 2-41
Administration
3
7/16/2012
Number of Justicesestablished
Administration
3
7/16/2012
Designation of the Planningand Zoning Commission ofthe Town of Brooklyn as theTown's Aquifer ProtectionAgency
Administration
3
3/4/2013
Adds property taxexemption for farm buildingsand additional farmmachinery, 6-3
Tax Abatements and TaxExemptions
4
3/4/2013
Brooklyn ResourceRecovery Commission, 2-21
Administration
4
3/4/2013
Anti-Blight Ordinance, 9-1
Property Maintenance
4
3/4/2013
Special events permits, 4-2
Licensing and BusinessRegulations
4
3/4/2013
Town Treasurer, 2-5
Administration
4
8/1/2013
Planning and ZoningCommission, 2-16.2, 2-16.3
Administration
4
8/1/2013
Summary publication ofadopted ordinances, 2-45
Administration
4
2/8/2021 Town of Brooklyn, CT Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/BR4075?guid=BR4075&children=true 138/138
Ord. No.
DateAdopted/Approved
Short Title
Chapter
Supp. No.
8/1/2013
Require Town meetingapproval of agreements,contracts or lease of Townproperty, 2-44 (repealed1/8/14)
Administration
4
8/1/2013
Citation procedures forzoning and wetlandsviolations, 20-2.1
Fees for Land UseApplications
4
8/1/2013
Tax exemption for certainmotor vehicles, 6-4
Tax Abatements and TaxExemptions
4
1/8/2014
Require Town meetingapproval of sale, lease ortransfer of Town property, 2-44
Administration
4
Officials Page
5
4/7/2015
Amends Ch.
4
Licensingand Business Regulations;4-1, peddlers, solicitors andsalesmen
6
8/16/2016
Amends Ch.
2
Administration; add 2-46Taxation: Refunds; Waivers;2-46.1 Refund of Taxes
7
8/16/2016
Amends Ch.
2
Administration; adds 2-46.2Waiver of All Taxes Due inan Amount Less Than$10.00
7
Officials Page
8
12/13/2018
Amends Ch.
2
Administration; adds 2-27Board of Education, 2-27.1Terms of Office of theMembers
9
12/13/2018
Amends Ch.
7
Traffic;amends 7-1 ParkingRestrictions; amends 7-2Parking Prohibited DuringParking Bans for SnowRemoval
9
Ordinance No.
Adoption Date
Subject
Disposition
Supp. No.
7-11-2019
Tax Abatements and TaxExemptions Amendment
Ch.
6
10

BROOKLYN, CONNECTICUT
ZONING REGULATIONS
PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION
EFFECTIVE JULY 30, 2020
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION 1
1.A. AUTHORITY.............................................................................................. 1
1.B. PURPOSES ............................................................................................... 1
1.C. ZONES AND BOUNDARIES ........................................................................ 2
1.D. APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS ............................................................... 3
1.E. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY .................................................................... 4
1.F. EFFECTIVE DATE ....................................................................................... 4 2. WORDS AND TERMS 5
2.A. BASIC USAGE ........................................................................................... 5
2.B. DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................ 7 3. RESIDENTIAL ZONES 36
3.A. R-10 RESIDENTIAL ZONE ......................................................................... 36
3.B. R-30 RESIDENTIAL ZONE ......................................................................... 40
3.C. RA RESIDENTIAL-AGRICULTURAL ZONE ................................................... 44 4. BUSINESS ZONES 49
4.A. VILLAGE CENTER ZONE ........................................................................... 49
4.B. NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS ZONE ........................................................... 59
4.C. RESTRICTED BUSINESS ZONE .................................................................. 66
4.D. PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONE ............................................................... 71
4.E. INDUSTRIAL ZONE .................................................................................. 79
4.F. MILL MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT ZONE ................................................... 83 5. SPECIAL ZONES 93
5.A. SCENIC ROUTE 169 OVERLAY ZONE ......................................................... 93
5.B. PARADISE LAKE OVERLAY ZONE .............................................................. 98
5.C. GOLF COURSE OVERLAY ZONE ................................................................ 99
5.D. FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONE ................................................................ 100
5.E. AQUIFER PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE ................................................. 101
5.F. GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE ..................................... 102
5.G. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE............................................................ 105
6. USE-RELATED PROVISIONS 110
6.A. HOME-BASED BUSINESSES ................................................................... 110
6.B. ALTERNATIVE BUSINESS ARRANGEMENTS ............................................ 114
6.C. ACCESSORY APARTMENT ..................................................................... 117
6.D. RESIDENTIAL COMPOUND .................................................................... 118
6.E. MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT ............................................................. 119
6.F. ELDERLY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT ....................................................... 121
6.G. CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION .............................................................. 123
6.H. EMERGENCY TRAILER ........................................................................... 128
6.I. REAR LOTS ........................................................................................... 129
6.J. SPECIAL EVENTS ................................................................................... 130
6.K. DONATION BINS .................................................................................. 132
6.L. VENDORS AND AGRICULTURAL BUSINESSES ......................................... 133
6.M. TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES ........................................................ 136
6.N. SMALL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS .......................................................... 140
6.O. EXCAVATION OPERATIONS ................................................................... 141
6.P. EARTH MATERIALS PROCESSING ........................................................... 149
6.Q. CHICKENS ............................................................................................ 151 7. BASIC STANDARDS 152
7.A. SIGNS .................................................................................................. 152
7.B. PARKING AND LOADING ....................................................................... 160
7.C. LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS ............................................................... 165
7.D. ACCESS MANAGEMENT ........................................................................ 168
7.E. DRIVEWAYS AND INTERSECTIONS ........................................................ 169
7.F. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS ................................................................ 170
7.G. OUTDOOR LIGHTING ............................................................................ 173
7.H. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ............................................................. 176
7.I. PEDESTRIAN IMPROVEMENTS .............................................................. 177
7.J. UTILITIES ............................................................................................. 177 8. EXCEPTIONS AND NON-CONFORMITIES 178
8.A. DIMENSIONAL EXCEPTIONS .................................................................. 178
8.B. NON-CONFORMING CONDITIONS ......................................................... 180
9. PROCEDURES 183
9.A. ZONING PERMIT APPLICATION ............................................................. 183
9.B. PRE-APPLICATION REVIEWS ................................................................. 186
9.C. SITE PLAN APPLICATION ....................................................................... 187
9.D. SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION ............................................................. 194
9.E. TEXT AMENDMENT APPLICATION ......................................................... 202
9.F. ZONE CHANGE APPLICATION ................................................................ 205
9.G. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS ................................................................ 209
9.H. ENFORCEMENT .................................................................................... 213
9.I. PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS ............................................................. 215 10. APPENDICES 221
10.A. APPENDIX A - SITE PLAN CHECKLIST ...................................................... 221
10.B. APPENDIX B – AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS BY ZONE ............. 223
10.C. APPENDIX C – REVISIONS ..................................................................... 226
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 1.B
Effective July 30, 2020 INTRODUCTION
PURPOSES
1
1. INTRODUCTION
1.A. AUTHORITY
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Brooklyn, Connecticut, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General statutes (CGS Section 8-1 et seq.), as amended, has adopted and established the following Zoning Regulations for the Town of Brooklyn, Connecticut.
1.B. PURPOSES
1.B.1. STATUTORY PURPOSES
1. In accordance with CGS Section 8-2, these Regulations are adopted to:
a. protect the public health, safety, convenience and property values;
b. lessen congestion in the streets;
c. secure safety from fire, panic, flood and other dangers;
d. promote health and the general welfare;
e. provide adequate light and air;
f. prevent the overcrowding of land;
g. avoid undue concentration of population; and
h. facilitate the adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements.
2. These Regulations are adopted to help implement the Plan of Conservation and Development adopted in accordance with CGS Section 8-23.
1.C BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
INTRODUCTION Effective July 30, 2020
ZONES AND BOUNDARIES
2
1.C. ZONES AND BOUNDARIES
1.C.1. ZONING MAP
1. In order to accomplish the purposes of these Regulations, the Town is divided into zones as shown on the most current Zoning Map adopted by the Commission.
2. The Zoning Map and subsequent revisions thereto are hereby declared to be a part of these Regulations.
1.C.2. INTERPRETATION OF ZONE BOUNDARIES
1. The zone boundaries shall be as shown on the most current Zoning Map adopted by the Commission.
2. Unless otherwise indicated, the zone boundaries are property lines, street lines, street lines extended, waterways, or lines drawn approximately parallel to street lines, and at distances therefrom determined by scaling the Zoning Map.
3. In cases of any uncertainty as to the location of zones or zone boundaries, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine the location.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 1.D
Effective July 30, 2020 INTRODUCTION
APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
3
1.D. APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
1.D.1. PROHIBITED IF NOT PERMITTED
1. Any use or activity within a zone which is not clearly permitted by these Regulations shall be deemed to be prohibited within such zone.
2. While uses not listed are prohibited, the Commission recognizes that it is not always possible to list every conceivable use that might be considered appropriate in each zone. Uses not listed as a permitted use in a zone that are related or equivalent to a listed use and meet the stated intent may be permitted subject to interpretation and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
1.D.2. CONFORMITY REQUIRED
1. No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied, in whole or in part, except in conformity with all applicable Sections of these Regulations.
2. No building or structure shall be built, erected, moved or altered except in conformity with all applicable Sections of these Regulations.
3. No lot shall be reduced, divided, or created such that the area, width or other dimensions of the lot or any of its required yards or required open areas shall be less than prescribed by these Regulations.
4. It shall be unlawful to alter the use of land, to commence construction or alteration of any building or structure, or to excavate for any building or structure or use until the application and plans therefore have been approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and a building permit issued by the Building Official.
1.D.3. MINIMUM REQUIREMENT
1. In their interpretation and application, these Regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare unless the context clearly indicates that the provision is intended to be a maximum limitation.
1.D.4. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGULATIONS
1. These Regulations are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law or ordinance.
2. These Regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreement between parties.
3. Where these Regulations impose a greater restriction on the use of buildings or land or on the height of buildings or require larger yards or setbacks, or a greater percentage of lot not to be built upon, or impose other higher standards than are imposed by any law, ordinance, regulation, or private agreement, these Regulations shall control.
4. When any law, ordinance, regulation, or private agreement imposes greater restrictions than are required by these Regulations, such greater restrictions shall not be diminished by these Regulations.
1.F BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
INTRODUCTION Effective July 30, 2020
EFFECTIVE DATE
4
1.E. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section, part or provision of these Regulations shall be determined to be illegal or otherwise unenforceable by any court having jurisdiction with respect thereto, such determination shall have no effect upon the continued validity, effect and enforceability of the remaining portions of these Regulations which shall continue in full force and effect.
1.F. EFFECTIVE DATE
1. Zoning Regulations initially became effective in Brooklyn on May 24, 1972.
2. The effective date of subsequent revisions was determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
3. These Regulations were comprehensively updated in 2015-2019 and adopted with an effective date of October 15, 2019.
4. The effective date of subsequent revisions will be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
A table at the back of these Regulations provides information on amendments adopted since October 15, 2019 and the sections affected thereby.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 2.A
Effective July 30, 2020 WORDS AND TERMS
BASIC USAGE
5
2. WORDS AND TERMS
2.A. BASIC USAGE
2.A.1. RULES AND TERMS
2. In the construction, interpretation, application, use and enforcement of these Regulations, words or terms shall be construed to carry out the purposes of these Regulations.
3. In the construction, interpretation, application, use and enforcement of these Regulations, the rules, terms, and definitions contained in this Section shall be observed and applied, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise.
4. In the construction, interpretation, application, use and enforcement of these Regulations, words or terms not defined in this Section shall carry their customary meaning or shall be interpreted by the Commission after consulting one or more of the following:
a. The State Building Code, as amended.
b. The Connecticut General statutes, as amended.
c. “The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions” (Rutgers University, Center for Urban Policy Research (Piscataway, NJ), as amended.
d. Black's Law Dictionary.
e. A comprehensive general dictionary.
2.A.2. BASIC RULES
In the construction, interpretation, application, use and enforcement of these Regulations, the following rules shall apply:
1. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular.
2. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
3. Words which are specifically masculine or feminine shall be interpreted as interchangeable.
4. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
5. The word "may" is permissive and not obligatory.
6. Any official, agency, commission, board or department identified in these Regulations is that of the Town of Brooklyn, unless otherwise specified.
7. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally.
2.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
WORDS AND TERMS Effective July 30, 2020
BASIC USAGE
6
2.A.3. COMMON TERMS
In the construction, interpretation, application, use and enforcement of these Regulations, commonly used terms shall be interpreted as follows unless the natural construction of the wording indicated otherwise:
1. The phrase "these Regulations" refers to the entire Zoning Regulations of the Town of Brooklyn.
2. The word "Section" refers to a Section of these Regulations (all paragraphs starting with the same numbers), unless otherwise specified.
3. The word "premise" or "premises" includes land and any buildings or structures thereon.
4. The word "building" includes the word "structure", and any part thereof.
5. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel".
6. The phrase "used for" includes the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for", and vice versa.
7. The word "built" includes the words "erected", "constructed", "reconstructed", "altered", or "enlarged".
8. The word "person" or "applicant" includes any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization or other legal entity.
9. The words "zone", "zoning district", and "district" have the same meaning.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 2.B
Effective July 30, 2020 WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
7
2.B. DEFINITIONS
ABUT – To physically touch or border upon or to share a common property line. For the purposes of these Regulations, properties across a public street shall be considered to abut.
ACCESS STRIP - A parcel of land that is designed and maintained to provide ingress and egress to a parcel of land, such as a rear lot, from a public road for vehicular use, including emergency vehicles.
ACCESSORY - See “Principal versus Accessory”.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT - See “Dwelling-Related Terms”.
ACRE - An area of 43,560 square feet.
ACTIVE ADULT COMMUNITY - A residential development the occupancy of which is limited, as permitted by state and federal fair housing laws, to those aged 55 and over.
ACTIVE RECREATION - Leisure-time activities, usually of a formal nature and often performed with others, requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites or fields.
ADULT DAY CARE CENTER - See “Day Care Related Terms”.
Adult-Related Terms ADULT-RELATED USE - Any commercial operation or exhibition where a significant or substantial portion of the stock in trade, marketing, labelling or any other activity involves: • the actual or simulated performance of specified sexual activities, as defined in these Regulations; • the exposure of specified anatomical areas, as defined in these regulations; • the removal of clothing or appearing unclothed; and/or • pantomime, modeling or similar personal service offered to a customer. This definition shall include but not be limited to adult-oriented motion pictures, live performance, display, or dance as well as the display and/or sale of adult-themed books, movies, or paraphernalia. SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: (1) Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, female breasts, or (2) male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely opaquely covered. SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES - Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; and fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or breasts.
2.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
WORDS AND TERMS Effective July 30, 2020
DEFINITIONS
8
Agriculture-Related Terms AGRICULTURE - As provided in CGS 1-1(q), the words “agriculture” and “farming” shall include : (1) The cultivation of the soil, dairying, forestry, or the raising or harvesting of any agricultural or horticultural commodity; including the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management of livestock, including horses, bees, poultry, fur-bearing animals and wildlife, and the raising or harvesting of oysters, clams, mussels, other molluscan shellfish or fish; (2) The operation, management, conservation, improvement or maintenance of a farm or its buildings, tools and equipment;, or salvaging timber or cleared land of brush or other debris left by a storm, as an incident to such farming operations; (3) The production or harvesting of maple sugar or maple syrup or any agricultural commodity, including lumber, as an incident to ordinary farming operations or the harvesting of mushrooms, the hatching of poultry, or the construction, operation or maintenance of ditches, canals, reservoirs or waterways used exclusively for farming purposes; (4) The handling, planting drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing, grading, storing, or delivering to storage or to market, or to a carrier for transportation to market, or for direct sale any agricultural or horticultural commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or, in the case of fruits and vegetables, as an incident to the preparation of such fruits or vegetables for market or for direct sale. AGRICULTURE, COMMERCIAL - An agricultural use where: (1) agricultural goods and/or services are prepared or rendered for sale or profit, and (2) the operator qualifies to file a Form 1040 Schedule F - Profit or Loss from Farming with the Internal Revenue Service. AGRICULTURE, NON-COMMERCIAL - An agricultural use other than a commercial agricultural use. AQUACULTURE – The farming of the waters of the state and tidal wetlands and the production of protein food, including fish, oysters, clams, mussels and other molluscan shellfish, on leased, franchised and public underwater farm lands. FARM – Farm buildings, and accessory buildings thereto, nurseries, orchards, ranges, greenhouses, hoophouses and other temporary structures or other structures used primarily for the raising and, as an incident to ordinary farming operations, the sale of agricultural or horticultural commodities. See “Principal versus Accessory”.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 2.B
Effective July 30, 2020 WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
9
Alteration-Related Terms ALTERATION – Any change, addition, or modification with regard to a use, building, structure, or parcel. ALTERATION, INCIDENTAL– (1) Exterior modifications to a building or structure that are primarily cosmetic; (2) Rearrangement of interior partitions provided the changes are not structural in nature; or (3) Changes in utility service or mechanical / electrical equipment. ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL– (1) Any enlargement or reduction to a structure whether horizontally or vertically; (2) Any change or rearrangement in the structural parts including any change to supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders; or (3) The moving from one location or position to another on a lot. MINOR MODIFICATION –Any alteration to a building or property that is determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO), who may consult with the Commission Chairman or the entire Commission, to: (1) not affect the existing size, form, style, ornamentation or appearance of the existing or proposed structure(s) including, but not limited to, minor exterior building changes; (2) not reduce the effectiveness, quality or quantity of the existing landscaping, screening or buffering of the site including, but not limited to, minor landscaping changes; (3) not impact the number of parking spaces or vehicular circulation; (4) not significantly alter drainage patterns including, but not limited to, slight alterations of finished grading contours; and (5) not significantly alter other key elements of the proposed development including, but not limited to, installation of fences, minor rearrangement of lighting fixtures, siting and screening of trash disposal and mechanical facilities, or similar appurtenances.
ANTENNA – A device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves including, but not limited to, whip, panel, and dish antennas.
ARTERIAL ROAD – State highways including Route 6, Route 169, and Route 205.
ART STUDIO / GALLERY – A place for the display of paintings, sculptures and decorative art, including as an incidental use thereof the sale and creation of such art.
2.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
WORDS AND TERMS Effective July 30, 2020
DEFINITIONS
10
Automotive-Related Terms AUTOMOBILE SALES – The use of any building, land area, or other premise principally for the display, sale, rental, or lease of new or used automobiles (but may include light trucks or vans, trailers or recreational vehicles), and including any vehicle preparation, warranty, or repair work conducted as an accessory use. AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION – Any building, land area, or portion thereof, used for the retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels; servicing and repair of automobiles; and including as an accessory use the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries, and similar vehicle accessories. GAS STATION – Any building, land area, or portion thereof, used for the retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels; which may include, as an accessory use, retail sales of convenience items.
BANK – An institution where money is deposited, kept, lent or exchanged and intended to be open to the general public.
BANQUET HALL - See “Food Service Related Terms”.
BED & BREAKFAST - See “Lodging-Related Terms”.
BOARD -- The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Brooklyn, Connecticut.
BOARD OF APPEALS - The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Brooklyn, Connecticut.
BOARDING HOUSE - See “Lodging-Related Terms”.
BUFFER STRIP – A landscaped area, which may include a wall or other structure, provided for the purpose of protecting adjoining properties from noise, glare, dust, and unsightly conditions.
BUILDABLE LAND - For the purposes of planning a Conservation subdivision, the area of the parcel after subtracting any areas designated as wetlands, watercourses, slopes of 25% or greater, areas within the 100-year flood boundary, and areas encumbered by any rights-of-way or easements.
BUILDING - A structure, whether temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls used or intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any person, animal, process, equipment, goods, tangible personal property or other materials.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY - See “Principal vs Accessory”.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL - See “Principal vs Accessory”.
BUILDING COVERAGE - See “Coverage-Related Terms”.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 2.B
Effective July 30, 2020 WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
11
BUILDING HEIGHT - The vertical distance measured from the average level of the finished ground along all walls of the building to the highest point of the roof, for flat roofs, to the deck line for mansard roofs, and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs; and to the highest point of any other type of roof.
CATERER’S ESTABLISHMENT - See “Food Service Related Terms”.
CGS - The General statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended.
CHICKEN – A type of domesticated fowl (Gallus gallus domesticus).
CHILD DAY CARE SERVICES - See “Day Care Related Terms”.
CHILD DAY CARE CENTER - See “Day Care Related Terms”.
CRAFTSPERSON - A person who practices or is highly skilled in a craft; an artisan.
COMMERCIAL AGRICULTURE - See “Agriculture Related Terms”.
COMMERCIAL USE - Those uses where goods and/or services are prepared or rendered for sale.
2.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
WORDS AND TERMS Effective July 30, 2020
DEFINITIONS
12
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE - Any vehicle or equipment regularly used to carry, deliver, handle or move goods in the conduct of a business, commerce, profession or trade, and which has three or more of the following characteristics:
1. Has a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of nine thousand (9,000) pounds or more;
2. Exceeds seven (7) feet in height from the base of the vehicle to the top;
3. Exceeds twenty (20) feet in length;
4. Has more than two (2) axles;
5. Has more than four (4) tires in contact with the ground;
6. Used, designed and built to carry more the eight (8) passengers;
7. Designed to sell food or merchandise from the vehicle or trailer itself;
8. Banners, signs, logos, advertising or markings identifying the owner or registrant, a trade, business, service or commodity;
9. Has modifications such as but not limited to platform rack, ladder rack, or mechanical equipment such as a hoist used to facilitate the carrying of goods or equipment;
10. Commercial plate or registration.
Commercial Vehicles used on a farm for activities associated with that farm are exempt from the definition of Commercial Vehicle.
The following types of vehicles when regularly used to carry, deliver, handle or move goods in the conduct of business, commerce, profession or trade shall be considered commercial vehicles - step vans, cargo vans, box trucks, flat bed or stake bed trucks, buses, semi-trailers, tractor trailers, dump trucks, wreckers and trailers for commercial purposes.
The following types of equipment shall also be considered commercial vehicles - earth moving equipment, cement mixers trenching and pipe laying equipment and other similar type of contractors/ construction/ site work equipment.
COMMISSION - the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Brooklyn.
COMMUNITY CENTER – A place, structure, area or other facility used for and providing religious, fraternal, social and/or recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to serve the community.
CONTAINER – Any portable device in which a material is stored, transported, treated, disposed of or otherwise handled. Containers used on a farm for activities associated with that farm are exempt from the definition of containers.
CONTRACTOR’S YARD – A lot or portion of a lot or parcel used to store and maintain construction equipment and other materials and facilities customarily required in the building trade by a construction contractor including associated office uses and excluding on-site sales.
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION - See “Subdivision-Related Terms”.
CONVALESCENT HOME, REST HOME, or NURSING HOME - A dwelling where persons are housed or lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care for hire.
CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION: - See “Subdivision-Related Terms.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 2.B
Effective July 30, 2020 WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
13
Coverage-Related Terms BUILDING COVERAGE - The percentage which the aggregate area of the footprints of all buildings on a lot bears to the lot area. In the following graphic, the yellow areas (“buildings”) would be tabulated to compute building coverage.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE - The percentage which the aggregate area of all impervious surfaces on a lot bears to the lot area. In the following graphic, the yellow areas would be tabulated to compute impervious coverage.
2.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
WORDS AND TERMS Effective July 30, 2020
DEFINITIONS
14
CUSTOMARY - See “Principal versus Accessory”.
Day Care-Related Terms DAY CARE - A program of supplementary care or instruction provided, generally for remuneration, to people outside their own homes on a regular basis for a part of the 24 hours in one or more days in the week (i.e., without overnight accommodations). CHILD DAY CARE – Day care services provided to children. ADULT DAY CARE - Day care services provided to the elderly and/or functionally impaired adults. FAMILY DAY CARE HOME - A private family home caring for not more than six people, including the provider's own relatives, where such people are cared for not less than three nor more than twelve hours during a twenty-four hour period and where care is given on a regularly recurring basis. During the regular school year, a maximum of three additional children who are in school full time, including the provider's own children, shall be permitted, except that if the provider has more than three children who are in school full time, all of the provider's children shall be permitted. GROUP DAY CARE HOME - A facility that offers or provides day care to not less than seven nor more than twelve related or unrelated people on a regular basis for a part of the twenty-four hours in one or more days in the week. DAY CARE CENTER - A facility that offers or provides day care to more than twelve related or unrelated people outside their own homes on a regular basis for a part of the twenty-four hours in one or more days in a week.
DEEP – Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
DEVELOPMENT - Any construction or grading activities to improved or unimproved real estate.
DEVELOPMENT RESTRICTION - A restriction which perpetually prohibits further development or use inconsistent with or inimical to the enhancement preservation and protection of a defined area for the benefit of fish, wildlife, plants, or other similar ecosystems or preserves such areas predominantly in their natural scenic or open condition; but which do not involve any significant alteration of development of the restricted area in a manner which is inconsistent or inimical to the preservation and protection of the restricted area.
DISTURBED AREA - In relation to erosion and sediment control, an area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion.
DONATION BIN - Any enclosed container or receptacle held out to the public for the donation of goods and the temporary secure storage of donated goods.
DRIVEWAY - A privately owned right-of-way providing vehicle access from a public right-of-way to a dwelling, business or any other use of a property.
DUPLEX - See “Dwelling Related Terms”.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 2.B
Effective July 30, 2020 WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
15
Dwelling-Related Terms DWELLING - A building or portion thereof used for residential occupancy; but not including hotels, boarding houses, or rooming houses. Manufactured homes with the narrowest dimension of twenty-two feet or more are considered to be a dwelling. DWELLING UNIT - A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING - A single building occupied by one family, but excluding trailers, mobile homes, or temporary structures. DUPLEX BUILDING - A single building containing independent dwelling units for two (2) families, living independently of each other. MULTI-FAMILY BUILDING – A single building containing three (3) or more dwelling units, and includes apartments, row houses, town houses and all other family dwellings of similar character where apartments or suites are occupied and used as separate, complete housekeeping units (not including bed & breakfasts, hotels, motels, and tourist homes). MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT - A residential development (other than one multi-family building) consisting of three (3) or more dwelling units on one parcel of land. ACCESSORY APARTMENT – A single dwelling unit accessory to a single family dwelling, occupying an existing detached garage or customary accessory building, but excluding trailers, mobile homes, or temporary structures. ELDERLY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT – As provided in the Fair Housing Act and the "Housing for Older Persons" exemption thereto, housing facilities and housing communities intended for, and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or older.
EDUCATION CENTER - Any use, exclusive of a private school or a municipal facility, which is intended for the education and/or instruction of children and/or adults.
ELDERLY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT - See “Dwelling Related Terms”.
EROSION - The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments or the wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice or gravity.
2.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
WORDS AND TERMS Effective July 30, 2020
DEFINITIONS
16
EVENTS FACILITY - A location, building, site or structure which is:
(1) rented, paid for use by payment, recompense, remuneration, exchange of services or by charging a fee to access the facility in the form of an admission charge, parking charge or other monetary exchange as a commercial enterprise;
(2) a place for the purpose of accommodating a group of diners, patrons, guests, or other attendees for functions such as banquets, wedding receptions, parties, entertainment, performances and/or similar gatherings; and where such event is a Secondary Use (as defined in Section 2.B of these Regulations) of the location, building, site or structure.
(3) The above definition of an Event Facility specifically excludes adult-related uses and facilities located in restaurants and/or hotels, or fairgrounds.
EXCAVATION - The severance from the earth’s surface or removal from the ground of soil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock, topsoil or any other earth material.
EXCAVATION OPERATIONS - Any operations involving:
• excavating, grading, filling or removal of earth, sand, stone, gravel, soil, minerals, loam, fill, clay, peat moss, and any other earth products in the Town of Brooklyn.
• transportation of earth products from excavating, grading, filling or removal operations across private property located in Brooklyn, regardless of whether the operation itself is within Brooklyn or in an adjacent town.
FAMILY - Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit and doing their cooking on the premises, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or rooming house, or hotel or dormitory.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME - - See “Day Care Related Terms”.
FARM - See “Agriculture Related Terms”.
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT - See “Food Service Related Terms”.
FLOOR AREA – Except as may be otherwise specified in these Regulations, the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors contained within a structure, measured from the exterior face of outside walls or from the centerline of a common wall separating two structures. The calculation of floor area shall not include areas which are located below grade with two-thirds or more of the clear height below the average finished grade at the walls of the structure.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 2.B
Effective July 30, 2020 WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
17
Food Service-Related Terms BANQUET HALL - Premises, which may or may not contain kitchen facilities, used for the gathering of groups of persons for specific functions including the consumption of food and beverages. CATERER’S ESTABLISHMENT -An establishment in which food and beverages are prepared for consumption off the premises and are not served to customers on the premises or to take out. RESTAURANT - A commercial establishment that serves food and beverages. SIT-DOWN RESTAURANT - A restaurant that primarily serves persons seated within the building. This specifically excludes fast food restaurants. FAST FOOD RESTAURANT - Any restaurant or other commercial establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages in ready-to-consume individual servings, for consumption either within the building or for carry-out, and where either: (1) foods, frozen desserts, or beverages are usually served in paper, plastic or other disposable containers, and where customers are not served their food, frozen dessert, or beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter where the items are consumed; or (2) the establishment includes a drive-up or drive through service facility or offers curb service.
GALLERY - - See “Art Studio / Gallery”.
GAS STATION - - See “Automotive-Related Terms”.
GENERAL STATUTES - The General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended.
GOLF COURSE - Areas of land laid out for golf, excluding miniature golf or executive golf, with:
• a series of nine (9) or eighteen (18) holes each including a tee, a fairway, and a putting green and which may include roughs and other natural and artificial playing hazards;
• practice greens, driving ranges, and related accessory uses such as a pro shop, snack bar, etc..
GRADING - Any excavation, stripping, cutting, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth materials or any combination thereof, which results in a change of contour or elevation.
“GRANDFATHERED” - - See “Non-conforming Terms”.
GREENHOUSE - A BUILDING or structure whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of fragile or out-of-season plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment.
GROUP DAY CARE HOME - - See “Day Care Related Terms”.
HALFWAY HOUSE - A licensed home for inmates on release from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more restrictive custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation, and counseling are provided to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently.
2.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
WORDS AND TERMS Effective July 30, 2020
DEFINITIONS
18
Hardship HARDSHIP - As recognized by the law: (1) When a property cannot be used in a manner permitted in the zone in which that property is located due to its unique shape, topography, or other inherent condition. (2) Being too small or too narrow is not a legal hardship unless it restricts the property from being put to a reasonable permitted use. (3) A hardship must be unique to the property, in that it is a characteristic that is not exhibited by other properties in the area or in the zone, and one that makes it appropriate for special treatment. (4) A hardship must not be merely financial, which is personal and not inherent in the property itself, nor is the personal hardship of the owner, such as age or family condition, a legal hardship. (5) A hardship must not have been created by the owner or the predecessor in title, such as by dividing a parcel to create lots which cannot support the desired use; by creating a topographic condition by excavation, fill, or other measures which render the property unusable for its highest use without a variance; or by building a structure which, for whatever reason, violates a current zoning regulation.
HEALTH CLUBS - A Connecticut licensed health club as defined in CGS Section 21a-216, including any business enterprise offering facilities for the preservation, maintenance, encouragement or development of physical fitness or well-being in return for the payment of a fee entitling the buyer to the use of such facilities.
HOTEL– See “Lodging-Related Terms”.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE - See “Coverage-Related Terms”.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE - A surface that has been compacted or covered with any material that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of storm water. It includes most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, driveways, and other similar features.
INCIDENTAL - See “Principal versus Accessory”.
INCIDENTAL ALTERATION - See “Alteration-Related Terms”.
INDOOR SPORTS AND RECREATION - Any sports or recreational use conducted within an enclosed building.
INSPECTION - The periodic review of measures shown on the accepted plan.
JUNKYARD - An area of land, with or without buildings, used, either as a principal or accessory use, or occupied by the outdoor storage of used or discarded materials such as waste paper, rags, scrap metal, building materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles, or parts thereof, with or without dismantling, processing salvage, sale or other use or disposition of the same. The outdoor storage on a lot of two (2) or more wrecked or unregistered vehicles or vehicles otherwise not in a condition for legal use on public highways shall be deemed a junk yard.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 2.B
Effective July 30, 2020 WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
19
KENNEL – A commercial establishment in which dogs or domesticated animals are housed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold for a fee or compensation.
KENNEL, NON-COMMERCIAL – When dogs are kept by their owners accessory to a residential use where limited breeding may occur provided that no more than two (2) kennel tags shall be utilized.
KITCHEN - A room, place or space within a structure equipped for the preparation and/or cooking of food.
LAUNDROMAT - An establishment that provides washing and drying, or dry cleaning machines on the premises for rental use to the general public.
LICENSED HEALTH SERVICE - An establishment primarily engaged in furnishing licensed medical, surgical or other services to individuals, including the offices of physicians, dentists, and other health practitioners, medical and dental laboratories, outpatient care facilities, blood banks, and oxygen and miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services.
LIGHT INDUSTRY - A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing.
Lodging-Related Terms BED & BREAKFAST –An authorized accessory use to an owner-occupied dwelling in which lodging and meals are offered or provided for compensation by the owner(s) for up to twelve persons for limited periods of time not exceeding 30 consecutive days. HOTEL / MOTEL –A building used as a temporary lodging place for more than twelve (12) persons or providing six (6) or more sleeping rooms in which lodging is provided for compensation with or without meals. BOARDING HOUSE / ROOMING HOUSE - An establishment for five or more persons located in an owner-occupied dwelling that: (1) provides lodging with or without meals, (2) is only available for permanent occupancy (more than 30 consecutive days), and (3) which makes no provisions for cooking in any of the rooms occupied by paying residents.
2.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
WORDS AND TERMS Effective July 30, 2020
DEFINITIONS
20
Lot LOT - An area of land with definite boundaries identified by recorded deed or plan, used or set aside and available for use as the site of one or more buildings and not divided by a public thoroughfare or private road serving or intending to serve other lots. Lot Lines (see also “Yards and Setbacks”) FRONT LOT LINE - A property line separating a lot from a street or, in the case of a rear lot, the property line that the accessway to the street leads from. SIDE LOT LINE - Any property line other than a front lot line or a rear lot line. REAR LOT LINE – The lot line most opposite a front lot line except as follows: • A corner lot shall only have a rear lot line if it has more than four lot lines in which case the rear lot line shall be the lot line most opposite the shortest front lot line. • A through lot shall not have a rear lot line. • A pie-shaped lot shall not have a rear lot line. Lot Measurements LOT AREA – The area within the property lines. LOT FRONTAGE – The distance between the side lot lines measured either along the front lot line or along the building setback line, whichever is greater. LOT WIDTH – The distance between the side lot lines measured at the front lot line.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 2.B
Effective July 30, 2020 WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
21
Lot Types FRONT LOT - A lot fronting on a street. A front lot typically has one front yard, one rear yard, and other yards are side yards. CORNER LOT - A front lot situated at the intersection of and fronting on two (2) or more streets. A corner lot typically has two front yards, two rear yards, and no side yards. CUL-DE-SAC LOT - A front lot fronting on the end of a cul-de-sac without the minimum frontage required for the respective zone. REAR LOT - A lot not having the minimum frontage required for the respective zone and served by an ACCESS STRIP. THROUGH LOT – A front lot having frontage on two (2) non-intersecting public roads. A through lot typically has two front yards, two side yards, and no rear yard.
2.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
WORDS AND TERMS Effective July 30, 2020
DEFINITIONS
22
MANUFACTURED HOME – Factory-built structures that are used for residential purposes, meet State and Federal requirements, and are 22 feet wide or more when installed. See “Trailer Related Terms” and “Mobile Home”.
MERCHANDISE - Goods, objects or items sold at retail stores, expressly excluding any goods, object or item regulated by the Connecticut Department of Motor Vehicles.
MINOR MODIFICATION – See “Alteration-Related Terms”.
MIXED OCCUPANCY – A building in a Business Zone where a business is located on the ground floor and at least one (1) dwelling unit is located above the ground floor.
MIXED USE – A property where a business or businesses are located in one or more buildings and dwelling units are located in one or more other buildings.
MOBILE HOME - See “Trailer Related Terms” and “Manufactured Home”.
MOTEL– See “Lodging-Related Terms”.
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES - Any building or use carried out by the Town of Brooklyn or it’s duly authorized agent such as public utilities; refuse disposal areas, schools, highway garage, town hall, town office building and other similar uses.
MULTI-FAMILY - See “Dwelling Related Terms”.
MUSEUM - A building or buildings used, or to be used, for the preservation of a collection of paintings and or other works of art and/or objects of natural history, and /or of mechanical, scientific and or philosophical inventions, instruments, models and/or designs and dedicated or to be dedicated to the recreation of the public, together with any libraries, reading rooms, laboratories and/or other offices and premises used or to be used in connection therewith.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 2.B
Effective July 30, 2020 WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
23
Non-conforming Terms NON-CONFORMING – A situation where a use, structure or lot does not conform with the regulations for the zone in which it is situated. LEGAL NON-CONFORMING – A situation where a use, structure or lot was legally existing as of May 24, 1972 or any pertinent amendments hereto and became non-conforming as a result of such adoption. ILLEGAL NON-CONFORMING – A situation where a non-conforming use, structure or lot is not a legal conforming use, structure or lot. “GRANDFATHERED” –See “Legal Non-conforming” in “Non-conforming Terms”. NON-CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE - A building or structure that does not conform to the dimensional or locational or other applicable provisions of these Regulations, but which was legally existing at the effective date of original adoption of these Regulations (May 24, 1972) or of any pertinent amendment hereto. NON-CONFORMING LOT - A parcel of land which does not conform to the acreage, dimensional or yard provisions of these Regulations but which was legally existing, in separate ownership from any other contiguous lot, at the effective date of original adoption of these Regulations (May 24, 1972) or of any pertinent amendment hereto. NON-CONFORMING USE - A use of land, building or structure that does not conform to the applicable use provisions of these Regulations but which was legally existing at the effective date of original adoption of these Regulations (May 24, 1972) or of any pertinent amendment hereto. Any use which is permitted by Special Permit in a zone under the provisions of these Regulations shall not be deemed a non-conforming use in such zone.
2.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
WORDS AND TERMS Effective July 30, 2020
DEFINITIONS
24
OFFICES, BUSINESS OR ADMINISTRATIVE - Any building or part of a building in which one or more persons are employed in the management, direction or conducting of an agency, business or brokerage, labor or fraternal organization, and may include the administrative offices of a non-profit or charitable organization or the offices of a licensed professional or financial offices but not such uses as retail sale, manufacture, assembly or storage of goods, or places of assembly and amusement.
OPEN SPACE - An area of land that is valued for natural processes and wildlife, for agricultural and forest production, for passive recreation, and/or for providing other public benefits.
ORIGINAL PARCEL -. A parcel of land in existence as of July 1, 1967, the date of adoption of subdivision regulations in Brooklyn.
PARKING SPACE - An off-street space available for the parking of one motor vehicle (except for Handicapped parking which is mandated by the State Building Code which governs the size), exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant and giving access thereto, and having direct access thereto, and having direct access to a street.
PARTY WALL - Any wall dividing two (2) or more properties, owned by the respective owners.
PASSIVE RECREATION - Activities that involve activities such as walking, running, hiking, and if specifically designated, bicycling, horseback riding or fishing.
PERSONAL SERVICES - Services related to personal hygiene and beauty care, including those activities licensed by the State of Connecticut under Definitions of “Hairdressing and Cosmetology, Massage Therapy, and Barbers”. These uses include hair salons, barber shops, nail salons, day spas, and therapeutic massage studios.
PLACE OF WORSHIP - A structure used primarily for the conduct of religious services.
PREMISES - A lot together with any structures thereon.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 2.B
Effective July 30, 2020 WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
25
Principal versus Accessory PRINCIPAL – That which is most important. The main or primary condition. ACCESSORY - That which is subordinate to the principal condition. PRINCIPAL BUILDING – (1) The primary or predominant building or structure on a property, or (2) A building in which is conducted the primary or predominant use on the piece or parcel of land or on a contiguous parcel of land under the same ownership. (3) Buildings or structures connected by roofs or breezeways shall be considered part of the principal building. See also “Accessory Building”. ACCESSORY BUILDING – A building which is subordinate and customarily incidental to the principal building and use on the piece or parcel of land or on a contiguous parcel of land under the same ownership. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE – A structure, the size and use of which is subordinate and customarily incidental to the principal structure and/or use on the piece or parcel of land or on a contiguous parcel of land under the same ownership. For purposes of these Regulations, a swimming pool is considered to be an accessory structure. Principal Building (Dwelling) Accessory Building (Detached Garage)
(continued on next page)
2.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
WORDS AND TERMS Effective July 30, 2020
DEFINITIONS
26
Principal versus Accessory (continued from preceding page) PRINCIPAL USE - The primary or predominant use or activity of a lot, building, structure, or property. See also “Accessory Use”. The following factors shall be considered when determining whether agriculture is a principal use of property: (1) Total land area in agricultural use. (2) Percent of land area in agricultural use. (3) Whether a Schedule F is filed with the Internal Revenue Service. (4) Whether the property is enrolled in the PA-490 program. (5) The assessed value of the agricultural use compared to the total assessed value of the property. ACCESSORY USE - A use or activity on a property which is subordinate and customarily incidental to a principal use or activity on the same property or on a contiguous lot under the same ownership with the principal use. See also “Principal Use”. SECONDARY USE - An intentional, non-incidental, alternative use of a location, buildings, site or structure. This definition excludes events that are considered by the Commission to be an accessory use and which are customarily incidental to the primary use. See also “Principal Use” and “Accessory Use”. Principal Use (Residential) Accessory Use (Passenger Vehicle Parking)
CUSTOMARY – Something commonly practiced, used, or observed such that it is considered conventional and typical rather than unusual. INCIDENTAL - Something likely to ensue as a minor consequence of another activity or something that happens as a minor part or result of something else. SUBORDINATE – Something inferior, smaller, fewer, and of less importance or impact or something placed in or occupying a lower class, rank, or position.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 2.B
Effective July 30, 2020 WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
27
PRINT SHOP - A retail establishment that provides duplicating services such as using photocopy, blueprint, and digital equipment, including collating of booklets and reports.
PRIVATE SCHOOL - Any building or group of buildings, including dormitories, the use of which meets State requirements for elementary, secondary, or higher education and which secures the major part of its funding from any non-governmental agency and is accredited by the Connecticut Commission on Independent Schools, (CIS) of the New England Schools and Colleges Association, or by any successor organization to these Associations adopting substantially similar accreditation standards.
REHABILITATION - The act of bringing property back into a state of sound structural and useful condition in work of such scope that a building permit is required.
RESIDENTIAL USES - See “Dwelling Related Terms”.
RESTAURANT - See “Food Service Related Terms”.
RESUBDIVISION - See “Subdivision-Related Terms”.
RETAIL BUILDING - A building in which more than 30% of the floor area is used for retail sales and display.
RETAIL STORE - A building where goods, wares, merchandise, substances, articles or things are offered or kept for sale at retail, including storage of limited quantities of such goods, wares, merchandise, substances, articles or things, sufficient only to service such store.
RETAIL USE - The sale or display of merchandise for direct consumption or use by the purchaser.
ROOMING HOUSE - See “Lodging-Related Terms”.
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE - Activities that typically occur on a periodic basis in order to keep a property in good condition such as, but not limited to, painting, shingling, and siding, but specifically excluding repairs that:
(1) change the floor area, height, or footprint of a building;
(2) change a roof line or roof type; or
(3) add or remove parts of the building envelope.
SECONDARY USE: - See “Principal versus Accessory”.
SEDIMENT - Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY - A building or group of buildings containing separate, individual, and private storage spaces of varying sizes available for lease or rent for varying periods of time.
SETBACK - See “Yards versus Setbacks”.
SF – Square foot or square feet.
2.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
WORDS AND TERMS Effective July 30, 2020
DEFINITIONS
28
Sign-Related Terms SIGN - An illustration or display of any kind, attached or erected in any manner, which is used or intended for recognized advertising purposes and/or displayed in such a way as to be in view of the general public,. The term sign shall include a sign erected inside a building which is visible and/or legible from a public street. FREE STANDING SIGN – (1) Any sign supported by one or more upright poles, columns, or braces placed in or on the ground and not attached to any buildings or structure, or (2) Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such a manner that the carrying of such sign or signs becomes a primary purpose in itself and is no longer incidental to the vehicle's primary purpose. PORTABLE SIGN – (1) A sign which stands with self-supporting elements, which is not illuminated, and is not permanently affixed to the ground. (2) Portable signs may be used to communicate a specific message or information (e.g., lunch menus, special sales, promotional events) that is not found in a business’ permanent signage. TEMPORARY SIGN - A sign that is: (1) used in connection with a circumstance, situation, or event that is designed, intended, or expected to take place or to be completed within a reasonably short or definite period after the erection of such sign; or (2) intended to remain on the location where it is erected or placed for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. (3) If a sign display is permanent but the message displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign shall not be regarded as temporary. WALL SIGN - A sign painted on the outside of a building or attached to the wall of a building and supported throughout its length by such building. WINDOW SIGN - A sign affixed to or visible through a window of a building. SIGN AREA – (1) The entire surface of a sign, including areas not lettered. (2) For wall signs painted on the surface of the building exterior, it includes the area within the outer extent of the lettering.
SINGLE SERVICE SALON - A personal services establishment with no more than one sink and one hair cutting chair, intended to serve a single customer at a time, located within a residence as an accessory use. A single service salon is considered a home office for the purposes of Sec. 6.A.2.
SIMILAR USE - A use which the Commission shall find to be similar to a permitted use.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING - See “Dwelling Related Terms”.
SITE PLAN - A type of map or drawing prepared to demonstrate conformance of buildings, structures or uses of land with standards set forth in these Regulations. See Section 9.C of these Regulations.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 2.B
Effective July 30, 2020 WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
29
SITE PLAN REVIEW - A type of application whereby the Planning and Zoning Commission reviews buildings, structures or uses of land for conformance with standards set forth in these Regulations. See Section 9.C of these Regulations.
SIT-DOWN RESTAURANT - See “Food Service Related Terms”.
SOIL - Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN - A scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ROOF-MOUNTED - A solar collection system that is installed upon or is part of the roof of a building or structure located on the subject property. Systems integrated as awnings or attached to the roofs of porches, sheds, carports and covered parking structures also fall under this distinction.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL - An accessory solar energy collection system that is interconnected to the local utility electrical grid on the customer's side of the electric meter, generates electricity for direct consumption on the subject property to offset electricity purchased from the local electric distribution company, and performs in accordance with current state net-metering laws.
SPECIAL PERMIT - A type of approval authorized by the Connecticut General statutes whereby certain classes or kinds of buildings, structures or uses of land may be permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission subject to standards set forth in these Regulations and to conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety, convenience and property values. See Section 9.D of these Regulations.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS - See “Adult- Related Terms”.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES - See “Adult- Related Terms”.
STATE - The State of Connecticut.
STORY - That portion of the building which is between the surface of a floor and the surface of the next floor above or, in the absence of a floor above, the ceiling above. A portion of a building located partially below grade and where 50 percent or more of the floor-to-ceiling height of that portion of the building is below the average finished grade at the walls of the structure shall not be considered a story.
STREET - A road, highway, lane, avenue, boulevard, or any other public or private way, or a way opened to the public or private use, which provides a principal means of access to a lot. "Street" shall be deemed to include the entire width of the right-of-way but shall not include private driveways and private rights-of-way.
STREET LINE - The line dividing the street and the lot.
2.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
WORDS AND TERMS Effective July 30, 2020
DEFINITIONS
30
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION - See “Alteration-Related Terms”.
STRUCTURE - Anything constructed or erected, including a building, which has a permanent location on the ground, or anything attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, but excluding fences, flagpoles, ornamental walls under five (5) feet, mailboxes, and patios. Satellite dishes, antenna towers, emergency generators, swimming pools, and solar energy systems are considered to be structures and shall comply with dimensional requirements.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 2.B
Effective July 30, 2020 WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
31
Subdivision-Related Terms SUBDIVISION – As defined in CGS Section 8-18. The division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more parts or lots made subsequent to the adoption of subdivision regulations by the commission, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development expressly, excluding development for municipal, conservation or agricultural purposes, and includes resubdivision. CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION – A development of residential lots laid out primarily on the basis of site characteristics where important resources are preserved for open space, recreation, wildlife habitat, agriculture, or other purposes including the preservation of historic features or community character. CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION – A development of residential lots laid out primarily on the basis of strict dimensional standards such as lot area and/or frontage and where the provision of open space or conservation areas is typically a secondary consideration. RESUBDIVISION – As defined in CGS Section 8-18. A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision if such change: • affects any street layout shown on such map, • affects any area reserved thereon for public uses, or • diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map. Conventional Subdivision Conservation Subdivision
2.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
WORDS AND TERMS Effective July 30, 2020
DEFINITIONS
32
SUBORDINATE - See “Principal versus Accessory”.
SUBSTANTIAL RECONSTRUCTION - Building or construction which is considerable in importance, value, degree, amount or extent relating to the replacement of pre-existing structures or parts thereof of such scope that a building permit is required.
THEATER - A building or part of a building which is used for the commercial showing of films or presentations of live entertainment but specifically excluding any adult-related uses.
TOPSOIL - Earth materials, including loam, which are arable and constitute the surface layer of earth material.
TOWN - The Town of Brooklyn, Connecticut.
TOWN CLERK - The Town Clerk of the Town of Brooklyn, Connecticut.
Trailer-Related Terms TRAILER – A non-motorized structure built, designed, intended, or configured to be towed or hauled by another vehicle. ANIMAL TRAILER – A trailer designed, intended, or used for carrying horses, livestock, or similar animals. BOAT TRAILER – A trailer designed, intended, or used for carrying one or more boats. CAMPING TRAILER – A trailer designed, intended, or used for recreational camping on an occasional basis. CONSTRUCTION TRAILER – A trailer on a construction site which is designed, intended, or used as temporary office space, storage space, or both. COMMERCIAL TRAILER – A trailer used for commercial purposes including but not limited to a trailer used in a tractor-trailer configuration. EMERGENCY TRAILER– A trailer authorized for use for temporary housing whenever a dwelling unit has been involuntarily destroyed so as to become uninhabitable by one or more of the following - fire, flood, tornado, hurricane, wind storm, lightening, earthquake, vandalism, or other catastrophe. MOBILE HOME – A trailer used for residential purposes which is less than 22 feet wide. See “Manufactured Home”. UTILITY TRAILER – A trailer designed, intended, or used for carrying brush, motorcycles, snowmobiles, and similar activities accessory to a residential use.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 2.B
Effective July 30, 2020 WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
33
USE – The purpose or activity for which buildings or other structures or land is occupied or may be occupied.
USE, ACCESSORY - See “Principal vs Accessory”.
USE, PRINCIPAL - See “Principal vs Accessory”.
USE, TEMPORARY - A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.
VARIANCE - A modification to the terms of these Regulations that may be granted by the Board of Appeals in an individual case where, owing to special conditions, literal enforcement would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship.
VEHICLE - A motor vehicle, trailer, traction engine, farm tractor, road building machine and any vehicle drawn, propelled or driven by any kind of power including muscular power, but does not include cars of electric or steam railways running only upon rails.
WATERCOURSE - As defined in CGS Section 22a-38.
“Watercourses” means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon this state or any portion thereof, …. Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: (A) Evidence of scour or deposits of recent alluvium or detritus, (B) the presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer than a particular storm incident, and (C) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation …
WETLAND - As defined in CGS Section 22a-38.
“Wetlands” means land, including submerged land, ... which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial, and floodplain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as may be amended from time to time, of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture …
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY - The equipment and structures involved in receiving or transmitting electromagnetic waves associated with wireless telecommunication services.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES - Services associated with the transmission and/or reception of wireless telecommunications. These services may include, but are not limited to cellular, personal communication services, specialized mobilized radio, and paging.
2.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
WORDS AND TERMS Effective July 30, 2020
DEFINITIONS
34
Yards Versus Setbacks YARD - The area between the principal structure and a lot line. FRONT YARD - The area between the principal structure and a front lot line. REAR YARD - The area between the principal structure and a rear lot line. SIDE YARD - The area between the principal structure and a side lot line. FRONT YARD SETBACK - The minimum required distance for a building or structure to be set back from a front lot line. REAR YARD SETBACK - The minimum required distance for a building or structure to be set back from a rear lot line. SIDE YARD SETBACK - The minimum required distance for a building or structure to be set back from a side lot line. Setbacks (defined from the property lines in)
Yards (defined from the building out)
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 2.B
Effective July 30, 2020
DEFINITIONS
35
ZEO - The Zoning Enforcement Officer.
ZONE - An area of Brooklyn set off as distinct from surrounding or adjoining parts and established by the provisions of these Regulations.
3.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
RESIDENTIAL ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
R-10 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
36
3. RESIDENTIAL ZONES
3.A. R-10 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
3.A.1. PURPOSE
The R-10 Residential Zone is intended primarily for established neighborhoods with relatively high density residential uses, generally served by public water and sewer.
3.A.2. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
3.A.2.1. AGRICULTURAL-RELATED USES
1. Not permitted.
3.A.2.2. RESIDENTIAL-RELATED USES
1. One (1) single family dwelling per lot.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
2. One duplex building per lot.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
3. Multi-family development in accordance with Section 6.E.
Special Permit
(PZC)
4. Elderly Housing Development in accordance with Section 6.F.
Special Permit
(PZC) 3.A.2.3. INSTITUTIONAL-RELATED USES
1. Municipal facilities of the Town of Brooklyn.
Site Plan Review
(PZC)
2. Place of worship when located on an arterial road.
Special Permit
(PZC) 3.A.2.4. OTHER USES
1. Utility facilities such as electrical substations, sewer pump stations, water tanks, and similar facilities whether as a principal use or an accessory use.
Special Permit
(PZC)
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 3.A
Effective July 30, 2020 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
R-10 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
37
3.A.3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
3.A.3.1. GENERAL ACCESSORY USES
1. Accessory uses that are customary, subordinate, and incidental to a principal use permitted by Section 3.A.2.
No Permit Required
2. Keeping of dogs, cats, or domestic household pets of the type normally kept within the home.
No Permit Required
3. Keeping of up to six (6) chickens in accordance with Section 6.Q.
No Permit Required
4. Removable Farm Stands in accordance with Sec. 6.L.5.
No Permit Required 3.A.3.2. ACCESSORY PARKING AND STORAGE
1. Off-street parking facilities for the use of the occupants of the premises and their guests.
No Permit Required
2. Parking of one commercial vehicle used by the occupants of the premises or their guests. (Semi-trailers and tractor trailers or their components are not permitted.)
No Permit Required
3. Parking of two commercial vehicles provided any such vehicle is parked in a side yard or a rear yard and is visually shielded from the street and from adjacent property. (Semi-trailers and tractor trailers or their components are not permitted.)
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
4. Storage of registered recreational vehicles, boat trailers, camping trailers, animal trailers, and utility trailers in a side yard or a rear yard.
No Permit Required 3.A.3.3. ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL USES
1. An accessory apartment in accordance with Section 6.C.
Special Permit
(PZC) 3.A.3.4. ACCESSORY BUSINESS USES
1. Home office in accordance with Section 6.A.2.
No Permit Required
2. Family Day Care Home conducted by resident occupants only.
No Permit Required
3. Group Day Care Home conducted by resident occupants only.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
4. Day care center accessory to an established institutional use such as a place of worship.
Special Permit
(PZC) 3.A.3.5. OTHER ACCESSORY USES
1. Not permitted.
3.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
RESIDENTIAL ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
R-10 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
38
3.A.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
3.A.4.1. GENERAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
1. Accessory structures that are customary, subordinate, and incidental to a principal use permitted by Section 3.A.2.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
2. Detached garage, workshop, garden house, tool house, or similar structure accessory to a dwelling if such structure is not subordinate in size to the dwelling.
Special Permit
(PZC) 3.A.4.2. ACCESSORY ENERGY FACILITIES
1. Small solar energy systems mounted flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N.
No Permit Required
2. Small solar energy systems installed other than flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N.
Site Plan Review
(PZC) 3.A.4.3. ACCESSORY RECREATION FACILITIES
1. Swimming pool, tennis court, or similar recreational structure accessory to a dwelling provided that any lighting shall be in accordance with Section 7.G.
Zoning Permit
(Staff) 3.A.4.4. OTHER ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
1. Use of a construction trailer during construction for an office or storage (but not as a residence) for a period of time not to exceed the duration of the construction project.
No Permit Required
2. Use of an emergency trailer as defined in these Regulations as a residence in accordance with Section 6.H.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
3. Temporary Storage – One (1) temporary storage structure of up to 8’x8’x16’ for a period of up to 60 days total in any twelve-month period provided that such structure shall not be located in a required yard setback.
No Permit Required
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 3.A
Effective July 30, 2020 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
R-10 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
39
3.A.5. AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
3.A.5.1. LOT STANDARDS
1. Minimum Lot area
10,000 SF
2. Minimum Lot frontage
75 feet
3.A.5.2. SETBACK STANDARDS
Principal Building
Accessory Building
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback
35 feet
35 feet
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback
15 feet
Half the height of the accessory building or 10 feet, whichever is greater
3. Minimum Rear Yard Setback
15 feet
Half the height of the accessory building or 10 feet, whichever is greater
3.A.5.3. BUILDING STANDARDS
1. Maximum Building Height
35 feet
3.A.5.4. POSSIBLE EXCEPTIONS
See Section 8.A for possible exceptions to these dimensional requirements
3.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
RESIDENTIAL ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
R-30 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
40
3.B. R-30 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
3.B.1. PURPOSE
The R-30 Residential Zone is intended to be primarily for medium density residential uses in established neighborhoods and in new development.
3.B.2. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
3.B.2.1. AGRICULTURAL-RELATED USES
1. Not permitted
3.B.2.2. RESIDENTIAL-RELATED USES
1. One (1) single family dwelling per lot.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
2. One duplex building per lot.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
3. Multi-family development in accordance with Section 6.E.
Special Permit
(PZC)
4. Elderly Housing Development in accordance with Section 6.F.
Special Permit
(PZC)
5. A residential compound in accordance with Section 6.D
Special Permit
(PZC) 3.B.2.3. INSTITUTIONAL-RELATED USES
3. Municipal facilities of the Town of Brooklyn.
Site Plan Review
(PZC)
4. Place of worship when located on an arterial road.
Special Permit
(PZC) 3.B.2.4. OTHER USES
2. Utility facilities such as electrical substations, sewer pump stations, water tanks, and similar facilities whether as a principal use or an accessory use.
Special Permit
(PZC)
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 3.B
Effective July 30, 2020 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
R-30 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
41
3.B.3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
3.B.3.1. GENERAL ACCESSORY USES
1. Accessory uses that are customary, subordinate, and incidental to a principal use permitted by Section 3.B.2.
No Permit Required
2. Keeping of dogs, cats, or domestic household pets of the type normally kept within the home.
No Permit Required
3. Keeping of up to six (6) chickens in accordance with Section 6.Q
No Permit Required
4. Keeping of bees utilizing best management practices provided the colony is registered with the State Entomologist as required by CGS Section 22-89 and no more than six (6) hives are kept.
No Permit Required
5. Removable Farm Stands in accordance with Sec. 6.L.5.
No Permit Required 3.B.3.2. ACCESSORY PARKING AND STORAGE
1. Off-street parking facilities for the use of the occupants of the premises and their guests.
No Permit Required
2. Parking of one commercial vehicle used by the occupants of the premises or their guests. (Semi-trailers and tractor trailers or their components are not permitted.)
No Permit Required
3. Parking of two commercial vehicles provided any such vehicle is parked in a side yard or a rear yard and is visually shielded from the street and from adjacent property. (Semi-trailers and tractor trailers or their components are not permitted.)
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
4. Storage of registered recreational vehicles, boat trailers, camping trailers, animal trailers, and utility trailers in a side yard or a rear yard.
No Permit Required 3.B.3.3. ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL USES
1. An accessory apartment in accordance with Section 6.C.
Special Permit
(PZC) 3.B.3.4. ACCESSORY BUSINESS USES
1. Home office in accordance with Section 6.A.2.
No Permit Required
2. Family Day Care Home conducted by resident occupants only.
No Permit Required
3. Group Day Care Home conducted by resident occupants only.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
4. Day Care Center accessory to an established institutional use such as a place of worship.
Special Permit
(PZC) 3.B.3.5. OTHER ACCESSORY USES
1. Not permitted
3.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
RESIDENTIAL ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
R-30 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
42
3.B.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
3.B.4.1. GENERAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
1. Accessory structures that are customary, subordinate, and incidental to a principal use permitted by Section 3.A.2.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
2. Detached garage, workshop, garden house, tool house, or similar structure accessory to a dwelling if such structure is not subordinate in size to the dwelling.
Special Permit
(PZC) 3.B.4.2. ACCESSORY ENERGY FACILITIES
1. Small solar energy systems mounted flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N.
No Permit Required
2. Small solar energy systems installed other than flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N.
Site Plan Review
(PZC) 3.B.4.3. ACCESSORY RECREATION FACILITIES
1. Swimming pool, tennis court, or similar recreational structure accessory to a dwelling provided that any lighting shall be in accordance with Section 7.G.
Zoning Permit
(Staff) 3.B.4.4. OTHER ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
1. Use of a construction trailer during construction for an office or storage (but not as a residence) for a period of time not to exceed the duration of the construction project.
No Permit Required
2. Use of an emergency trailer as defined in these Regulations as a residence in accordance with Section 6.H.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
3. Temporary Storage – One (1) temporary storage structure of up to 8’x8’x16’ for a period of up to 60 days total in any twelve-month period provided that such structure shall not be located in a required yard setback.
No Permit Required
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 3.B
Effective July 30, 2020 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
R-30 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
43
3.B.5. AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
3.B.5.1. LOT STANDARDS
1. Minimum Lot area
30,000 SF
2. Minimum Lot frontage
110 feet
3.B.5.2. SETBACK STANDARDS
Principal Building
Accessory Building
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback
50 feet
50 feet
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback
30 feet
Half the height of the accessory building or 15 feet, whichever is greater
3. Minimum Rear Yard Setback
50 feet
Half the height of the accessory building or 15 feet, whichever is greater
3.B.5.3. BUILDING STANDARDS
1. Maximum Building Height
35 feet
3.B.5.4. POSSIBLE EXCEPTIONS
See Section 8.A for possible exceptions to these dimensional requirements
3.C BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
RESIDENTIAL ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
RA RESIDENTIAL-AGRICULTURAL ZONE
44
3.C. RA RESIDENTIAL-AGRICULTURAL ZONE
3.C.1. PURPOSE
The RA Residential-Agricultural Zone is intended primarily for agricultural uses and for low density residential uses.
3.C.2. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
3.C.2.1. AGRICULTURAL-RELATED USES
1. Agriculture in accordance with best management practices as promulgated by the Connecticut Department of Agriculture.
No Permit Required
2. Removable Farm Stands in accordance with Sec. 6.L.5.
No Permit Required 3.C.2.2. RESIDENTIAL-RELATED USES
1. One (1) single family dwelling per lot.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
2. One duplex building per lot.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
3. Multi-family development in accordance with Section 6.E.
Special Permit
(PZC)
4. A residential compound in accordance with Section 6.D
Special Permit
(PZC) 3.C.2.3. INSTITUTIONAL-RELATED USES
1. Municipal facilities of the Town of Brooklyn.
Site Plan Review
(PZC)
2. Place of worship when located on an arterial road.
Special Permit
(PZC)
3. Private schools including uses and activities accessory thereto.
Special Permit
(PZC) 3.C.2.4. OTHER USES
1. Utility facilities such as electrical substations, sewer pump stations, water tanks, and similar facilities whether as a principal use or an accessory use.
Special Permit
(PZC)
2. Adaptive re-use of an agricultural building as a principal use in accordance with Section 6.B.3.
Special Permit
(PZC)
3. Cemetery.
Special Permit
(PZC)
4. Excavation operations in accordance with Section 6.O.
Special Permit (PZC)
5. Earth Materials Processing in accordance with Section 6.B.2P.
Special Permit (PZC)
6. State Route Business Enterprise in accordance with Section 6.B.2.
Special Permit (PZC)
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 3.C
Effective July 30, 2020 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
RA RESIDENTIAL-AGRICULTURAL ZONE
45
3.C.3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
3.C.3.1. GENERAL ACCESSORY USES
1. Accessory uses that are customary, subordinate, and incidental to a principal use permitted by Section 3.C.2.
No Permit Required
2. Keeping of dogs, cats, or domestic household pets of the type normally kept within the home.
No Permit Required
3. Agriculture in accordance with best management practices as promulgated by the Connecticut Department of Agriculture.
No Permit Required 3.C.3.2. ACCESSORY PARKING AND STORAGE
1. Off-street parking facilities for the use of the occupants of the premises and their guests.
No Permit Required
2. Parking of one commercial vehicle used by the occupants of the premises or their guests. (Semi-trailers and tractor trailers or their components are not permitted.)
No Permit Required
3. Parking of two commercial vehicles provided any such vehicle is parked in a side yard or a rear yard and is visually shielded from the street and from adjacent property. (Semi-trailers and tractor trailers or their components are not permitted.)
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
4. Storage of registered recreational vehicles, boat trailers, camping trailers, animal trailers, and utility trailers in a rear yard.
No Permit Required 3.C.3.3. ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL USES
1. An accessory apartment in accordance with Section 6.C.
Special Permit
(PZC)
2. A non-commercial kennel provided that any buildings, structures or runs shall be at least double the required yard setback from any property lines and shall be buffered from adjacent uses.
Special Permit
(PZC)
(continued on next page)
3.C BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
RESIDENTIAL ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
RA RESIDENTIAL-AGRICULTURAL ZONE
46
(continued from previous page)
3.C.3.4. ACCESSORY BUSINESS USES
1. Home office in accordance with Section 6.A.2.
No Permit Required
2. Home business in accordance with Section 6.A.3.
Site Plan Review
(PZC)
3. Home enterprise in accordance with Section 6.A.4.
Special Permit
(PZC)
4. State Route Business Enterprise in accordance with Section 6.B.2.
Special Permit
(PZC)
5. Adaptive re-use of an agricultural building as an accessory use in accordance with Section 6.B.3.
Special Permit
(PZC)
6. Family Day Care Home conducted by resident occupants only.
No Permit Required
7. Group Day Care Home conducted by resident occupants only.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
8. Day care center accessory to an established institutional use such as a place of worship.
Special Permit
(PZC)
9. Bed and breakfast.
Special Permit
(PZC) 3.C.3.5. ACCESSORY AGRICULTURAL USES
1. Permanent Farm Stands in accordance with Sec. 6.L.5.
Zoning Permit
(Staff) 2. Farm Wineries and Breweries in accordance with Section 6.L.6.
Special Permit
(PZC) 3.C.3.6. OTHER ACCESSORY USES
1. Special events in accordance with Section 6.J.
Special Permit
(PZC)
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 3.C
Effective July 30, 2020 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
RA RESIDENTIAL-AGRICULTURAL ZONE
47
3.C.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
3.C.4.1. GENERAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
1. Accessory structures that are customary, subordinate, and incidental to a principal use permitted by Section 3.A.2.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
2. Detached garage, workshop, garden house, tool house, or similar structure accessory to a dwelling if such structure is not subordinate in size to the dwelling.
Special Permit
(PZC) 3.C.4.2. ACCESSORY ENERGY FACILITIES
1. Small solar energy systems mounted flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N.
No Permit Required
2. Small solar energy systems installed other than flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N.
Site Plan Review
(PZC) 3.C.4.3. ACCESSORY RECREATION FACILITIES
1. Swimming pool, tennis court, or similar recreational structure accessory to a dwelling provided that any lighting shall be in accordance with Section 7.G.
Zoning Permit
(Staff) 3.C.4.4. OTHER ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
1. Use of a construction trailer during construction for an office or storage (but not as a residence) for a period of time not to exceed the duration of the construction project.
No Permit Required
2. Use of an emergency trailer as defined in these Regulations as a residence in accordance with Section 6.H.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
3. Temporary Storage – One (1) temporary storage structure of up to 8’x8’x16’ for a period of up to 60 days total in any twelve-month period provided that such structure shall not be located in a required yard setback.
No Permit Required
3.C BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
RESIDENTIAL ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
RA RESIDENTIAL-AGRICULTURAL ZONE
48
3.C.5. AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
3.C.5.1. LOT STANDARDS
1. Minimum Lot area
2 acres
2. Minimum Lot frontage
150 feet
3.C.5.2. SETBACK STANDARDS
Principal Building
Accessory Building
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback
50 feet
50 feet
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback
40 feet
Half the height of the accessory building or 20 feet, whichever is greater
3. Minimum Rear Yard Setback
50 feet
Half the height of the accessory building or 20 feet, whichever is greater
3.C.5.3. BUILDING STANDARDS
1. Maximum Building Height
35 feet
3.C.5.4. POSSIBLE EXCEPTIONS
See Section 8.A for possible exceptions to these dimensional requirements
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.A
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
VILLAGE CENTER ZONE
49
4. BUSINESS ZONES
4.A. VILLAGE CENTER ZONE
4.A.1. PURPOSE
The Village Center (VC) Zone is intended to protect the distinctive character, landscape, and historic structures in view from public roadways within the Brooklyn Village Center Zone (VC), including the Town Green National Register Historic District.
The Village Center (VC) Zone is a “village district” as authorized by CGS Section 8-2j. Accordingly, the Commission shall consider the design, placement, relationships and compatibility of structures, plantings, signs, roadways, street hardware and other objects in public view. These Regulations shall encourage the conversion, conservation and preservation of existing buildings and sites in a manner that maintains the historic value, distinctive character and landscape of the village center.
Village Center Zone
4.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
VILLAGE CENTER ZONE
50
4.A.2. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
4.A.2.1. AGRICULTURAL-RELATED USES
1. Non-commercial Agriculture
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. Commercial Agriculture
Special Permit (PZC)
3. Farmers’ Markets in accordance with Sec. 6.L.4.
Zoning Permit (staff)
4. Removable Farm Stands in accordance with Sec. 6.L.5.
No Permit Required 4.A.2.2. RESIDENTIAL-RELATED USES
1. One (1) single family dwelling per lot.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. One duplex building per lot.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
3. One (1) multi-family building per lot with no more than 3 dwellings per structure in accordance with Section 6.E
Special Permit (PZC)
4. Elderly Housing Development in accordance with Section 6.F.
Special Permit (PZC) 4.A.2.3. BUSINESS-RELATED USES
1. Retail Use up to a maximum retail floor area of 2,000 square feet for each individual establishment
Special Permit (PZC)
2. Services – Personal or Business
Site Plan Review (PZC)
3. Restaurant, but not fast food restaurant or drive in restaurant
Special Permit (PZC)
4. Office – Business or Administrative
Site Plan Review (PZC)
5. Bank
Special Permit (PZC)
6. Licensed Health Service
Site Plan Review (PZC)
7. Caterer’s Establishment
Site Plan Review (PZC)
8. Child Day Care Center / Adult Day Care Center
Special Permit (PZC)
9. Automotive Service Station
Special Permit (PZC)
10. Hotel/Motel with a maximum floor area of 10,000 square feet
Special Permit (PZC)
11. Health club and/or Membership Club
Special Permit (PZC)
12. Indoor Sports and Recreation
Special Permit (PZC)
(continued on next page)
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.A
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
VILLAGE CENTER ZONE
51
(continued from previous page)
4.A.2.4. MIXED USES
1. Mixed use development (business and residential uses in separate buildings)
Special Permit (PZC)
2. Mixed occupancy building(s) with first floor business use and up to two dwelling units on upper floors
Special Permit (PZC) 4.A.2.5. INDUSTRIAL-RELATED USES
1. Not permitted
4.A.2.6. INSTITUTIONAL-RELATED USES
1. Municipal facilities for the Town of Brooklyn
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. Museum
Site Plan Review (PZC)
3. Community Center
Site Plan Review (PZC)
4. Education Center
Site Plan Review (PZC)
5. Convalescent Home, Rest Home, or Nursing Home
Special Permit (PZC)
6. Place of worship
Special Permit (PZC) 4.A.2.7. OTHER USES
1. Art Studio/Gallery
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. Craftsperson including accessory sales of craft items created by the craftsperson
Site Plan Review (PZC)
3. Funeral Parlor
Special Permit (PZC)
4. Utility facilities such as electrical substations, sewer pump stations, water tanks, and similar facilities whether as a principal use or an accessory use.
Special Permit (PZC)
5. A use considered by the Commission to be similar to a use listed in Section 4.A.22.
Special Permit (PZC)
While uses not listed are prohibited, the Commission recognizes that it is not always possible to list every conceivable use that might be considered appropriate in each zone. Uses not listed as a permitted use in a zone that are related or equivalent to a listed use and meet the stated intent may be permitted subject to interpretation and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
4.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
VILLAGE CENTER ZONE
52
4.A.3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
4.A.3.1. ACCESSORY TO A BUSINESS
1. Off-street parking facilities in accordance with Section 7.B.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. Signs in accordance with Section 7.A.
Zoning Permit (Staff) 4.A.3.2. ACCESSORY TO A DWELLING
1. Home office in accordance with Section 6.A.2.
No Permit Required
2. Home business in accordance with Section 6.A.3.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
3. Home enterprise in accordance with Section 6.A.4.
Special Permit (PZC)
4. Bed & Breakfast
Site Plan Review (PZC)
5. Family Day Care Home when accessory to an existing residence.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
6. Group Day Care Home when accessory to an existing residence.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
7. Accessory apartment in accordance with Section 6.C.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
8. Accessory uses that are customary, subordinate, and incidental to a principal use permitted by Section 3.A.2.
No Permit Required
9. Keeping of dogs, cats, or domestic household pets of the type normally kept within the home.
No Permit Required 4.A.3.3. ACCESSORY TO A FARM
1. Permanent Farm Stands in accordance with Sec. 6.L.5.
Zoning Permit (Staff)
2. Farm Wineries and Breweries in accordance with Section 6.L.6.
Special Permit (PZC) 4.A.3.4. ACCESSORY ENERGY FACILITIES
1. Small solar energy systems mounted flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N. and not visible from a public roadway.
No Permit Required
2. Small solar energy systems mounted flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N. and visible from a public roadway.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
3. Small solar energy systems installed other than flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N. and not visible from a public roadway.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
4. Small solar energy systems installed other than flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N. and visible from a public roadway.
Special Permit (PZC)
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.A
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
VILLAGE CENTER ZONE
53
4.A.4. AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
4.A.4.1. LOT STANDARDS
1. Minimum Lot area
30,000 SF
(or the area of the existing lot of record, if it is smaller)
2. Minimum Lot width
60 feet
3. Minimum Lot frontage
60 feet
4.A.4.2. SETBACK STANDARDS
Principal Building
Accessory Building
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback
10 feet
10 feet
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback
8 feet
8 feet
3. Minimum Rear Yard Setback
10 feet
10 feet
4.A.4.3. BUILDING STANDARDS
1. Maximum Building Height
35 feet
2. Maximum Building Width (horizontal dimension fronting a public roadway)
100 feet
3. Maximum Building Size (gross floor area)
5,000 square feet
4.A.4.4. COVERAGE STANDARDS
1. Impervious Coverage
80 percent
4.A.4.5. POSSIBLE EXCEPTIONS
See Section 8.A for possible exceptions to these dimensional requirements
4.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
VILLAGE CENTER ZONE
54
4.A.5. VILLAGE CENTER DESIGN STANDARDS
4.A.5.1. OVERALL
1. Any development in the Village Center (VC) Zone shall be designed to achieve the following compatibility objectives:
a. The arrangement and orientation of any proposed building or site improvement shall be similar to those in the immediate neighborhood;
b. The building and layout of buildings and included site improvements shall reinforce existing buildings and streetscape patterns and the placement of buildings and included site improvements shall assure there is no adverse impact on the Village Center (VC) Zone;
c. Proposed streets shall be connected to the existing road network, wherever possible;
d. Open spaces within the proposed development shall reinforce open space patterns of the Village Center (VC) Zone, in form and siting;
e. Locally significant features of the site such as distinctive buildings, stonewalls, or sight lines of vistas from within the Village Center (VC) Zone shall be integrated into the site design;
f. The landscape design shall complement the Village Center (VC) Zone landscape patterns, and reinforce functional qualities;
g. The exterior signs, site lighting and accessory structures shall support a uniform architectural theme if such a theme exists and be compatible with their surroundings; and
h. The scale, proportion, massing and detailing of any proposed building shall be in proportion to the scale, proportion, massing and detailing in the Village Center (VC) Zone.
2. Spaces, structures and related site improvements within view from public roadways shall be designed to be compatible with the elements of the Village Center (VC) Zone in and around the proposed building or modification.
4.A.5.2. BUILDINGS
1. All proposed work concerning the exterior of structures and sites in view from public roadways shall be consistent with the distinctive characteristics of the Village Center (VC) Zone identified in the Plan of Conservation and Development.
2. All proposed work concerning the exterior of structures and sites in view from public roadways shall relate harmoniously to its surroundings, the terrain and to the use, scale and architecture of existing buildings in the vicinity that have a functional or visual relationship to the proposed work.
4.A.5.3. PARKING
The following requirements are in addition to the requirements set forth in Section 7.B of these Regulations.
1. Parking shall not be permitted in any front yard except the Commission may, by Special Permit, permit parking in a front yard of a through lot or a corner lot upon satisfaction by the applicant of all of the standards for the grant of all Special Permits set forth in Section 9.D of these Regulations.
2. Parking areas shall be setback from buildings by at least 8 feet, and shall be setback from property lines by at least 5 feet (except where shared parking has been approved).
3. Paving Materials:
a. The use of hard-surfaced materials that provide an aesthetic alternative to bituminous concrete for parking areas is encouraged.
b. Materials that are consistent with the historic character of the Village Center (VC) Zone, such as cobblestone, brick, compacted stone dust or materials which imitate these design elements are strongly
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.A
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
VILLAGE CENTER ZONE
55
encouraged.
4. Common or Shared Parking: The owners of two or more adjacent lots may elect to share common parking facilities subject to the following regulations:
a. A written agreement shall be submitted with the application, signed by all affected lot owners, accompanied by a plan showing the location of all proposed parking, parking reserve area, access ways, any easements or rights-of-way, and all buildings which will use the parking area.
b. If approved, the appropriate legal instrument shall be filed on the land records at the time of the filing of the approval.
c. Regardless of the number of parking spaces actually developed, a parking area to accommodate the aggregate number of required parking spaces shall be fully designed, and the area which is not to be developed set aside as "Parking Reserve Area."
d. The area set aside as Parking Reserve Area shall be landscaped according to an approved plan.
4.A.5.4. ADDITIONAL FEATURES
1. The color, size, height, location, proportion of openings, roof treatments, building materials and landscaping of commercial or residential property and any proposed signs and lighting shall be evaluated for compatibility with the local architectural motif and the maintenance of views, historic buildings, monuments and landscaping.
2. The removal or disruption of historic, traditional or significant structures, stonewalls and stone rows, or architectural elements shall be discouraged and minimized.
3. Stone Walls:
a. The repair or reconstruction of stone walls is encouraged and, where required, shall be of similar material and style.
b. The removal, demolition or alteration of stone walls within the Village Center (VC) Zone shall not be permitted unless the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Planning and Zoning Commission (whichever is the permitting entity) that such removal, demolition, or alteration is necessary for the continued use of the property.
4. Commercial development shall not result in projected large volumes of traffic (more than 350 vehicles per day) or projected continuous customer turnover (more than 35 vehicles per hour on average) nor operate for the public after the hours of 11:00 p.m. nor prior to 6:00 a.m.
5. With the exception of banks, no drive-through service windows shall be permitted.
6. The Commission may require the applicant to present a traffic survey conducted by a qualified traffic engineer evaluating the impact of the anticipated traffic on the safety and congestion of traffic flow on the public roadway, and on pedestrian use in front of the property. The Commission may require such measures as are necessary to ensure pedestrian and vehicular safety and ease of travel, including limiting access to and from the parking area to right turns only, and requiring other measures to enhance visibility for persons exiting from the parking area and for drivers and pedestrians on the public roadways.
7. No use shall be permitted which generates noise which is objectionable and out of harmony with the surrounding uses due to volume, intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness outside the property where it originates, as described in Section 7.F.2 of these Regulations.
8. Each application for commercial use shall include a plan detailing landscaping for those areas within public view, prepared in accordance with Section 7.C of these Regulations.
9. Outside Display Area:
a. A maximum outside display area of 100 square feet is permitted during posted hours of operation upon approval of Site Plan application.
b. Any increase above the 100 square feet requires application and approval of a Special Permit.
4.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
VILLAGE CENTER ZONE
56
10. Trailers:
a. Trailers used for business, office and storage purposes shall not be permitted unless it is in connection with a permitted construction operation.
b. In such instance, the trailer may be placed for such purposes for a period of time not to exceed the duration of the construction project.
11. Lighting:
a. Exterior lighting of the building and site shall be directed downward and designed so that light is not directed off-site or upwards.
b. All lighting shall be situated and sized so as not to result in hazardous interference on abutting properties or public roadways, nor result in beams onto public roadways or adjacent buildings.
c. Lighting that is intermittent, flashing, rotating or moving is prohibited.
12. Small Solar Energy Systems: Small solar energy systems shall not be permitted in areas visible from a public road unless it is demonstrated that the solar technology:
a. Will not compromise the character of the site or the surrounding historic district,
b. Is minimally visible from a public right of way,
c. Will not damage historic roofing material, and
d. Is reversible.
4.A.5.5. UTILITIES AND SERVICE AREAS
1. Utilities shall be placed underground whenever practicable and the Commission may require that utilities be placed underground for new construction or Special Permit uses, except for good cause shown by the applicant.
2. Solid waste and materials awaiting recycling shall be stored inside a building or structure, or within an outdoor screened area (either by fencing, by vegetation or both) which screening shall not be more than six feet in height and be placed in such a manner that the stored materials are not visible from public roadways or adjacent properties.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.A
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
VILLAGE CENTER ZONE
57
4.A.6. PROCEDURES
4.A.6.1. COMMISSION APPROVAL REQUIRED UNLESS EXEMPTED
All new construction, substantial reconstruction, and rehabilitation of properties in the Village Center (VC) Zone and any changes of use or new uses not exempted below shall require Commission approval as specified in Sections 4.A.2. and 4.A.3.
4.A.6.2. EXEMPTED ACTIVITIES
1. Change of Use - A Zoning Permit may be issued by the ZEO for a change of use within the Village Center (VC) Zone when:
a. no or Minor Modifications to the site or structure are proposed,
b. such proposed use is permitted in the zone, and
c. such proposed use is substantially similar to the previous use or deemed to have less neighborhood impact than a previously permitted use.
2. Routine Maintenance / Minor Modification – A Zoning Permit may be issued by the ZEO for:
a. Routine Maintenance and Minor Modifications within view from any public roadway.
b. Such Routine Maintenance or Minor Modification shall be consistent with Section 4.A.5 Village Center Design Standards as well as all other applicable requirements of this section.
3. New Construction Not Visible – A Zoning Permit may be issued by the ZEO for:
a. Any new construction, any addition, alteration or other structural or site plan modification within the Village Center (VC) Zone when the entirety of such work is not within view from any public roadway.
b. In issuing a Zoning Permit for such work, the ZEO shall utilize the dimensional requirements of the underlying zone, but not the design standards of this section.
c. This section does not pertain to any change of use which is regulated by Section 4.A.6.1.
4. Sign - A Zoning Permit may be issued by the ZEO for:
a. A sign consistent with Section 4.A.5 Village Center Design Standards and in conformance with Section 7.A. of these Regulations.
4.A.6.3. PROCEDURE
1. The ZEO may request all relevant information from a landowner or applicant as deemed reasonably necessary to make an initial determination as to which section of this Regulation is applicable to the proposed activity.
2. In reviewing the proposed activity the ZEO may consult the Planning and Zoning Commission Chair, Local or State Historical Commission or consulting architect.
3. Any proposed activity that is not deemed to be otherwise exempt in accordance with these Regulations shall proceed through Site Plan review in accordance with Section 9.C (Site Plan Requirements and Procedures) or Special Permit review in accordance with Section 9.D (Special Permit Requirements) of these Regulations and with the general design standards and other requirements of the Village Center (VC) Zone, all in accordance with said determination.
4. Prior to the formal submission of a Site Plan or Special Permit application, the applicant is encouraged to schedule an informal discussion with the Commission to present a conceptual plan of the proposed activity. Any such informal, pre-application discussion with the Commission shall not constitute a decision by the Commission nor be part of the formal application process and shall be non-binding on the Commission.
5. All applications for new construction or substantial reconstruction within the Village Center (VC) Zone and in view from public roadways shall be subject to review and recommendation by an architect or architectural firm, landscape architect, or planner who is a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners, selected, contracted and paid for by the Commission and designated as the "VC Architectural Consultant" for
4.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
VILLAGE CENTER ZONE
58
such application. The VC Architectural Consultant shall review and report to the Commission within 35 days of the official receipt of an application. Failure of the VC Architectural Consultant to report within 35 days shall not alter or delay statutory time limits. The report of the VC Architectural Consultant shall be entered into the record of the public hearing and may be considered by the Commission in making its decision. The applicant shall be afforded the opportunity to review and comment upon any such report and to offer additional information to the Commission in response to said report.
6. The Commission may additionally seek the recommendation of any Town or Regional Agency or outside specialists with which it consults, including but not limited to, the regional planning agency, the municipality’s historical society, the Connecticut Trust for Historic Preservation, and The University of Connecticut College of Agriculture and Natural Resources. Any report from such agency or organization shall be entered into the record of the public hearing and may be considered by the Commission in making its decision. The applicant shall be afforded the opportunity to review and comment upon any such report and to offer additional information to the Commission in response to said report.
7. No approval of the Commission shall be effective until a copy thereof, certified by the commission, containing the name of the owner of record, a description of the premises to which it relates and specifying the reasons for its decision, is recorded in the land records of the Town of Brooklyn. The Town Clerk shall index the same in the Grantor's index under the name of the then record owner and the record owner shall pay for such recording.
8. Substantial construction shall be complete and/or the approved use shall commence within two years of the date of the Commission’s approval. Failure to complete the work and/or commence the use within the specified time frame may be cause for the revocation of the approval.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.B
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS ZONE
59
4.B. NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS ZONE
4.B.1. PURPOSE
The Neighborhood Business (NB) Zone is a primarily residential area where it is appropriate for residential buildings to be converted to neighborhood-oriented business use, especially businesses that are a benefit to the residences in the area, or for new structures to blend in to the character and scale of the neighborhood.
4.B.2. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
4.B.2.1. AGRICULTURAL-RELATED USES
1. Removable Farm Stands in accordance with Sec. 6.L.5.
No Permit Required 4.B.2.2. RESIDENTIAL-RELATED USES
1. One (1) single family dwelling per lot in conformance with the requirements of R-30 zone.
Zoning Permit (Staff)
2. One duplex building per lot.
Zoning Permit (Staff)
3. Multi-family development in accordance with Section 6.E.
Special Permit (PZC)
4. Elderly Housing Development in accordance with Section 6.F.
Special Permit (PZC) 4.B.2.3. BUSINESS-RELATED USES
1. Retail Use up to a maximum retail floor area of 1,000 square feet for each individual establishment.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. Retail Use up to a maximum floor area of 2,000 square feet for each individual establishment except that that the maximum floor area for retail use may be waived by a three-quarters affirmative vote of the membership present provided:
a. the applicant can provide information verifying suitability of the parcel, supporting utilities, access roads, and suitability in the neighborhood context for the proposed retail operation, and
b. A change of tenants requires review by the Commission to insure that the original conditions still apply.
Special Permit (PZC)
3. Personal Services with less than 1,500 SF floor area.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
4. Personal Services with 1,500 SF floor area or more.
Special Permit (PZC)
(continued on next page)
4.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS ZONE
60
(continued from previous page)
5. Restaurant, but not fast food restaurant or drive in restaurant, with less than 1,500 SF floor area.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
6. Restaurant, but not fast food restaurant or drive in restaurant, with 1,500 SF floor area or more.
Special Permit (PZC)
7. Office – Business or Administrative with less than 5,000 SF floor area.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
8. Office – Business or Administrative with 5,000 SF floor area or more.
Special Permit (PZC)
9. Licensed Health Service with less than 5,000 SF floor area.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
10. Licensed Health Service with 5,000 SF floor area or more.
Special Permit (PZC)
11. Bank.
Special Permit (PZC)
12. Child Day Care Center / Adult Day Care Center.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
13. Indoor Sports and Recreation
Special Permit (PZC)
14. Health Club and/or Membership Club up to a maximum floor area of 1,000 square feet.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
15. Health and/or Membership Club up to a maximum floor area of 2,000 square feet except that that the maximum floor area may be waived by a three-quarters affirmative vote of the membership present provided:
a. the applicant can provide information verifying suitability of the parcel, supporting utilities, access roads, and suitability in the neighborhood context for the proposed operation, and
b. A change of tenants requires review by the Commission to insure that the original conditions still apply.
Special Permit (PZC) 4.B.2.4. MIXED USES
1. Mixed use development (business and residential uses in separate buildings)
Permit determined by uses
2. Mixed occupancy building(s)
Permit determined by uses
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.B
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS ZONE
61
4.B.2.5. INDUSTRIAL-RELATED USES
1. Not permitted
4.B.2.6. INSTITUTIONAL-RELATED USES
1. Municipal facilities for the Town of Brooklyn.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. Education Center up to a maximum floor area of 1,000 square feet.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
3. Education Center up to a maximum floor area of 2,000 square feet except that that the maximum floor area may be waived by a three-quarters affirmative vote of the membership present provided:
a. the applicant can provide information verifying suitability of the parcel, supporting utilities, access roads, and suitability in the neighborhood context for the proposed operation, and
b. A change of tenants requires review by the Commission to insure that the original conditions still apply.
Special Permit (PZC)
4. Place of worship
Special Permit (PZC)
4.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS ZONE
62
4.B.2.7. OTHER USES
1. Art Studio/Gallery.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. Craftsperson including accessory sales of craft items created by the craftsperson.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
3. Utility facilities such as electrical substations, sewer pump stations, water tanks, and similar facilities whether as a principal use or an accessory use.
Special Permit (PZC)
While uses not listed are prohibited, the Commission recognizes that it is not always possible to list every conceivable use that might be considered appropriate in each zone. Uses not listed as a permitted use in a zone that are related or equivalent to a listed use and meet the stated intent may be permitted subject to interpretation and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.B
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS ZONE
63
4.B.3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
4.B.3.1. ACCESSORY TO A BUSINESS
1. Off-street parking facilities in accordance with Section 7.B.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. Signs in accordance with Section 7.A.
Zoning Permit (Staff) 4.B.3.2. ACCESSORY TO A DWELLING
1. Home office in accordance with Section 6.A.2.
No Permit Required
2. Family Day Care Home when accessory to an existing residence.
No Permit Required
3. Group Day Care Home when accessory to an existing residence.
Zoning Permit (Staff) 4.B.3.3. ACCESSORY TO A FARM
1. Not permitted
4.B.3.4. ACCESSORY ENERGY FACILITIES
1. Small solar energy systems mounted flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N.
No Permit Required
2. Small solar energy systems installed other than flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
4.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS ZONE
64
4.B.4. AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
4.B.4.1. LOT STANDARDS
1. Minimum Lot area
10,000 SF
(or the area of the existing lot of record, if it is smaller)
2. Minimum Lot width
None
3. Minimum Lot frontage
None
4.B.4.2. SETBACK STANDARDS
Principal Building
Accessory Building
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback
20 feet
20 feet
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback
10 feet
10 feet
3. Minimum Rear Yard Setback
20 feet
10 feet
4.B.4.3. BUILDING STANDARDS
1. Maximum Building Height
35 feet
2. Maximum Building Width (horizontal dimension fronting a public roadway)
None
3. Maximum Building Size (gross floor area)
None
4.B.4.4. COVERAGE STANDARDS
1. Building Coverage
20 percent
2. Impervious Coverage
80 percent
4.B.4.5. POSSIBLE EXCEPTIONS
See Section 8.A for possible exceptions to these dimensional requirements
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.B
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS ZONE
65
4.B.5. ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS
1. No parking facilities, other than an access drive, shall be permitted in the front yard.
2. For uses requiring Site Plan Review and/or Special Permit approval, the Commission may reduce the number of parking spaces required, under the following circumstances.
a. It is demonstrated that the total demand for parking of different uses on the site will occur at different periods of time. If shared access and parking is provided for adjacent properties, the uses on both properties may be considered in determining the feasibility of shared parking.
b. The required number of spaces cannot be provided in the side and rear yards of the property without adverse impacts on the overall quality of the neighborhood.
c. The shared use of a common point of access to serve more than one property shall be encouraged. A maximum building coverage of 25%, and a maximum impervious coverage of 85% shall be permitted for properties that share a common point of access instead of individual points of access on each parcel. Such shared access shall be secured by a mutual access easement or other appropriate legal instrument that provides for permanent shared access.
4.C BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
RESTRICTED BUSINESS ZONE
66
4.C. RESTRICTED BUSINESS ZONE
4.C.1. PURPOSE
The Restricted Business (RB) Zone is intended only for uses that generate low volumes of traffic. The zones are located along State Highways that have limitations with regard to holding capacity, sight line and general safety. This zone attempts to allow commercial activity that does not overburden the road and its ability to serve through traffic.
4.C.2. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
4.C.2.1. AGRICULTURAL-RELATED USES
1. Removable Farm Stands in accordance with Sec. 6.L.5.
No Permit Required 4.C.2.2. RESIDENTIAL-RELATED USES
1. One (1) single family dwelling per lot in conformance with the requirements of R-30 zone
Zoning Permit (Staff)
2. One duplex building per lot.
Zoning Permit (Staff)
3. Multi-family development in accordance with Section 6.E.
Special Permit (PZC) 4.C.2.3. BUSINESS-RELATED USES
1. Retail Use up to a maximum retail floor area of 500 square feet for each individual establishment (existing structures are exempt from this limitation).
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. Retail Use up to a maximum retail floor area of 2,000 square feet for each individual establishment except that that the maximum floor area for retail use may be waived by a three-quarters affirmative vote of the membership present provided:
a. the applicant can provide information verifying suitability of the parcel, supporting utilities, access roads, and suitability in the neighborhood context for the proposed retail operation, and
b. A change of tenants requires review by the Commission to insure that the original conditions still apply.
Special Permit (PZC)
3. Personal Services
Site Plan Review (PZC)
(continued on next page)
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.C
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
RESTRICTED BUSINESS ZONE
67
(continued from previous page)
4. Restaurant, but not fast food restaurant or drive in restaurant, with less than 1,000 SF floor area
Site Plan Review (PZC)
5. Restaurant, but not fast food restaurant or drive in restaurant, with 1,000 SF floor area or more
Special Permit (PZC)
6. Office – Business or Administrative with less than 10,000 SF floor area
Site Plan Review (PZC)
7. Office – Business or Administrative with 10,000 SF floor area or more
Special Permit (PZC)
8. Licensed Health Service with less than 10,000 SF floor area.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
9. Licensed Health Service with 10,000 SF floor area or more.
Special Permit (PZC)
10. Bank
Special Permit (PZC)
11. Child Day Care Center / Adult Day Care Center
Site Plan Review (PZC)
12. Health and/or Membership Club
Site Plan Review (PZC)
13. Indoor Sports and Recreation
Special Permit (PZC)
14. Automotive Service Station
Special Permit (PZC) 4.C.2.4. MIXED USES
1. Mixed use development (business and residential uses in separate buildings)
Permit determined by uses
2. Mixed occupancy building(s)
Permit determined by uses 4.C.2.5. INDUSTRIAL-RELATED USES
1. Light Industry
Special Permit (PZC)
2. Storage and Distribution of bulk products: landscaping products, heating oil, propane, building products on properties, by special permit.
Special Permit (PZC) 4.C.2.6. INSTITUTIONAL-RELATED USES
1. Municipal facilities for the Town of Brooklyn
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. Museum
Site Plan Review (PZC)
3. Education Center up to a maximum floor area of 1,000 square feet.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
4. Education Center up to a maximum floor area of 2,000 square feet except that that the maximum floor area may be waived by a three-quarters affirmative vote of the membership present provided:
a. the applicant can provide information verifying suitability of the parcel, supporting utilities, access roads, and suitability in the neighborhood context for the proposed operation, and
b. A change of tenants requires review by the Commission to insure that the original conditions still apply.
Special Permit (PZC)
5. Place of worship
Special Permit (PZC)
4.C BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
RESTRICTED BUSINESS ZONE
68
4.C.2.7. OTHER USES
1. Utility facilities such as electrical substations, sewer pump stations, water tanks, and similar facilities whether as a principal use or an accessory use.
Special Permit (PZC)
While uses not listed are prohibited, the Commission recognizes that it is not always possible to list every conceivable use that might be considered appropriate in each zone. Uses not listed as a permitted use in a zone that are related or equivalent to a listed use and meet the stated intent may be permitted subject to interpretation and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.C
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
RESTRICTED BUSINESS ZONE
69
4.C.3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
4.C.3.1. ACCESSORY TO A BUSINESS
1. Off-street parking facilities in accordance with Section 7.B.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. Signs in accordance with Section 7.A.
Zoning Permit (Staff)
3. Containers provided it meets setbacks allowed for accessory structures.
Site Plan Review (PZC) 4.C.3.2. ACCESSORY TO A DWELLING
1. Home office in accordance with Section 6.A.2.
No Permit Required
2. Family Day Care Home when accessory to an existing residence.
No Permit Required
3. Group Day Care Home when accessory to an existing residence.
Zoning Permit (Staff) 4.C.3.3. ACCESSORY TO A FARM
1. Not permitted
4.C.3.4. OTHER ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
1. Automobile Sales when accessory to an approved Automotive Service Station
Special Permit (PZC)
2. Small solar energy systems mounted flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N.
No Permit Required
3. Small solar energy systems installed other than flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
4.C BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
RESTRICTED BUSINESS ZONE
70
4.C.4. AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
4.C.4.1. LOT STANDARDS
1. Minimum Lot area
20,000 square feet
(or the area of the existing lot of record, if it is smaller)
2. Minimum Lot width
None
3. Minimum Lot frontage
None
4.C.4.2. SETBACK STANDARDS
Principal Building
Accessory Building
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback
20 feet
20 feet
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback
15 feet
10 feet
3. Minimum Rear Yard Setback
15 feet
10 feet
4.C.4.3. BUILDING STANDARDS
1. Maximum Building Width
None
2. Maximum Building Height
35 feet
3. Maximum Building Size (gross floor area)
None
4.C.4.4. COVERAGE STANDARDS
1. Building Coverage
20 percent
2. Impervious Coverage
80 percent
4.C.4.5. POSSIBLE EXCEPTIONS
1. See Section 8.A for possible exceptions to these dimensional requirements
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.D
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONE
71
4.D. PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONE
4.D.1. PURPOSE
The Planned Commercial (PC) Zone is intended to provide for those commercial uses which will accommodate the broad range of retail shopping, service and office space that will economically enhance the community while maintaining the sense of community and character of the Town of Brooklyn as outlined in the Town’s Plan of Conservation and Development.
4.D.2. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
4.D.2.1. AGRICULTURAL-RELATED USES
1. Farmers’ Markets in accordance with Sec. 6.L.4.
Zoning Permit (staff) 4.D.2.2. RESIDENTIAL-RELATED USES
1. Not permitted
4.D.2.3. BUSINESS-RELATED USES
1. Retail Use
Special Permit (PZC)
2. Personal Services
Special Permit (PZC)
3. Restaurant, including fast food restaurant but not drive in restaurant
Special Permit (PZC)
4. Office – Business or Administrative
Special Permit (PZC)
5. Bank
Special Permit (PZC)
6. Licensed Health Service
Special Permit (PZC)
7. Banquet Hall and/or Caterer’s Establishment
Special Permit (PZC)
8. Hotel/Motel
Special Permit (PZC)
9. Child Day Care Center / Adult Day Care Center
Special Permit (PZC)
10. Health Club and/or Membership Club
Special Permit (PZC)
11. Automobile Sales
Special Permit (PZC)
12. Automotive Service Station
Special Permit (PZC)
13. Gas station
Special Permit (PZC)
14. Theater
Special Permit (PZC)
15. Indoor Sports and Recreation
Special Permit (PZC)
16. Itinerant Vendors in accordance with Sec. 6.L.2.
Zoning Permit (staff)
17. Seasonal Vendors in accordance with Sec. 6.L.3.
Special Permit (PZC)
(continued on next page)
4.D BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONE
72
(continued from previous page)
4.D.2.4. MIXED USES
1. Not permitted.
4.D.2.5. INDUSTRIAL-RELATED USES
1. Public or Private Access to Industrial Zone Property
Special Permit (PZC) 4.D.2.6. INSTITUTIONAL-RELATED USES
1. Municipal facilities for the Town of Brooklyn
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. Education Center
Special Permit (PZC)
3. Community Center
Site Plan Review (PZC) 4.D.2.7. OTHER USES
1. Utility facilities such as electrical substations, sewer pump stations, water tanks, and similar facilities whether as a principal use or an accessory use.
Special Permit (PZC)
While uses not listed are prohibited, the Commission recognizes that it is not always possible to list every conceivable use that might be considered appropriate in each zone. Uses not listed as a permitted use in a zone that are related or equivalent to a listed use and meet the stated intent may be permitted subject to interpretation and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.D
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONE
73
4.D.3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
4.D.3.1. ACCESSORY TO A BUSINESS
1. Off-street parking facilities in accordance with Section 7.B.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. Signs in accordance with Section 7.A.
Zoning Permit (Staff)
3. Limited outdoor display of merchandise for Retail Stores may be permitted as provided in Section 4.D.6.3.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
4.D.3.2. ACCESSORY TO A DWELLING
1. Home office in accordance with Section 6.A.2.
No Permit Required
2. Home Business in accordance with Section 6.A.3
Site Plan Review (PZC)
3. Family Day Care Home when accessory to an existing residence.
No Permit Required
4. Group Day Care Home when accessory to an existing residence.
Zoning Permit (Staff)
5. Home Enterprise in accordance with Section 6.A.4.
Special Permit (PZC) 4.D.3.3. ACCESSORY TO A FARM
1. Not permitted.
4.D.3.4. OTHER ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
1. Donation bin accessory to an established business or institutional use when in accordance with Section 6.K.
Zoning Permit (Staff)
2. Small solar energy systems mounted flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N.
No Permit Required
3. Small solar energy systems installed other than flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
4.D BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONE
74
4.D.4. AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
4.D.4.1. LOT STANDARDS
1. Minimum Lot area
30,000 SF
2. Minimum Lot width
100 feet
3. Minimum Lot frontage
100 feet
4.D.4.2. SETBACK STANDARDS
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback
a. If no parking between building and street
b. If parking between building and street
30 feet
45 feet
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback
20 feet
(see Section 4.D.6.1)
3. Minimum Rear Yard Setback
20 feet
4.D.4.3. BUILDING STANDARDS
1. Maximum Building Height
a. Any portion of a building within 200 feet of a residential property line or a residential zone
b. Any portion of a building more than 200 feet from a residential property line or a residential zone
2 story and 30 feet
(see Section 4.D.6.2)
3 story and 40 feet
4.D.4.4. COVERAGE STANDARDS
1. Building Coverage
Not limited
2. Impervious Coverage
65 percent
4.D.4.5. POSSIBLE EXCEPTIONS
1. See Section 8.A for possible exceptions to these dimensional requirements
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.D
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONE
75
4.D.5. ADDITIONAL SPECIAL PERMIT CRITERIA
In addition to the Special Permit Criteria in Section 9.D, any activity requiring a Special Permit in the Planned Commercial Zone shall also be reviewed in relation to:
a. the Route 6 Corridor Design Guidelines (available on the Town website), and
b. the additional Special Permit considerations outlined in this Subsection.
The applicability of the following provisions shall be determined by the Commission on a site-specific basis, following consideration of conditions relevant to the development proposal and the Planned Commercial Zone. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating accordance with all Special Permit criteria.
As used in the remainder of this Subsection: The word "shall" means that the relevant standard, criterion or action must be followed unless the applicant demonstrates that it would clearly be unreasonable or undesirable to do so. The word "should" means that the relevant standard, criterion or action will generally be required, but the applicant may offer, and the Commission may approve, an alternative standard, criterion or action if the Commission finds that the alternative would better fulfill the overall goals set forth in these standards. The word "may" means that the relevant standard, criterion or action is desirable and may be imposed by the Commission unless the applicant demonstrates that it would clearly be unreasonable or undesirable to do so.
1. Building Design, Scale & Compatibility – Whether a proposed development is in accordance with the following:
a. Facades should be articulated at a minimum every fifty (50) linear feet to reduce the scale and appearances of large retail buildings and provide visual interest that encourages a more pedestrian scale.
b. The proportions and relationships between doors, windows and other building elements shall be compatible with a pedestrian scale, rhythm, and character of the surrounding area.
c. Any buildings over 5,000 square feet shall have variation in roof form, building height and wall planes.
d. Large windowless or otherwise unarticulated spaces on street facades shall be avoided.
e. Linear “strip” development should incorporate variation in building height, building mass, roof forms and changes in wall planes in the architectural design to mitigate the linear effect of “strip” development. In some instances, a physical separation of one building into two or more buildings may be desirable.
f. Rooflines shall be varied with a change in height every 100 linear feet in the building length. Parapets, mansard roofs, gable roofs, hip roofs, or dormers shall be used to conceal flat roofs and roof top equipment from public view.
g. All refuse collection/storage; utility systems, accessory storage and other similar structures shall be screened from public view.
2. Building Form & Materials - Whether a proposed development is in accordance with the following:
a. All building facades shall be treated with a similar architectural style, use of materials, and details as the front of the building.
4.D BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONE
76
3. Streetscape & Parking - Whether a proposed development is in accordance with the following:
a. Continuous internal pedestrian walkways, no less than five (5) feet in width, should be provided from the public sidewalk or right-of-way to the principal customer entrance of all principal buildings on the site. At a minimum, walkways shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, transit stops, street crossings, building and store entry points, and shall feature adjoining landscaped areas that include trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, ground covers, or other such materials for no less than 50 percent of their length.
b. Sidewalks, no less than five (5) feet in width, shall be provided along the full length of the building along any facade featuring a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting parking areas. Such sidewalks shall be located at least six (6) feet from the facade of the building to provide planting beds for foundation landscaping, except where features such as arcades or entryways are part of the facade.
c. All internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of durable, low maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort, as well as the attractiveness of the walkways. Signs shall be installed to designate pedestrian walkways.
d. Separate travel ways and/or grade separation should be included for each mode of transportation (pedestrian and vehicles) where feasible, especially where volumes and relative speeds merit this precaution.
e. Shared parking and common driveways are encouraged among adjacent buildings to take advantage of different peak periods and reduce underutilized parking during various times of the day.
f. Large parking lots shall be broken into smaller lots to reduce the size and visual impact of large expanses of asphalt.
g. Parking located adjacent to a public roadway shall be landscaped and include a sidewalk (if feasible) so to minimize the negative visual presented by the parking lot. (4.3.5)
4. Access Management - Whether a proposed development is in accordance with the following:
a. Proposed driveways, parking, utilities, and vehicular and pedestrian / bike access should be integrated with existing or planned driveways, parking, utilities, and vehicular and pedestrian / bike access on abutting properties to the extent that such connectivity is feasible from an engineering and environmental standpoint, and provided that access easements(s), if necessary, exist or have been acquired for such integration.
b. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the right to require the applicant to provide an access easement or easements to abutting land owners in a manner that will allow future integration of driveways, parking, utilities, and vehicular and pedestrian / bike access. Such access easement(s) shall be designed to accommodate combined lot development meeting the engineering and public safety standards of the Town as well as the goals and standards of Section 9.D. Such access easement(s) shall include provisions as necessary to equitably share maintenance costs among users and provisions for extension of related utilities, lighting, and streetscape improvements.
c. Where it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Commission that access management measures have been incorporated into the site design, which have or will be served by a mutual access easement and other appropriate legal instruments, the maximum lot coverage with impervious surfaces may be increased by an additional 10%.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.D
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONE
77
5. Lighting - Whether a proposed development is in accordance with the following:
a. Lighting fixtures shall be full cut-off and positioned, with respect to spatial design and fixture height, to give adequate uniformity of the illuminated area while not impacting adjacent buildings and properties, especially residential uses.
b. Pedestrian walkways and destination points shall be adequately lit for pedestrian safety illuminating changes in grade, path, intersections, and other areas along paths.
6. Landscaping - Whether a proposed development is in accordance with the following:
a. Landscaping shall incorporate low impact development strategies for storm water including the use of Bio-filters, or vegetated/grass swales at the edges of parking lots to collect, filter, and distribute storm water runoff from parking lots.
b. Landscaping shall be installed along blank walls and fences to soften the appearance of the material and provide a layering of vegetation.
c. Street trees shall be included along all street frontages of commercial development.
4.D.6. ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS
1. Side Yard Setback - - By Special Permit, the Commission may allow the required side yard setback to be reduced to zero feet (0’) in the following situations:
a. when separate parcels are developed jointly,
b. when an existing building with no side yard is expanded, or
c. when the Commission finds that access is provided to the rear yard for use by fire trucks and equipment.
2. Building Height - By Special Permit, the Commission may allow a building height of up to three (3) stories and forty feet (40’) within 200 feet of a residential property line or a residential zone if the Commission determines that adequate visual buffering will be provided, the proposed building height will not adversely the adjacent residential area, and the proposed building height is otherwise in general conformity with the intent of the regulations.
3. Outdoor Display of Merchandise - Limited outdoor display of merchandise for Retail Stores may be permitted provided a drawing shall be approved by the Commission by Site Plan Review identifying the location and limits of the display area and further provided:
a. Outdoor display of merchandise shall be located on the site of a permitted Retail Store.
b. The display of merchandise shall not obstruct the use of any sidewalk, parking area, driveway, or fire lane.
c. Items displayed are safe and stable with no risk of overturning due to wind or contact.
d. Display shall be representative of merchandise that is regularly sold as part of the business.
e. Items shall be displayed appropriately. For example, cardboard boxes and folding tables are not permitted as display racks.
f. For premises containing multiple establishments, the display of merchandise shall not interfere with the business activities of other establishments on the premises
4. Waiver of Special Permit Requirement - For the following types of development, the Commission may waive the requirement for Special Permit approval and authorize such development by Site Plan Review if it finds that such development is unlikely to have significant impacts.
a. An addition to an existing commercial structure, for a use listed in Section 4.D, which is 500 square feet or less in total ground floor area.
b. A new structure for commercial use listed in Section 4.D which is 500 square feet or less in total ground floor area.
c. The development is not significant and is not likely to have more than a negligible impact on traffic, the neighborhood, or the environment.
4.D BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONE
78
5. Informal Discussions - Prior to submitting a formal application for a Zoning Permit or Special Permit, the applicant is encouraged to:
a. review the Planned Commercial, Route 6 Corridor Design Guidelines,
b. prepare a conceptual plan of the proposed project or use, and
c. discuss the proposal with the Town Staff and/or the Planning & Zoning Commission.
6. Technical Reviews – The Commission may engage consultants at the applicant’s expense to review applications in the PC Zone and provide written and/or oral findings and recommendations on the application including, but not limited to, the following:
a. outdoor lighting (including isometrics, fixture and pole style, characteristics and placement, adequacy for pedestrian and vehicular circulation and safety, potential for glare or excessive illumination on or off the site, and the use of lighting to enhance the building’s façade);
b. the adequacy of measures to screen mechanical equipment from public view (whether roof-, building-, or ground-mounted);
c. the adequacy of measures to screen dumpster and other refuse/recycling containers/areas;
d. the effectiveness of landscape buffer treatments, including plant materials/size at installation, fencing, walls, berms or other elements;
e. scale/form/massing/style of proposed buildings and other structures, including architectural elevations (all sides), with building-mounted signs, including the building’s colors and materials;
f. how the landscape architectural elements around the proposed building (s), parking lot (s), entrance drives, pervious surfaces, and pavement selections serve to enhance and complement the site’s aesthetics and function;
g. material composition, geometry, and location of proposed pedestrian sidewalks and walkways through vehicular circulation areas;
h. dimensions, style, height, color, location, lighting function, safety and material characteristics of all proposed signage.
i. Any questions or concerns raised by the commission.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.E
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
INDUSTRIAL ZONE
79
4.E. INDUSTRIAL ZONE
4.E.1. PURPOSE
The Industrial (I) Zone is intended to be the principal industrial area of the Town for enterprises that generate large volumes of traffic, congestion, and noise.
4.E.2. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
4.E.2.1. AGRICULTURAL-RELATED USES
1. Agriculture
No Permit Required 4.E.2.2. RESIDENTIAL-RELATED USES
1. Not permitted
4.E.2.3. BUSINESS-RELATED USES
1. Offices, Business or Administrative:
a. with less than 10,000 SF floor area
b. with 10,000 SF floor area or more
Site Plan Review (PZC)
Special Permit (PZC)
2. Contractor’s Yard
Site Plan Review (PZC) 4.E.2.4. MIXED USES
1. Not permitted
(continued on next page)
4.E BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
INDUSTRIAL ZONE
80
(continued from previous page)
4.E.2.5. INDUSTRIAL-RELATED USES
1. Light Manufacturing
a. with less than 40,000 SF floor area
b. with 40,000 SF floor area or more
Site Plan Review (PZC)
Special Permit (PZC)
2. Manufacturing, Processing, or Assembling of Goods
a. with less than 40,000 SF floor area
b. with 40,000 SF floor area or more
Site Plan Review (PZC)
Special Permit (PZC)
3. Printing, Publishing, or Reproduction
a. with less than 40,000 SF floor area
b. with 40,000 SF floor area or more
Site Plan Review (PZC)
Special Permit (PZC)
4. Dry Cleaning, Laundry, where municipal sewers are used
a. with less than 40,000 SF floor area
b. with 40,000 SF floor area or more
Site Plan Review (PZC)
Special Permit (PZC)
5. Storage Warehouses
a. with less than 40,000 SF floor area
b. with 40,000 SF floor area or more
Site Plan Review (PZC)
Special Permit (PZC)
6. Wholesale Business
a. with less than 40,000 SF floor area
b. with 40,000 SF floor area or more
Site Plan Review (PZC)
Special Permit (PZC) 4.E.2.6. INSTITUTIONAL-RELATED USES
1. Municipal facilities for the Town of Brooklyn
Site Plan Review (PZC) 4.E.2.7. OTHER USES
1. Utility facilities such as electrical substations, sewer pump stations, water tanks, and similar facilities whether as a principal use or an accessory use.
Special Permit (PZC)
2. Adult-related uses provided that all parts of the proposed establishment shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet in a straight line from any residential zone.
Special Permit (PZC)
While uses not listed are prohibited, the Commission recognizes that it is not always possible to list every conceivable use that might be considered appropriate in each zone. Uses not listed as a permitted use in a zone that are related or equivalent to a listed use and meet the stated intent may be permitted subject to interpretation and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.E
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
INDUSTRIAL ZONE
81
4.E.3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
4.E.3.1. ACCESSORY TO A BUSINESS
1. Off-street parking facilities in accordance with Section 7.B.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. Signs in accordance with Section 7.A.
Zoning Permit (Staff)
3. Retail Store when clearly accessory to a Permitted Industrial Use on the same property:
a. with less than 1,500 SF floor area
b. with 1,500 SF floor area or more.
Site Plan Review
Special Permit 4.E.3.2. ACCESSORY TO A DWELLING
1. Not permitted
4.E.3.3. ACCESSORY TO A FARM
1. An accessory use as permitted in Section 3.A.3 when accessory to a farm.
No Permit Required
2. An accessory structure as permitted in Section 3.A.4 when accessory to a farm.
Zoning Permit (Staff) 4.E.3.4. ACCESSORY ENERGY FACILITIES
1. Small solar energy systems mounted flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N.
No Permit Required
2. Small solar energy systems installed other than flush to a roof in accordance with Section 6.N.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
4.E BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
INDUSTRIAL ZONE
82
4.E.4. AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
4.E.4.1. LOT STANDARDS
1. Minimum Lot area
Two (2) acres
2. Minimum Lot width
No requirement
3. Minimum Lot frontage
200 feet
4.E.4.2. SETBACK STANDARDS
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback
20 feet
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback
20 feet
3. Minimum Rear Yard Setback
20 feet
4.E.4.3. BUILDING STANDARDS
1. Maximum Building Width
None
2. Maximum Building Height
35 feet
3. Maximum Building Size (gross floor area)
None
4.E.4.4. COVERAGE STANDARDS
1. Building Coverage
None
2. Impervious Coverage
None
4.E.4.5. POSSIBLE EXCEPTIONS
1. See Section 8.A for possible exceptions to these dimensional requirements
4.E.5. OTHER PROVISIONS
1. Landscaping and Buffering - In addition to the standards of Section 7.C, the following additional landscaping requirements apply:
a. Building or structures in this zone shall be provided with landscaping, including grass or shrubbery or trees or a combination thereof, in the front yard.
b. Where a side or rear yard adjoins a Residential Zone, a green belt of at least twenty-five (25) feet in depth, landscaped with trees and shrubbery, shall be maintained.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.F
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
MILL MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT ZONE
83
4.F. MILL MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT ZONE
4.F.1. PURPOSE
The intent of the Mill Mixed Use Development Zone (hereinafter referred to as MMUD Zone) is to provide the opportunity to fully utilize former mill structures and related properties that are part of the Town’s landscape, character, and history. They are also places of economic activity and economic opportunity. Recognizing the unique and special characteristics of these mill structures the Town has established a special zoning district to protect and maximize their potential. Specifically, this regulation is intended to:
1. Provide maximum flexibility for the development and enhancement of mill properties;
2. Retain the potential for business and industrial development in specified mill locations while permitting age-restricted residential development;
3. Foster a greater opportunity for creative development which encourage a mix of uses (residential, commercial, and industrial) within former mill buildings;
4. To enhance business vitality, and provide employment opportunities;
5. To enhance and protect the Town tax revenues, and;
6. To encourage the development of flexible space for small and emerging businesses.
4.F.2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. All uses shall be served by public water and sewer. The applicant shall submit a written report on the adequacy of the public sewer and water supply system of each proposed building lot and/or use prepared by a Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut.
2. All developments shall be reviewed for compatibility with the Brooklyn Plan of Conservation and Development and be supportive of the public health, general welfare and safety of the community, including adequate provision of public facilities such as playgrounds, trails and a minimum number of access points on existing roads.
3. Property shall, at the time application for MMUD Zone designation is made, have a Mill Structure located on site. Properties designated as MMUD Zone shall be sub-dividable.
4. The commission may, at its discretion, hire a third-party consultant to aid the Commission in its review. Fees charged will be borne by the applicant.
1. Residential uses are restricted to Active Adult Community. The applicant shall supply the Commission with its Declaration of a Planned Community in Compliance with the Connecticut Common Interest Ownership Act, as may be amended from time to time, when submitting its application.
4.F BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
MILL MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT ZONE
84
4.F.3. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
4.F.3.1. AGRICULTURAL-RELATED USES
1. Agriculture
No Permit Required 4.F.3.2. RESIDENTIAL-RELATED USES
1. One (1) single family dwelling per lot.
Special Permit (PZC)
2. One duplex building per lot.
Special Permit (PZC)
3. Multi-family development in accordance with Section 6.E.
Special Permit (PZC)
4. Elderly Housing Development in accordance with Section 6.F.
Special Permit (PZC)
5. Active Adult Community.
Special Permit (PZC) 4.F.3.3. BUSINESS-RELATED USES
1. Offices, Business or Administrative
Special Permit (PZC)
2. Personal Services
Special Permit (PZC)
3. Bank
Special Permit (PZC)
4. Restaurants (except fast food and drive in restaurants)
Special Permit (PZC)
5. Licensed Health Services
Special Permit (PZC)
6. Day Care Center
Special Permit (PZC)
7. Health Club and/or Membership Club
Special Permit (PZC)
8. Museum
Special Permit (PZC)
9. Retail stores (when all merchandise is totally enclosed within a building)
Special Permit (PZC)
10. Laundromat
Special Permit (PZC) 4.F.3.4. MIXED USES
1. Mixed use development (business and residential uses in separate buildings)
Permit determined by uses
2. Mixed occupancy building(s)
Permit determined by uses 4.F.3.5. INDUSTRIAL-RELATED USES
1. Light Industry
Special Permit (PZC)
2. Print Shop
Special Permit (PZC)
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.F
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
MILL MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT ZONE
85
4.F.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
4.F.4.1. ACCESSORY TO A BUSINESS
1. Off-street parking facilities in accordance with Section 7.B.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. Signs in accordance with Section 7.A.
Zoning Permit (Staff)
3. Retail Store when clearly accessory to a Permitted Industrial Use on the same property:
a. with less than 1,500 SF floor area
b. with 1,500 SF floor area or more.
Site Plan Review
Special Permit 4.F.4.2. ACCESSORY TO A DWELLING
1. Family Day Care Home when accessory to an existing residence.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
2. Group Day Care Home when accessory to an existing residence.
Site Plan Review (PZC)
4.F.5. PERFORMANCE AND COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS
4.F.5.1. COMPATIBILITY
1. All new uses shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Commission, that any such new uses (in addition to meeting the requirements of this section) are compatible with all existing uses and will not negatively impact the general neighborhood.
2. Any new buildings or accessory structures shall relate harmoniously to each other with adequate light, air circulation, separation between buildings and, to the extent practicable, shall be in harmony with the existing district.
3. Buildings or structures that are listed on the National Register of Historic Places shall be converted, constructed, reconstructed, restored or altered to maintain or promote the status of the building or structure on the State or National Register of Historic Places.
4.F.5.2. ACCESS AND TRAFFIC IMPACTS
1. Traffic and safety impacts to the existing and proposed roads shall be minimized.
2. Access shall be provided to the extent feasible through an existing side street or a shared driveway; curb cuts shall be limited.
3. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic shall be separated.
4. Walkways shall be provided for access to adjacent properties and between businesses.
4.F BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
MILL MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT ZONE
86
4.F.5.3. NOISE, ODOR AND DUST ALLOWANCE
1. Uses shall cause no inherent and recurring generated vibration perceptible without instruments at any point between two or more uses or along a property line. Temporary construction is excluded from this restriction.
2. Heat and glare generated from manufacturing shall be confined to the building structure.
3. Odor, dust, and fumes shall be effectively confined to the premises or so disposed of in accordance with state and federal regulations.
4. The Commission at its discretion may limit the hours of operation of any commercial or industrial use.
5. Common walls between residential and non-residential uses shall be constructed to minimize the transmission of noise and vibration. Residential buildings to be constructed or rehabilitated shall be designed to filter out noise and vibration through construction employing, but not limited to, such techniques as applying soundproofing material between dwelling units laterally and vertically, and between different uses; employing staggered joists and insulation.
4.F.5.4. LIGHTING
1. A lighting plan showing existing and proposed exterior lighting, including building and ground lighting; locations, supports, mounting heights, and orientation of all luminaires and light distribution patterns is required.
2. Parking areas shall be illuminated to provide appropriate visibility and security during hours of darkness.
3. Exterior lighting shall be architecturally integrated with the building style, material and colors.
4. Exterior lighting of the building and site shall be directed downward and designed so that light is not directed off the site, including above the site and the light source is shielded from direct offsite viewing.
5. Fixture mounting height should be appropriate for the project and the setting. Use of low, bollard-type fixtures, three to four (3-4) feet in height is encouraged as pedestrian area lighting. The mounted height of fixtures in smaller parking lots or service areas should not exceed sixteen (16) feet, with lower mounting heights encouraged, particularly where adjacent to residential areas or other sensitive land uses.
6. Raised light pole bases shall be attractively designed and well-detailed to be compatible with the overall project.
7. The use of vandal resistant well lighting is encouraged for lighting monument signs.
8. All parking areas and pedestrian facilities serving non-residential uses and open to the general public shall be provided with illumination during all hours from dusk to dawn that those facilities are open to the general public.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.F
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
MILL MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT ZONE
87
4.F.5.5. RESIDENTIAL USE RESTRICTION
1. Residential uses created within the MMUD Zone shall have a note placed on the deed to the parcel notifying potential buyers of the probability of non-residential uses elsewhere on the site. Such note shall state: “This property is currently part of a Mill Mixed Use Development Zone which allows a variety of non-residential uses within the same district and on the same site.”
2. An Active Adult Community shall fully comply with the provisions of the United States Fair Housing Act, as amended, and Connecticut State Statutes Section 46a-64b, as amended as it pertains to “Housing for older persons.” This included compliance with any and all rules promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, which govern the implementations of such act.
3. Permanent Occupancy of any Unit is restricted to:
a. any person of the age of 55 year or over, and any person approved by the Declarant or the Board, in accordance with the provisions set forth below in this Section (“Age Qualified Person”);
b. a husband, wife or companion, over the age of 18 years, residing with the Age Qualified Person;
c. children residing with the Age Qualified Person or residing with the husband, wife or companion of the Age Qualified Person, provided the children are over the age of 18 years;
d. an individual, over the age of 18 years, residing with and providing physical or economic support to the Age Qualified Person; or
e. any person who was permitted to and did occupy a Unit with an Age Qualified Person may continue to occupy the Unit after the death of Age Qualified Person.
NOTE: The Fair Housing Act permits housing intended for persons 55 and older provided that (1) at least 80% of the occupied units are occupied by at least one person who is 55 or older;(2) the Community publishes and adheres to policies demonstrating the intent to be age-restricted; and (3) the Community meets certain rules for verifying the age restrictions of the Community. Thus, up to 20% of the Units may be occupied by individuals, all of whom are under 55 years of age.
4. The proposed development shall be a “Common Interest Ownership Community” as defined in Chapter 828 of the Connecticut General statutes.
5. The constituent documents of the Common Interest Ownership Community shall contain provisions requiring the Declarant, (which designation includes the Developer, or a successor in interest to the Developer or any other party holding development rights), in connection with the initial sale of Units, and the Association, as to all subsequent sale of Units, to enforce the Declaration which shall incorporate the Ownership and Occupancy Standards of the Zoning Regulations so that at all times the Common Interest Community will qualify for the 55 or over housing for older persons exemption under The Fair Housing Act. Permanent occupancy of any Unit shall not be permitted or allowed to continue if such occupancy violates the provisions of the Declaration or the Zoning Regulations or results in the loss of the Common Interest Community’s 55 or over housing for older person’s exemption under the Fair Housing Act. At the closing of title of each unit being sold by Declarant, the purchaser of said Unit will be required to sign a certification or declaration to be used to insure that the Common Interest Community will qualify for the exemption under The Fair Housing Act and to insure that said purchaser is in compliance with the age
4.F BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
MILL MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT ZONE
88
restrictions set forth herein. Persons may not transfer, sell, gift, lease, assign, grant, buy, rent or occupy any Unit, except for the sale of the Unit by Declarant, until such person receives the approval of the Board in accordance with the provisions of the Declaration.
6. Apartment and condominium units shall be permitted in existing structures, and density shall be consist of the number of units containing not less than eight-hundred (800) square feet of livable space that can be created within the existing structures based on state building and health codes. Residential density for new construction will be limited to one dwelling per 10,000 sq. ft.
7. For any development it shall be a condition precedent that at least 15% of the total project cost shall be allocated to improvements to the existing mill structure. This minimum shall be determined by the commission based upon cost estimates submitted by a duly licensed engineer or architect. This requirement is based upon the importance - historical, cultural, economic and aesthetic, in maintaining and rehabilitating these mill structures. This requirement may be met by either actual mill structure construction prior to the issuance of residential building permits outside of the mill structure or by surety acceptable to the town, together with an acceptable concept plan and timeline for completion of mill improvements.
4.F.5.6. BUFFERS, DENSITY, AND HEIGHT
1. Where a MMUD Zone abuts a residentially zoned property, a buffer strip of seventy-five (75') feet shall be required for any new non-residential development and shall not be changed by action of the ZBA. Such buffer shall be planted with year-round screening vegetation adequate to buffer the view from the residential zone. Preservation of existing trees and vegetation is preferred where they provide desired screening.
2. Where the MMUD Zone abuts a residentially zoned property, a buffer strip equal to the abutting setback requirements shall be required for any new residential development and said limitation shall not be changed by action of the ZBA.
3. To reduce the bulk and area of buildings and pavement relative to the overall size of the development; and to provide landscaped areas for visual and sound buffers, increased groundwater recharge and reduced storm water runoff, the total area of any MMUD Zone that may be covered by buildings and paved surfaces shall not exceed fifty (50) percent coverage and shall not be changed by action of the ZBA. The Commission may allow by Special Permit an increase to a maximum of sixty (60) percent impervious coverage when the Commission finds that one or more of the following benefits of the development outweigh the impacts of the increased impervious coverage:
a. The use of grass/pavement block systems or similar treatment reduces storm water runoff; and/or
b. The development achieves an overall benefit to the community such as elimination of blight conditions, preservation of historic structures, closure of excessive curb cuts, provision of inter-parcel access or service roads or similar benefit.
4. Maximum Building heights shall be as follows and are not subject to action by the ZBA:
a. Residential - thirty-five (35) feet
b. Commercial - forty (35) feet
c. Industrial – thirty-five (35) feet
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.F
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
MILL MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT ZONE
89
5. For existing mill structures:
a. Telecommunication facilities, water tanks, solar collection systems, similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected on an existing mill structure to a height no more than 10 feet greater than the existing mill structures within the MMUD Zone provided that no such exception shall cover at any level more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of the roof on which any one or more of the above are located, except for a solar collection system which may cover more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of the roof on which the solar collection system is located if the architectural design and layout is compatible with that of the structure to which it is affixed and generally in keeping with the character of the neighborhood in which any one or more of the above is to be situated; and provided further that no such exception shall be used for residential, commercial or industrial purposes other than such as may be incidental to the permitted use(s) of the main structure.
b. Roof structures and/or roof lines may be integrated together where more than one roof line or roof style is present to which telecommunication facilities, water tanks, solar collection systems, similar structures or mechanical appurtenances is affixed and generally in keeping with the character of the neighborhood in which the above is to be situated; and provided further that no such exception shall be used for residential, commercial or industrial purposes other than such as may be incidental to the permitted use(s) of the main structure.
6. The height limitations of these Regulations for new construction shall not apply to chimneys, gables, cupolas, spires, water towers, flag poles, transmission towers and cables, radio or television antennas or towers or telecommunication service facilities provided that the telecommunication facility, and its antenna(s) or associated equipment does not extend more than five (10) feet above the highest point of the building or structure to which it is attached.
4.F.5.7. OUTDOOR STORAGE AND SALES DISPLAY
Except as specified below, outdoor storage or display of goods shall be enclosed within permanent walls or fences integrated into the design of the building.
a. Storage or display racks and goods thereon shall not exceed the height of screening walls or fences.
b. Goods shall not be displayed in landscaped areas, on exterior walls, or in parking lots.
c. No vending machines shall be allowed outside of any buildings.
d. All materials, supplies and equipment shall be stored in accordance with Fire Prevention Standards of the National Board of Fire underwriters and shall be screened from view from public ways and abutting properties.
4.F.5.8. WASTE DISPOSAL
1. Garbage or recycling dumpsters/compactors shall have doors or lids that shall remain closed when not being loaded or unloaded and shall be contained in masonry enclosures supplemented with landscaping
2. No delivery, loading, trash removal, compaction or other similar operations shall be permitted between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
4.F BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
MILL MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT ZONE
90
4.F.5.9. SIGNS
1. Signs shall conform to the Brooklyn Zoning Regulations Section 7 and Section 7.A.3.2 (Signs Permitted in the Village Center Zone) for each use on the site.
4.F.5.10. LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
1. Existing trees shall be maintained as practicable and any new trees shall be carefully selected and located where they will complement the building elevation and shall not block all any retail storefront signage from view.
2. Screening of mechanical equipment, trash, and loading areas shall be provided through the use of walls, fences, and/or dense, evergreen plant materials.
3. Landscaping and screening plant materials shall not encroach on the public walkways or roadways in a way that impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
4. All new plant materials shall be sized so that the landscaping has an attractive appearance at the time of installation and a mature appearance within three years of planting.
5. All proposed shrubs except accent, color or ground cover planting shall be a minimum of 5 gallon size. Shrubs and ground cover plants shall be spaced close enough together to ensure an attractive and mature planting effect.
6. Energy conservation within structures shall be addressed by recognizing the sun exposure on the site and providing or maintaining appropriate tree species (deciduous trees on the southern exposure, coniferous and broadleaf evergreen trees along the eastern and western exposures, and evergreens along the northern exposure.)
7. Tree species, when additional trees are proposed, should be selected with root growth habits that will not cause damage to sidewalks, or such tree species should be sited away from such hardscape areas.
8. Landscaping plans shall show all obstructions such as street lights, meters, back-flow devices, utility covers, transformers, and similar objects which may affect plant placement and installation limitations.
9. When constructing new landscape planting areas on surfaces which where previously covered by pavement or structures, all existing asphalt, base rock or other deleterious material shall be removed to the depth of the native soil and clean soil shall be used to backfill the planting area.
10. All exposed dirt areas shall be covered with bark or mulch or other weed control measures included as part of final landscape
11. Street tree placement shall include consideration for vehicle line of sight, entrance and exit curb cuts, street light and traffic control devices, and other site specific conditions as part of design review process.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 4.F
Effective July 30, 2020 BUSINESS ZONES
MILL MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT ZONE
91
4.F.5.11. PARKING AND LOADING AREAS
Parking shall conform to Section 7.B and additionally shall meet the following standards:
a. Parking lots shall provide well defined routes for vehicles, delivery trucks, and pedestrians.
b. Loading areas visible from a public street or adjacent property shall be screened with masonry walls supplemented by landscaping.
c. To the maximum extent feasible, landscaped islands with raised curbs shall be used to define parking lot entrances, the ends of parking aisles, and the location and pattern of primary driveways, and to provide pedestrian walkways where appropriate.
d. Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential uses, streets, and walkways using trees and shrubs adapted to the region, of specimen quality conforming to the American Standard for Nursery Stock, American Standards Institute, Inc., 230 Southern Building, Washington, DC 20005, and shall be planted according to accepted horticultural standards. Berms may be used for screening along the street in conjunction with plant materials.
e. Where a mix of uses creates staggered peak periods of parking demand, shared parking calculations shall be submitted to reduce total required parking. A reserve area for future development shall be provided on the Site Plan.
f. The use of porous pavement and/or perforated brick or block shall be used to the extent feasible to increase on-site water retention for plant material, groundwater supplies, and to reduce problems associated with runoff.
g. Within the Town’s right-of-way all curbing shall be constructed of concrete. However, the Town Engineer may waive this requirement, when in his/her opinion the use of concrete curbing is not necessary.
4.F.6. APPLICATIONS AND PERMIT PROCEDUERS
1. Before an application is made, it is suggested that the applicant become familiar with the regulations contained in this section as well as those contained in Section 9.C (Site Plan Requirements and Procedures) and with Section 9.D (Special Permit Requirements) of these Regulations and consult with the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or planning department office for other regulations to consider and for any clarifications.
shall proceed through Site Plan review in accordance with Section 9.C (Site Plan Requirements and Procedures) or Special Permit review in accordance with Section 9.D (Special Permit Requirements) of these Regulations
4.F.7. MMUD ZONE SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
1. A Special Permit application in conformance with Section 9.D, which includes submission of a Site Plan as outlined in Section 9.C, is required for each proposed use. The Special Permit application is also subject to the following General Requirements - Conformance with Section 5.H.5 - Performance and Compatibility Standards.
4.F BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BUSINESS ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
MILL MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT ZONE
92
a. Pre-Application Concept Plan. The Commission recommends that, prior to the submission of an official application the applicant prepares and presents a conceptual plan for informal review per Section 9.B.
b. Elements of Pre-Application Concept Plan. The Concept Plan shall be pre-pared by an engineer, architect, or landscape architect, and shall include:
i. Drawings at a scale of 1” = 100’.
ii. Existing topography, with two (2) foot contours, to show the general gradient of the site, existing structures, existing roads and rights-of-way, major topographic features (including wooded and open areas, ledge or outcroppings), inland wetlands, watercourses and flood plain.
iii. The land uses and zoning within 300 feet of the site.
iv. Boundary description of the district within it.
v. Names of all abutting property owners.
vi. The location of all proposed roadways, parking areas, setbacks, rail lines, easements, land use areas, open space areas, and access locations from connecting roads and driveways within the site to the existing public road system.
vii. The site shall be divided into general land use areas, identified as one or more of the specially permitted uses (e.g. retail, restaurant, office, research lab, etc.).
viii. Proposed building footprints and location of parking areas.
ix. Letters from the public water company and the Water Pollution Control Authority stating how service is to be provided to the proposed land uses.
2. Changes to an approved Special Permit Site Plan are to be approved by the Commission.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 5.A
Effective July 30, 2020 SPECIAL ZONES
SCENIC ROUTE 169 OVERLAY ZONE
93
5. SPECIAL ZONES
5.A. SCENIC ROUTE 169 OVERLAY ZONE
5.A.1. PURPOSE
The Scenic Route 169 Overlay Zone is established to help protect the historic, cultural and scenic features visible to the public from Route 169 which was designated as a National Scenic Byway in 1997.
The objectives of the Scenic Route 169 Overlay Zone include:
1. To preserve the scenic character and views from the roadway.
2. To preserve the distinctive historic, cultural, and agricultural characteristics of the corridor.
3. To encourage economic development that is compatible with the preservation of the viewshed.
The Scenic Route 169 Overlay Zone is authorized by CGS Section 8-2j as an area with distinctive character, landscape and historic value identified in the Plan of Conservation and Development. Accordingly, the Commission shall consider the design, placement, relationships and compatibility of structures and other objects in public view.
The zone encourages the preservation of rural character through economic development opportunities for compatible businesses such as:
• Agriculture consistent with the definition in Section 2.B,
• Adaptive re-use of an agricultural building in accordance with Section 6.B.3,
• Farm stands in accordance with Section 6.L.5,
• Farm wineries and breweries in accordance with Section 6.L.6,
• State Route Business Enterprises in accordance with Section 6.B.2, and
• Bed & breakfasts.
Scenic Route 169
5.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
SPECIAL ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
SCENIC ROUTE 169 OVERLAY ZONE
94
5.A.2. JURISDICTIONAL BOUNDARY DEFINED
The Scenic Route 169 Overlay Zone is delineated on the zoning map but is only applicable to areas visible from Route 169. The Scenic Route 169 Overlay Zone does not apply to areas visible from other roads within the Overlay Zone. The Scenic Route 169 Overlay Zone does not include any areas within the Village Center Zone.
5.A.3. PERMITTED USES
Within the Scenic Route 169 Overlay Zone, permitted uses are the same as those allowed in the underlying RA Residential-Agricultural Zone listed in Section 3.C of these Regulations.
5.A.4. PROHIBITED USES
Within the Scenic Route 169 Overlay Zone, the following uses are prohibited:
5.A.4.1. PROHIBITED USES
1. Excavation operations
2. Earth Materials Processing
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 5.A
Effective July 30, 2020 SPECIAL ZONES
SCENIC ROUTE 169 OVERLAY ZONE
95
5.A.5. ROUTE 169 DESIGN STANDARDS
To ensure that development along the roadway does not negatively impact the Scenic Byway, any activity requiring a permit in the Scenic Route 169 Overlay Zone shall be reviewed with consideration for the following design standards.
The applicability of the following provisions shall be determined by the Commission on a site-specific basis, following consideration of conditions relevant to the development proposal and the Scenic Route 169 Overlay Zone. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating accordance with all standards.
1. The arrangement and orientation of any proposed building or site improvement shall be compatible with the immediate neighborhood;
2. The building and layout of buildings and included site improvements shall reinforce existing buildings and streetscape patterns
3. Site design shall maximize the conservation of open space in the zone, in form and siting;
4. Locally significant features of the site such as distinctive buildings, land features, stone walls or sight lines of vistas from within the zone, shall be integrated into the site design;
5. The landscape design shall complement the zone’s landscape patterns and reinforce functional qualities. Agricultural fields, significant mature trees, stonewall and historic structures found on the site shall be incorporated into the overall design.
6. Exterior signs, site lighting and accessory structures shall support a uniform architectural theme if such a theme exists and be compatible with their surroundings;
7. Scale, proportions, massing and detailing of any proposed building shall be in proportion to the scale, proportion, massing and detailing in the zone. New buildings shall have generally complex exterior form, including design components such as windows, doors, and changes in roof and facade orientation. Large flat expanses of featureless exterior wall shall be avoided.
8. Shared access and limited curb cuts are encouraged.
9. Potential archeological sites as identified by the Office of State Archaeology (OSA) shall be identified and reviewed for future study.
10. HVAC and similar types of incidental machinery or equipment shall be screened from view or located in such a manner as to not be visible from the street. Trash receptacles, dumpsters, utility meters, above ground tanks, satellite dishes and antennas shall be screened to the extent possible.
11. Proposed buildings and site improvements shall be designed to preserve stone walls to the extent possible. The Commission may require conservation easements along stone walls to ensure their future protection.
12. Signage should utilize natural or traditional materials (e.g. wood or metal) and may not contain electronic messaging or be internally illuminated.
5.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
SPECIAL ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
SCENIC ROUTE 169 OVERLAY ZONE
96
5.A.6. PROCEDURES
5.A.6.1. COMMISSION APPROVAL REQUIRED UNLESS EXEMPTED
All new construction, substantial reconstruction, and rehabilitation of properties visible from Route 169 and any changes of use or new uses not exempted below shall require approval as specified in Section 3.C of these Regulations.
5.A.6.2. STAFF APPROVALS
1. Change of Use - A Zoning Permit may be issued by staff for a change of use within the Scenic Route 169 Overlay Zone when:
a. no or Minor Modifications to the site or structure are proposed,
b. such proposed use is permitted in the zone, and
c. such proposed use is substantially similar to the previous use or deemed to have less neighborhood impact than a previously permitted use.
2. Routine Maintenance / Minor Modification – A Zoning Permit may be issued by staff for:
a. Routine Maintenance and Minor Modifications within view from Route 169.
b. Such Routine Maintenance or Minor Modification shall be consistent with Section 5.A.5 Route 169 Design Standards as well as all other applicable requirements of this section.
3. New Construction Not Visible – A Zoning Permit may be issued by staff for:
a. Any new construction, any addition, alteration or other structural or site plan modification within the Scenic Route 169 Overlay Zone when the entirety of such work is not within view from Route 169.
b. In issuing a Zoning Permit for such work, staff shall utilize the dimensional requirements of the underlying zone, but not the design standards of this section.
c. This section does not pertain to any change of use which is regulated by Section 5.A.6.1.
4. Sign - A Zoning Permit may be issued by staff for:
a. A sign consistent with Section 5.A.5 Route 169 Design Standards and in conformance with Section 7.A. of these Regulations.
5.A.6.3. PROCEDURE
1. Staff shall determine if the proposed work is in view from Route 169.
2. Staff may request all relevant information from a landowner or applicant as deemed reasonably necessary to make an initial determination as to which section of this Regulation is applicable to the proposed activity.
3. In reviewing the proposed activity, staff may consult the Planning and Zoning Commission Chair, Local or State Historical Commission or consulting architect.
4. Any proposed activity that is not deemed to be otherwise exempt in accordance with these Regulations shall proceed through Site Plan review in accordance with Section 9.C (Site Plan Requirements and Procedures) or Special Permit review in accordance with Section 9.D (Special Permit Requirements) of these Regulations and with the general design standards and other requirements of the Scenic Route 169 Overlay Zone, all in accordance with said determination.
5. Prior to the formal submission of a Site Plan or Special Permit application, the applicant is encouraged to schedule an informal discussion with the Commission to present a conceptual plan of the proposed activity. Any such informal, pre-application discussion with the Commission shall not constitute a decision by the Commission nor be part of the formal application process and shall be non-binding on the Commission.
6. All applications for new construction or substantial reconstruction within the Scenic Route 169 Overlay Zone and in view from Route 169 shall be subject to review and recommendation by an architect or architectural
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 5.A
Effective July 30, 2020 SPECIAL ZONES
SCENIC ROUTE 169 OVERLAY ZONE
97
firm, landscape architect, or planner who is a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners, selected, contracted and paid for by the Commission and designated as the "Route 169 Architectural Consultant" for such application. The Route 169 Architectural Consultant shall review and report to the Commission within 35 days of the official receipt of an application. Failure of the Route 169 Architectural Consultant to report within 35 days shall not alter or delay statutory time limits. The report of the Route 169 Architectural Consultant shall be entered into the record of the public hearing and may be considered by the Commission in making its decision. The applicant shall be afforded the opportunity to review and comment upon any such report and to offer additional information to the Commission in response to said report.
7. The Commission may additionally seek the recommendation of any Town or Regional Agency or outside specialists with which it consults, including but not limited to, the regional planning agency, the municipality’s historical society, the Connecticut Trust for Historic Preservation, and The University of Connecticut College of Agriculture and Natural Resources. Any report from such agency or organization shall be entered into the record of the public hearing and may be considered by the Commission in making its decision. The applicant shall be afforded the opportunity to review and comment upon any such report and to offer additional information to the Commission in response to said report.
8. No approval of the Commission shall be effective until a copy thereof, certified by the commission, containing the name of the owner of record, a description of the premises to which it relates and specifying the reasons for its decision, is recorded in the land records of the Town of Brooklyn. The Town Clerk shall index the same in the Grantor's index under the name of the then record owner and the record owner shall pay for such recording.
9. Substantial construction shall be complete and/or the approved use shall commence within two years of the date of the Commission’s approval. Failure to complete the work and/or commence the use within the specified time frame may be cause for the revocation of the approval.
5.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
SPECIAL ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
PARADISE LAKE OVERLAY ZONE
98
5.B. PARADISE LAKE OVERLAY ZONE
5.B.1. PURPOSE
The Paradise Lake Overlay Zone is established to help manage land use and development activities within the Paradise Lake area since many lots were created before Zoning Regulations were adopted and do not conform to current requirements.
5.B.2. APPLICABILITY
The provisions of the Paradise Lake Overlay Zone provide relief from some of the dimensional standards in the R-A Zone. The provisions of the Paradise Lake Overlay Zone apply in addition to the requirements of the underlying zone or any other overlay zone.
5.B.3. PROVISIONS
Within the Paradise Lake Overlay Zone, the provisions of Section 3.C.5 of these Regulations shall be replaced by the following:
5.B.3.1. LOT STANDARDS
1. Minimum Lot area
No Minimum provided
Public Health Code is met.
2. Minimum Lot frontage
50 feet
5.B.3.2. SETBACK STANDARDS
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback
10 feet
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback
10 feet
3. Minimum Rear Yard Setback
10 feet
5.B.3.3. BUILDING STANDARDS
1. Maximum Building Height
35 feet
2. Minimum Floor area
None
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 5.C
Effective July 30, 2020 SPECIAL ZONES
GOLF COURSE OVERLAY ZONE
99
5.C. GOLF COURSE OVERLAY ZONE
5.C.1. PURPOSE
The Golf Course Overlay Zone is established to help manage land use and development activities at the Brooklyn Golf Course.
5.C.2. APPLICABILITY
The provisions of the Golf Course Overlay Zone authorize additional uses of the property within the zone. The provisions of the Golf Course Overlay Zone apply in addition to the requirements of the underlying zone or any other overlay zone.
5.C.3. PROVISIONS
The following uses are permitted by Special Permit within the Golf Course Overlay Zone:
1. Golf courses and uses and structures accessory thereto.
2. Sit-down restaurants, either seasonal or year-round.
5.D BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
SPECIAL ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONE
100
5.D. FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONE
5.D.1. PURPOSE
The Floodplain Overlay Zone is established to help inform people of the location of flood hazard areas within the town of Brooklyn as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
5.D.2. APPLICABILITY
The provisions of the Floodplain Overlay Zone and the requirements of the Brooklyn Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance (Brooklyn Town Code Chapter XII - Flood Damage Prevention) shall apply in addition to the requirements of the underlying zone or any other zoning district.
5.D.3. BOUNDARIES
The official boundaries of the Floodplain Overlay Zone are shown on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map for Brooklyn, as amended, which is on file in the Town Clerk’s office.
5.D.4. PROVISIONS
1. Unless otherwise permitted by the Brooklyn Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, any proposal for a development within the Floodplain Overlay Zone shall include references to any base flood elevation data available from FEMA.
2. Unless otherwise permitted by the Brooklyn Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, residential structures within the Floodplain Overlay Zone shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the Brooklyn Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, nonresidential structures within the Floodplain Overlay Zone shall have the lowest floor level, including basement, flood-proofed or elevated to level of the base flood elevation.
4. Unless otherwise permitted by the Brooklyn Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, new and replacement water supply systems within the Floodplain Overlay Zone shall be designed to eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
5. Unless otherwise permitted by the Brooklyn Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, new and replacement on-site septic systems within the Floodplain Overlay Zone shall be located to avoid impairment during flooding, and all utilities shall be located to avoid flood damage.
6. In the event of a conflict with provisions in other Sections of these Regulations, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 5.E
Effective July 30, 2020 SPECIAL ZONES
AQUIFER PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE
101
5.E. AQUIFER PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE
5.E.1. PURPOSE
The Aquifer Protection Overlay Zone is intended to help to help inform people of the location of recharge areas of pumping public supply wellfields in accordance with standards established by the Connecticut Aquifer Protection Area Program (CGS §22a-354a - §22a-354bb).
5.E.2. APPLICABILITY
The provisions of the Aquifer Protection Overlay Zone apply in addition to the requirements of the underlying zone or any other overlay zone.
The Aquifer Protection Overlay Zone, a State-defined recharge area surrounding a public supply well serving more than 1,000 people, is a separate zone from the Groundwater Protection Overlay Zone.
5.E.3. PROVISIONS
The requirements of the Brooklyn Aquifer Protection Regulations shall apply within the Aquifer Protection Overlay Zone.
Brooklyn Wellfield Aquifer Protection Area
5.F BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
SPECIAL ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE
102
5.F. GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE
5.F.1. PURPOSE
The purpose of the Groundwater Protection Overlay Zone is to provide safeguards to protect water quality in aquifers and other geologic formations identified as an existing or potential source of potable water. Brooklyn contains several areas with deposits of coarse grained, stratified drift with a saturated thickness suggesting high water yielding conditions.
Creating this overlay is deemed essential to protecting the environment, public health, and this significant potential water supply source for the Town. As ground waters have been shown to be easily, and in many cases, irrevocably contaminated by many common land uses, it is imperative all reasonable controls over land use, waste disposal and material storage be conscientiously exercised.
5.F.2. APPLICABILITY
As an overlay zone, the provisions of the Groundwater Protection Overlay Zone apply in addition to the requirements of the underlying zone or any other overlay zone.
The Groundwater Protection Overlay Zone is a separate zone from the Aquifer Protection Overlay Zone, a State-defined recharge area surrounding a public supply well serving more than 1,000 people.
5.F.3. BOUNDARIES
The areas subject to the provisions of the Groundwater Protection Overlay Zone are the areas identified as “coarse-grained deposits”, “fines over coarse-grained deposits”, and “other glacial meltwater deposits” on a map prepared by the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection entitled “Surficial Aquifer Potential Map of Connecticut”, as may be amended. This source map was created at a scale of 1:125,000.
If contested, the burden of proof shall be upon the person contesting the boundary to show where they believe the Groundwater Protection Overlay Zone to be located. Such proof shall be in the form of a map, prepared by a professional engineer showing the existing zone boundary and that proposed with sufficient information for the Commission to undertake a review. The Planning and Zoning Commission may seek input from qualified individuals to assist in the review of contested zone boundaries.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 5.F
Effective July 30, 2020 SPECIAL ZONES
GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE
103
Surficial Aquifer Potential Map
Legend
5.F BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
SPECIAL ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE
104
5.F.4. SPECIAL USE RESTRICTIONS
Notwithstanding any other provision of these Regulations, the following uses shall be subject to additional restrictions and limitations as indicated below:
5.F.4.1. NEW USES PROHIBITED
1. Manufacture, use, storage, transport or disposal of hazardous materials as a principal activity.
2. Sanitary landfill, septage lagoon, waste water treatment facility for municipal or industrial wastes.
3. Road salt storage.
4. Junkyard, salvage yard, truck terminal.
5. Gasoline station, car wash, auto repair or auto body shop.
6. Underground storage of hazardous materials.
5.F.4.2. SPECIAL PERMIT REQUIRED
1. Excavation, filling or removal of earth materials.
2. Above ground storage of hazardous materials in quantities greater than associated with normal use, other than fuel storage for residential space heating
5.F.5. APPLICATION PROCESSING
1. As part of any application for a Special Permit under this Section, the Commission may require submission of the following additional information:
a. A complete list of all chemicals, pesticides, fuels or other potentially hazardous materials to be used or stored on the premises in quantities greater than associated with normal household use.
b. Information on the measures proposed to protect all storage containers from vandalism, corrosion, leakage and spillage and for control of spilled materials.
c. A description of all potentially hazardous wastes to be generated, including provision for storage and disposal measures.
d. For above ground storage of hazardous materials or waste, evidence of qualified professional supervision of the design and installation of such storage facilities or containers.
e. Detailed stormwater runoff management plans (including maintenance programs) demonstrating methods to control any spills, oil, grease and sediment.
f. For on-site disposal of sewage in quantities in excess of 2,000 gallons per day, documentation that such system meets all applicable codes and regulations.
2. Special permits required under this Section shall be granted only if the Planning and Zoning Commission determines the ground water quality resulting from on-site wastewater disposal or other operations on site shall not cause degradation of ground waters outside any authorized zone of influence which would result in a condition which renders the ground waters unsuitable for direct human consumption. If existing ground water quality is not now suitable for drinking water purposes, on site disposal or operations on site shall cause no further deterioration.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 5.G
Effective July 30, 2020 SPECIAL ZONES
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
105
5.G. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
5.G.1. PURPOSE
This section of the Regulations is intended to permit modification of the strict application of the standards and provisions of these Regulations to accomplish the purposes set forth below:
1. Enable the development or redevelopment of specific areas in accordance with an overall Master Plan for such area and in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and Development adopted in accordance with CGS Section 8-23, as may be amended.
2. Be flexible in order to allow for innovative design techniques, accommodate unique uses and/or encourage creative approaches to development or redevelopment.
3. Promote economic development in appropriate locations which will help meet community needs and be compatible with the community.
4. Result in a development that demonstrates a high regard for design and that is compatible with the historic, cultural and geographic qualities of Brooklyn.
5.G.2. ELIGIBLE AREAS
In order to establish a Planned Development Zone (PDZ), one of the following conditions shall be met:
1. The location of the proposed PDZ shall be identified as a Development Core in the Plan of Conservation and Development adopted in accordance with CGS Section 8-23, as may be amended.
2. The location of the proposed PDZ or a portion thereof shall be identified as a potential location for a PDZ in the Plan of Conservation and Development adopted in accordance with CGS Section 8-23, as may be amended.
3. The location of the proposed PDZ shall be determined by the Commission to be consistent with the objectives and recommendations of the Plan of Conservation and Development adopted in accordance with CGS Section 8-23, as may be amended.
5.G.3. PRELIMINARY DISCUSSION STRONGLY ENCOURAGED
In order to guide the proposed development and minimize the potential for unnecessary expense or delay, persons wishing to establish a Planned Development Zone hereunder are strongly encouraged to arrange for preliminary meetings with the Commission prior to submitting an application for a Planned Development Zone.
5.G BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
SPECIAL ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
106
5.G.4. BASIC PARAMETERS
1. A Planned Development Zone may only be established by approval of three (3) applications submitted and processed at the same time:
a. A Master Plan providing the information described in Section 5.G.5 in sufficient detail for the Commission to understand and establish the overall parameters of the proposed development,
b. A Text Amendment application, processed in accordance with Section 9.E of these Regulations, where the wording of the change applied for shall be the Master Plan documents as may be approved by the Commission in accordance with this Section 5.G of the Regulations, and
c. A Zone Change application, processed in accordance with Section 9.F of these Regulations, locating the proposed Planned Development Zone on the official Zoning Map.
2. Once a Planned Development Zone is established, actual development may only occur with site plan review as provided in Section 9.C where the purpose of such site plan review is to determine if the proposed development is consistent with the approved Master Plan and to document the proposed improvements.
3. As provided in Chapter 20 of the Ordinances of the Town of Brooklyn, the Commission may require the applicant to pay the cost of reasonable consulting fees for peer review of the technical aspects of any of the applications.
5.G.5. REQUIREMENTS FOR MASTER PLAN SUBMITTAL
A Master Plan of the proposed development shall be submitted to the Commission for approval and such Master Plan shall include the following:
1. Overview of Planned Development Zone – A name identifying the proposed Planned Development Zone and a general statement regarding the intent of the proposed Planned Development Zone.
2. Conceptual Site Plans – One or more sheets depicting the proposed schematic design of the site including:
a. The identification and general location of proposed uses;
b. Existing and proposed building footprints;
c. Proposed public and private streets, sidewalks and/or pedestrian walkways, rights‐of‐way, and parking areas;
d. A landscaping plan, including the location of proposed buffers;
e. Information regarding the provision of water, sewer, drainage, and other utilities; and
f. The location of public and/or private open space or conservation areas.
3. Schematic Architectural Drawings – One or more sheets illustrating the schematic design of the proposed buildings and structures, including:
a. Architectural elevations of all buildings, and/or
b. Photographs of buildings similar to the proposed buildings.
4. Data Table – Information regarding the proposed development including:
a. Lot area and lot frontage;
b. Building setbacks, yards, and/or building separations;
c. Building coverage and impervious coverage;
d. Proposed floor area by proposed use;
e. Parking spaces.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 5.G
Effective July 30, 2020 SPECIAL ZONES
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
107
5. Additional Documentation – Depending on the nature and/or intensity of the proposed Planned Development Zone, the following documentation may also be required by the Commission:
a. A traffic study estimating the potential traffic generation and the capacity of streets within and neighboring the zone to accommodate the projected traffic;
b. A report regarding the adequacy of proposed utility services;
c. A statement on how the proposed development complies with the Plan of Conservation and Development; and
d. Any additional information as may be required by the Commission to fully understand the nature of the proposed development.
5.G.6. APPLICATION PROCESSING
1. Any Commission action regarding a PDZ shall only pass if made by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the full membership of the Commission.
2. Following the close of the public hearing(s), the Commission shall first approve, modify and approve, or deny the Master Plan.
3. In evaluating the merits of the Master Plan and determining the appropriateness of a proposed PDZ, the Commission shall consider the following factors:
a. Consistency with the Plan of Conservation and Development, as may be amended.
b. Whether the proposed PDZ promotes reasonable and logical development to serve the public interests of the community.
c. Whether the uses proposed are consistent with the special permit considerations and criteria, as appropriate, of Section 9.D of these Regulations.
d. Accessibility to major roads and proximity to community services.
e. Physical characteristics of the lot.
f. The capability of existing infrastructure to support the proposed development (or infrastructure to be provided by the applicant).
g. Any other factors that it deems applicable to a change of zone request.
4. If the Commission denies the Master Plan, they shall also deny the Text Amendment application and the Zone Change application.
5. If the Commission approves or modifies and approves the Master Plan, the Commission shall approve the Text Amendment application.
6. If the Commission approves or modifies and approves the Master Plan, the Commission shall approve the Zone Change application.
5.G.7. EFFECT OF APPROVAL
1. If the Commission approves the Text Amendment application, the effect of such approval shall, provided the requirements of Section 5.G.8 below are followed, be to treat the Master Plan materials approved by the Commission and any conditions of approval as if it were a distinct part of the text of these Regulations and to modify Section 5.G.11 of these Regulations to reference the approved Master Plan and any conditions of approval.
2. If the Commission approves the Zone Change application, the effect of such approval shall be to rezone the property to the name of the Planned Development Zone provided the requirements of Section 5.G.8 below are followed.
3. Adoption of a PDZ by the Commission and completion of the requirements of Section 5.G.8 below shall constitute
5.G BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
SPECIAL ZONES Effective July 30, 2020
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
108
authorization to apply for site plan review.
4. Any provision of these Regulations applicable to the property prior to the Zone Change and Text Amendment and not superseded by adoption of the Master Plan, standards, and zoning map and regulation amendments shall continue in full force and effect.
5.G.8. COMPLETION OF APPROVAL / EFFECTIVE DATE
1. If the Commission approves the Text Amendment application, the approved Master Plan and accompanying material shall, within ninety (90) days of the Commission’s action, be submitted to the Commission for signature by the Chair or the approval of the Zone Change and Text Change shall be null and void.
2. Once signed by the Chair of the Commission, the approved Master Plan shall, at the applicant’s expense, be filed on the land records within thirty (30) days of the Chairman’s signature or the approval of the Zone Change and Text Change shall be null and void.
3. Upon request of the applicant and for good cause shown, the Commission may extend the period prescribed in Section 5.G.8.1 by ninety (90) additional days and/or the period prescribed in Section 5.G.8.2 by thirty (30) additional days.
4. The effective date of the Text Amendment and the Zone Change applications shall be the date that the approved Master Plan documents, signed by the Chair of the Commission, are filed on the land records by the applicant at the applicant’s expense.
5.G.9. SITE PLAN REVIEW / CONSTRUCTION
1. No construction within the PDZ may occur without approval by the Commission of detailed site plans in accordance with Section 9.C documenting that the proposed construction substantially conforms to the approved Master Plan and standard engineering requirements.
2. If site plans are not submitted within two (2) years of the effective date of the Text Amendment and the Zone Change applications, or within 2 years of the final dismissal of an appeal of such zone change by a court of competent jurisdiction, and if an extension of time is not given by the Commission for good cause shown, then the Text Amendment application and the Zone Change application shall become null and void and the PDZ area shall revert to all the requirements of its previous zoning.
3. Site Plans may be submitted in phases provided that such phases:
a. include all those public amenities and features used as a public protection for the surrounding area, and
b. shall be capable of complete and self-sufficient existence without the completion of the remaining stages.
4. If construction of improvements is not begun and diligently prosecuted to completion within five (5) years of the effective date of the Text Amendment and the Zone Change application, or within 5 years of the final dismissal of an appeal of such zone change by a court of competent jurisdiction, and if an extension of time is not given by the Commission for good cause shown, then the Text Amendment application and the Zone Change application shall become null and void and the PDZ area shall revert to all the requirements of its previous zoning.
5. No Certificate of Zoning Compliance precedent to a Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued within the PDZ without the posting of a financial guarantee, in form, amount and surety approved by the Commission, to guarantee the provision of common elements which may be included in a later phase but are considered by the Commission to be integral to the overall development including, but not limited to, private roads, buffer strips, walkways, recreational facilities, or other common elements.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 5.G
Effective July 30, 2020 SPECIAL ZONES
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
109
5.G.10. FUTURE MODIFICATIONS
1. Any modification of an approved Master Plan may be approved by site plan review in accordance with Section 9.C of these Regulations if:
a. the modification decreases the dimensional elements (e.g. reduction of building size) or lessens the impact on abutting properties, and/or
b. does not substantially alter, in the opinion of the Commission, the character of the approved Master Plan.
2. Any modification of an approved Master Plan shall be approved by a Text Amendment in accordance with Section 9.E and with Section 5.G.11 of these Regulations codifying the revised Master Plan as part of this Section of the Regulations if:
a. the modification adds or deletes a permitted use or substantially alters, in the opinion of the Commission, the area devoted to different uses in the approved Master Plan.
b. the modification increases the dimensional elements in the Master Plan (e.g. expansion of building size).
c. the modification substantially alters, in the opinion of the Commission, the character of the approved Master Plan.
5.G.11. APPROVED PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONES
A. Planned Development Zone 1 ( <<insert name of PDZ >> ) approved by the Commission at a meeting on ( <<insert date of PZC approval>> ), effective on ( <<insert date of filing on land records>> ), and filed on the land records at Volume _________, Page ______ and/or Map File _________________.
6.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
HOME-BASED BUSINESSES
110
6. USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
6.A. HOME-BASED BUSINESSES
6.A.1. PURPOSE
This section is intended to provide for home-based business operations provided they are of appropriate scale and do not materially change the existing or planned nature of the area in which they are to be located.
Home Business uses can include but are not limited to offices, independent contractors, artisans and craftsman, dressmakers and tailors.
Uses not permitted in the home-based business classification include but are not limited to:
a. barber shops, beauty shops (excluding single service salons),
b. pet grooming shops,
c. dancing schools, karate schools,
d. restaurants,
e. printing shops,
f. employment agencies,
g. radio stations,
h. automotive repair services, and
i. retail establishments.
6.A.2. HOME OFFICE
6.A.2.1. TYPE OF APPROVAL
A Home Office is permitted as an accessory use to any residential dwelling in any zone with no approval required (i.e. – “as of right”) provided the use complies with the standards and criteria in Section 6.A.2.2.
6.A.2.2. STANDARDS AND CRITERIA
1. There shall be no change in the exterior of the building or dwelling; no outside display or storage of materials, goods, supplies or equipment; nor is there any exterior visible evidence of home office use.
2. Only 2 employees other than family members residing in the dwelling shall be employed in the Home Office use.
3. The Home Office use shall be operated from either the dwelling or a structure that is clearly incidental to the use of a property for a dwelling.
4. There shall be no traffic, noise, or electrical interference associated with the Home Office use that exceeds that normally associated with a dwelling.
5. There shall be no hazardous, flammable or combustible liquids, materials and/or wastes located, stored, used, or displayed in association with uses as a Home Office other than that normally associated with a dwelling.
6. Off-street parking shall be provided for all employees.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.A
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
HOME-BASED BUSINESSES
111
6.A.3. HOME BUSINESS
6.A.3.1. TYPE OF APPROVAL
1. Establishment of a Home Business requires site plan review by the Commission in accordance with Section 9.C of these Regulations.
2. Approval of the Site Plan by the Commission will authorize the issuance of a Zoning Permit for a Home Business.
6.A.3.2. STANDARDS AND CRITERIA
1. A Home Business may only be established in the Residential-Agricultural, Village Center, or Planned Commercial Zones.
2. The property utilized for a Home Business use shall have a minimum lot area of 40,000 square feet.
3. The Home Business use shall be clearly secondary to the residential use of the property, and shall not change the residential appearance of the lot or the residential character of the neighborhood.
4. If located within the primary dwelling, the Home Business shall not utilize more than 50% of the floor area of the primary dwelling.
5. The Home Business use may occupy an accessory building providing that the location and appearance of the accessory building is consistent with the residential character of the lot and of the neighborhood.
6. If located within an accessory building, the Home Business shall not utilize more than an area equal to 50% of the floor area of the primary dwelling except that the Commission may authorize the use of up to 50% of the floor area of the accessory building as it existed as of January 26, 2011.
7. The Home Business use shall not employ more than two persons other than resident family members.
8. The appearance of the lot and of the structures on the lot shall not be altered in a manner that would cause the building or dwelling to differ from its residential character by the use of materials, construction, lighting, and signs, or by the emission of sounds, vibrations, or electrical interference.
9. There shall be no exterior storage of goods, supplies, or materials associated with the Home Business.
10. There shall be no hazardous materials stored, used, or displayed in association with use as a Home Business other than that normally associated with a dwelling.
11. On-site parking shall be provided to accommodate the parking needs of the home business in accordance with Section 7.B of these Regulations.
12. Landscape buffers shall be provided in accordance with Section 7.C of these Regulations.
13. Not more than three (3) commercial vehicles associated with the Home Business shall be parked and/or located on the premises at any one time.
6.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
HOME-BASED BUSINESSES
112
6.A.4. HOME ENTERPRISE
6.A.4.1. TYPE OF APPROVAL
1. Establishment of a Home Enterprise requires granting of a Special Permit by the Commission in accordance with Section 9.D of these Regulations.
2. The Special Permit for a Home Enterprise shall be issued to the owner of the property and the owner shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with these Regulations even if the business is leased to or operated by others. The owner of the property shall notify the Commission of the name of the tenant / business operator and any change thereto.
3. The Commission may authorize more than one Home Enterprise on a property but the uses will be considered cumulatively when determining compliance with the Regulations.
4. Changes in types of Home Enterprise uses must be reviewed by the Commission and the Special Permit revised accordingly.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.A
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
HOME-BASED BUSINESSES
113
6.A.4.2. STANDARDS AND CRITERIA
1. A Home Enterprise may only be established in the Residential-Agricultural, Village Center, or Planned Commercial Zones.
2. A Home Enterprise use must maintain the residential character of the lot and the neighborhood, minimize the conflict of such use with the surrounding residential uses, and protect residential property values.
3. The Home Enterprise use shall be clearly secondary to the residential use of the premises, and shall not materially change the residential appearance of the dwelling, lot or neighborhood.
4. If located within the primary dwelling, the Home Enterprise shall not utilize more than 50% of the floor area of the primary dwelling.
5. The Home Enterprise use may occupy an accessory building providing that the location and appearance of the accessory building is consistent with the residential character of the lot and of the neighborhood.
6. If located within an accessory building, the Home Enterprise shall not utilize more than an area equal to 100% of the floor area of the primary dwelling except that the Commission may authorize the use of up to 100% of the floor area of the accessory building as it existed as of January 26, 2011.
7. The appearance of the lot and of the structures on the lot shall not be altered in a manner that would cause the dwelling or building to differ from its residential character by the use of materials, construction, lighting, or signs, nor by the emission of sounds, vibrations, or electrical interference.
8. The proposed site shall have direct access to a State Highway or an approved town road, shall have an area equal to or greater than three acres, and shall have frontage equal to or greater than one-hundred and fifty (150) feet.
9. The lot shall be of such size shape and dimension that any exterior evidence of the proposed Home Enterprise use is screened from public view in accordance with Section 7.C, Landscape Regulations.
10. For any outside storage or parking associated with the Home Enterprise use, a buffer of 50 feet shall be required meeting the Screening and Buffering Area Standards of Section 7.C.6.
11. The application shall show measures taken to minimize the impact of vehicular traffic on the surrounding neighborhood.
12. As a condition to the Special Permit, the Commission may establish limits on the permit pertaining to hours of operation, number and type of vehicles, outside storage, and other such considerations as may be necessary to minimize the impact of the proposed activity on the surrounding residential areas.
13. The Home Enterprise use shall not employ more than five (5) persons other than resident family members.
14. The only retail sales permitted will be of items manufactured on the premises.
6.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
ALTERNATIVE BUSINESS ARRANGEMENTS
114
6.B. ALTERNATIVE BUSINESS ARRANGEMENTS
6.B.1. PURPOSE
This Section of the Regulations is intended to provide an opportunity for low intensity business uses in certain locations or situations outside of business zones where such uses may be appropriate within the community provided that potential impacts on surrounding areas are minimized or avoided.
6.B.2. STATE ROUTE BUSINESS ENTERPRISE
6.B.2.1. LOCATION AND USE
1. A State Route Business Enterprises may only be located on a lot in the R-A Zone having frontage on a state highway.
2. This section shall only authorize the following uses:
a. Adult Day Care Center,
b. Art Studio / Gallery (including sales),
c. Antique Sales,
d. Craftsperson including accessory sales of craft items created by the craftsperson, and
e. Offices, Business or Administrative.
6.B.2.2. TYPE OF APPROVAL
1. Establishment of a State Route Business Enterprise requires granting of a Special Permit by the Commission in accordance with Section 9.D of these Regulations.
2. The Commission may authorize the issuance of a Special Permit for a State Route Business Enterprise when it has been determined that the proposed use meets:
a. the standards and criteria in Section 6.B.2.3, and
b. the requirements of Section 9.D of these Regulations.
3. While the owner of the property may choose to lease out the premises for operation of a State Route Business Enterprise, the Special Permit for a State Route Business Enterprise shall be issued to the owner of the property and the owner shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with these Regulations.
4. The Commission may authorize more than one State Route Business Enterprise on a property but the uses will be considered cumulatively when determining compliance with the Regulations.
5. Changes in types of State Route Business Enterprise uses must be reviewed by the Commission and the Special Permit revised accordingly.
6. A change in in owner or lessee must be reviewed by the Commission and the approval may be amended to permit the proposed owner, or operator provided all conditions of the Regulation are satisfied.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.B
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
ALTERNATIVE BUSINESS ARRANGEMENTS
115
6.B.2.3. STANDARDS AND CRITERIA
1. State Route Business Enterprises shall be limited to a gross floor area not to exceed 2,400 square feet per lot.
2. State Route Business Enterprises shall:
a. maintain the residential character of the buildings and the lot and the neighborhood,
b. be developed in a manner that will minimize the conflict of such use with the surrounding residential uses and its cultural and historical heritage, and
c. not negatively impact the value of surrounding residential property.
3. The lot shall be of such size, shape and dimension that any exterior evidence of the proposed use or uses is screened from public view in accordance with Section 7.C, Landscape Regulations.
4. A buffer of 50 feet in width shall be required for any outside storage or parking associated with the use and must meet the Screening and Buffering Area Standards as contained in Section 7.C.6 of these Regulations.
5. The application shall show measures taken to minimize the impact of vehicular traffic on the surrounding neighborhood. The commission may require the applicant to provide a traffic analysis from a licensed professional engineer if, in the Commission’s determination, the State Route Business Enterprise may cause a reduction in traffic safety or a reduction in the level of service in the public roadway.
6. As a condition to the Special Permit the Commission may establish limits on the hours and days of operation, lighting, number and type of vehicles, outside storage, and such other conditions as may be necessary to minimize the impact of the proposed activity on the surrounding residential areas.
6.B.3. ADAPTIVE RE-USE OF AN AGRICULTURAL BUILDING
6.B.3.1. LOCATION AND USE
1. Adaptive re-use of an agricultural building may only be permitted for an agricultural building existing on February 7, 2002. The applicant must document the previous agricultural use.
2. This section shall only authorize the following uses:
a. Light Industry,
b. Self-Storage Facilities,
c. Offices, Business or Administrative and
d. Shop and/or storage space for Electricians, Plumbers, Carpenters and Craftsperson’s (but not including sales on the premises of craft items created by the craftsperson).
6.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
ALTERNATIVE BUSINESS ARRANGEMENTS
116
6.B.3.2. TYPE OF APPROVAL
1. The Commission may authorize the issuance of a Special Permit for adaptive re-use of an agricultural building when it has been determined that the proposed use meets:
a. the standards and criteria in Section 6.B.3.3, and
b. the requirements of Section 9.D of these Regulations.
2. While the owner of the property may choose to lease out the agricultural building, the Special Permit for adaptive re-use of an agricultural building shall be issued to the owner of the property and the owner shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with these Regulations.
3. The Commission may authorize more than one adaptive re-use of an agricultural building on a property but the uses will be considered cumulatively when determining compliance with the Regulations.
4. Changes in uses within the agricultural building must be reviewed by the Commission and the Special Permit revised accordingly.
5. A change in in owner or lessee must be reviewed by the Commission and the approval may be amended to permit the proposed owner, or operator provided all conditions of the Regulation are satisfied.
6.B.3.3. STANDARDS AND CRITERIA
1. The adaptive re-use of an agricultural building shall not:
a. Detract from the character of the lot or the neighborhood,
b. Create a conflict of such use with the surrounding residential uses, or
c. Negatively affect residential property values.
2. The proposed site shall:
a. have direct access to a State Highway or approved town road,
b. have an area equal to or greater than three acres, and
c. have frontage equal to or greater than one-hundred and fifty (150) feet.
3. The lot shall be of such size shape and dimension that any exterior evidence of the proposed use is screened from public view in accordance with Section 7.C Landscape Regulations.
4. For any outside storage or parking associated with the Home Enterprise use, a buffer of 50 feet shall be required meeting the Screening and Buffering Area Standards of Section 7.C.6.
5. The application shall show measures taken to minimize the impact of vehicular traffic on the surrounding neighborhood.
6. As a condition to the Special Permit the Commission may establish limits on the hours of operation, number and type of vehicles, outside storage, and such other conditions as may be necessary to minimize the impact of the proposed activity on the surrounding residential areas.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.C
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
ACCESSORY APARTMENT
117
6.C. ACCESSORY APARTMENT
6.C.1. PURPOSE
This Section of the Regulations is intended to provide housing choices to help meet the housing needs of Brooklyn residents and families consistent with soil types, terrain, and infrastructure capacity.
IMPORTANT NOTE: Accessory apartments are defined as a single-dwelling unit accessory to a single family dwelling, occupying an existing detached garage or customary accessory building, but excluding trailers, mobile homes, or temporary structures. Apartments located within a principle residence are a duplex for the purposes of these Zoning Regulations.
6.C.2. STANDARDS AND CRITERIA
1. Establishment of an accessory apartment requires granting of a Special Permit by the Commission in accordance with Section 9.D of these Regulations.
2. An accessory apartment shall only be allowed in conjunction with a single family detached dwelling.
3. Only one accessory apartment shall be permitted on the premises.
4. An accessory apartment shall not exceed the square footage of the primary dwelling.
5. The principal dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling unit combination shall be designed to maintain the appearance and character of the premises as a single-family dwelling.
6.D BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
RESIDENTIAL COMPOUND
118
6.D. RESIDENTIAL COMPOUND
6.D.1. PURPOSE
The intent of thi
The intent of thiss regulation is to allow regulation is to allow for for multiple residences on one property provided it is multiple residences on one property provided it is demonstrated that demonstrated that such rsuch resideesidences could be subdivided lances could be subdivided laterter into confointo conforming rming lotslots..
6.D.2. STANDARDS
A residential compound (multiple, detached, single family dwelling units) may be constructed on a single parcel subject to the granting of a Special Permit in accordance with the following standards:
1. No more than three (3) dwelling units are constructed or occupied.
2. The residential compound is served by one driveway unless modified by the Commission for good cause shown due to topography, wetlands, watercourses, steep slopes, floodplain, or other considerations.
3. The applicant demonstrates that the land is capable of being subdivided in compliance with the Zoning Regulations and the Subdivision Regulations of the day.
4. Permanent provision for the preservation of open space and for the preservation of natural features is made at the time of approval.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.E
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT
119
6.E. MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT
6.E.1. PURPOSE
This Section of the Regulations is intended to provide housing choices within Brooklyn consistent with soil types, terrain, infrastructure capacity, and the Plan of Conservation and Development for Brooklyn while ensuring that the design development is compatible with surrounding land uses and the character of the area, and that land development remains consistent with the adopted Plan of Conservation and Development.
6.E.2. LOCATION CRITERIA
1. The parcel of land proposed for a Multi-family Development shall:
a. be located in the R-10, R-30, RA, VC, NB, RC, or MMUD zones.
b. have at least fifty (50) feet of frontage on an accepted and maintained public street.
6.E.3. STANDARDS AND CRITERIA
1. Multi-family developments may be permitted for a building existing on the effective date of these Regulations provided public sewer service is available and used. Such multifamily developments shall have no minimum lot size or maximum density except that multi-family developments located in the Village Center Zone are limited to three residential units.
2. The parcel area for a new Multi-family development shall be at least five (5) acres.
3. The number of dwelling units to be allowed in a new Multi-family development shall not exceed:
a. One dwelling unit per ten-thousand (10,000) square feet of parcel area where there are no public sewers or public water facilities.
b. One dwelling unit per eight-thousand (8,000) square feet of parcel area where there are either public sewer or public water facilities available and used.
c. One dwelling unit per five-thousand (5,000) square feet of parcel area where there are both public sewers and public water facilities available and used.
4. No structure within a Multi-family development shall contain more than twelve (12) dwelling units.
5. Density Bonus: Additional dwelling units on a parcel of land shall be permitted, provided that twenty percent (20%) of the total dwelling units on the parcel of land are subjected to binding recorded deeds containing covenants or restrictions which require that such dwelling units be sold or rented at, or below, prices which will preserve the units as housing for which persons and families pay thirty per cent or less of income, where such income is less than or equal to sixty percent (60%) of the median income, as defined by CGS Section 8-30g (a) (7). The number of additional dwelling units that shall be permitted on a parcel of land shall not exceed forty per cent (40%) of the number of dwelling units calculated under Sec. 6.E.3.3 above.
6. Dwelling units within the Multi-family development shall contain at least the following amount of floor area based on interior wall-to-wall measurements and excluding public hallways and stairways:
Efficiency Unit (A dwelling unit consisting of a bathroom, kitchen and a combined living room and bedroom)
450 square ft.
One-bedroom Unit
600 square ft.
Two-bedroom Unit
800 square ft.
Three-bedroom Unit
950 square ft.
7. The number of efficiency units (dwelling units consisting of a bathroom, kitchen and a combined living room
6.E BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT
120
and bedroom) for each Multi-family development shall not exceed twenty (20) per cent of the total number of dwelling units.
8. No living quarters within the Multi-family development shall be below the finished grade of the ground adjoining such structure, nor above the second story.
9. Maximum heights for all buildings within a Multi-family development shall be the lesser of two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet.
10. Required yards within a Multi-family development shall be as allowed in the zone.
11. Buildings shall be situated in a safe, efficient, and harmonious grouping that clusters buildings, creates well-designed open spaces, and avoids overcrowding. The distance between two buildings shall be no less than forty (40) feet.
12. No exterior facade of any such building shall exceed forty (40) feet in length without an offset.
13. All dwellings within a neighborhood or phase shall be of a single consistent architectural style to harmonize with the landscape and with each other, using materials and architectural features that are traditional in the Town of Brooklyn.
14. Building clusters shall be externally identified. Exterior unit identification (or directories) also shall be provided at driveway intersections and shall be externally lighted.
15. Off-street parking requirements shall be met according to the standards of Section 7.B of these Regulations.
16. All parking areas and walkways shall be suitably illuminated. Additionally, the requirements of Section 7.G shall be met.
17. All interior access drives shall be paved.
18. All proposed streets shall be constructed in accordance with Section 10 of the Subdivision Regulations and the Public Improvement Specifications.
19. The accessory uses permitted on a parcel used for a Multi-family Housing shall be those permitted in the zone in which the land is located, and recreational and/or community facilities associated with the proposed development.
20. Recreation and open space shall be provided for a Multi-family Housing at a rate of one hundred and fifty (150) square feet per dwelling unit. Areas within the required side yard setback or rear yard setback along the perimeter of the development may be used to meet this requirement.
21. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the area proposed for recreation and open space shall consist of wetland soils.
22. Landscaping of the site proposed for development shall be provided for according to the standards of Section 7.C Landscape Regulations.
23. Solid waste receptacles shall be provided on-site and shall be screened from view from any public street and abutting properties. Provisions shall be made for the collection of recyclable materials.
24. Buffer strips:
a. A buffer strip at least fifteen (15) feet wide shall be provided along every side property line and rear property line.
b. In order to protect the adjacent property and the neighborhood in general from detriment, such buffer strip shall be:
• planted with a mixture of evergreens and deciduous plants and trees, and
• maintained.
c. Such strips may be included in the required side yards.
d. Existing wooded areas may be considered as buffer strips.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.F
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
ELDERLY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
121
6.F. ELDERLY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
6.F.1. PURPOSE
This Section of the Regulations is intended to provide housing alternatives for elderly persons, to provide the opportunity for elderly persons to live in a planned community specifically designed to meet their special needs, and to locate housing for the elderly to provide safe and convenient access to services, while at the same time to ensure that the design development is compatible with surrounding land uses and the character of the area, and that land development remains consistent with the adopted Plan of Conservation and Development for the Town of Brooklyn.
6.F.2. AGE RESTRICTION
1. Prior to issuance of any building permits for the Elderly Housing Development, a deed restriction shall be filed on the land records restricting the use of the dwelling units for the exclusive use by elderly residents for at least ninety-nine (99) years after the initial occupation of the proposed development.
6.F.3. LOCATION CRITERIA
1. The parcel of land proposed for an Elderly Housing Development shall:
a. be located in the R-10, R-30, VC, NB, or MMUD zones.
b. be served by public water and public sewer facilities approved by relevant state and local agencies as of the date of application.
c. have at least fifty (50) feet of frontage on an accepted and maintained public street.
6.F.4. STANDARDS AND CRITERIA
1. The number of dwelling units to be allowed in the Elderly Housing Development shall not exceed one (1) unit per two-thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of parcel area.
2. The maximum impervious coverage for an Elderly Housing development shall not exceed eighty (80) percent.
3. No structure within an Elderly Housing development shall contain more than twelve (12) dwelling units.
4. No living quarters within the Elderly Housing development shall be below the finished grade of the ground adjoining such structure, nor above the second story.
5. Maximum heights for all buildings within an Elderly Housing development shall be the lesser of two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet.
6. Required yards within an Elderly Housing development shall be as allowed in the zone.
7. Buildings shall be situated in a safe, efficient, and harmonious grouping that clusters buildings, creates well-designed open spaces, and avoids overcrowding. The distance between two buildings shall be no less than forty (40) feet.
8. No exterior facade of any such building shall exceed forty (40) feet in length without an offset.
9. All dwellings within a neighborhood or phase shall be of a single consistent architectural style to harmonize with the landscape and with each other, using materials and architectural features that are traditional in the Town of Brooklyn.
10. Building clusters shall be externally identified. Exterior unit identification (or directories) also shall be provided at driveway intersections and shall be externally lighted.
11. Off-street parking requirements shall be met according to the standards of Section 7.B of these Regulations.
6.F BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
ELDERLY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
122
12. All parking areas and walkways shall be suitably illuminated. Additionally, the requirements of Section 7.G shall be met.
13. All interior access drives shall be paved.
14. All proposed streets shall be constructed in accordance with Section 10 of the Subdivision Regulations and the Public Improvement Specifications.
15. The accessory uses permitted on a parcel used for an Elderly Housing development shall be those permitted in the zone in which the land is located, and recreational and/or community facilities associated with the proposed development.
16. Recreation and open space shall be provided for an Elderly Housing development at a rate of one hundred and fifty (150) square feet per dwelling unit. Areas within the required side yard setback or rear yard setback along the perimeter of the development may be used to meet this requirement.
17. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the area proposed for recreation and open space shall consist of wetland soils.
18. Landscaping of the site proposed for development shall be provided for according to the standards of Section 7.C Landscape Regulations.
19. Solid waste receptacles shall be provided on-site and shall be screened from view from any public street and abutting properties. Provisions shall be made for the collection of recyclable materials.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.G
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION
123
6.G. CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION
6.G.1. PURPOSE
This Section of the Regulations is intended to provide a method for development of land which permits a reduction in lot sizes without a significant increase in density of population or development, while at the same time providing for the protection of surrounding properties, persons and neighborhood value and allowing greater flexibility and creativity in the design and layout of residential and/or development in order to:
1. Protect the existing rural appearance and character of the Town of Brooklyn in accordance with the Town’s Plan of Conservation and Development;
2. Minimize alteration of or damage to the natural, historic and scenic resources;
3. Avoid adverse impacts of new development on the value of existing homes and reduce sprawl;
4. Promote development that is compatible with existing neighborhoods;
5. Preserve open spaces, large unfragmented forests, wildlife habitat and other undeveloped open land particularly along Town roads;
6. Establish buffers for adjacent land uses such as agriculture and fragile ecosystems;
7. Reduce public costs for the maintenance of roads and other public infrastructure;
8. Protect water resources by reducing the amount of impervious surfaces, volume of runoff, and pollutant loads to streams and other water resources; and
9. Conserve energy resources.
Conservation Design
6.G BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION
124
6.G.2. OVERALL STANDARDS AND DESIGN PROCESS
1. A Conservation subdivision shall:
a. only be permitted in the R-A zone.
b. only be used for detached single-family dwellings and permitted accessory uses.
c. require a minimum of forty (40) percent Open Space set aside.
2. Any application for a Conservation subdivision shall include the following materials prepared by a landscape architect, civil engineer, or surveyor licensed to practice in Connecticut:
a. a site inventory / analysis map as described below, and
b. an overall lot / roadway layout plan which responds to the site inventory / analysis map.
3. If the Commission is not satisfied with the quality of the analysis submitted with the application, it may hire another landscape architect, civil engineer, or surveyor licensed to practice in Connecticut to prepare such analysis and charge the applicant for the cost of such services.
4. The site inventory / analysis map shall identify Primary Conservation Areas:
c. wetlands and vernal pools,
d. watercourses,
e. steep slopes (15 percent or more), and
f. 100-year floodplain (FEMA Floodzone A).
5. The site inventory / analysis map shall also identify Secondary Conservation Areas and other environmental, scenic, and cultural resources such as:
g. Prime farmland soils and soils of statewide significance,
h. areas within 50 feet of a wetland,
i. areas within 100 feet of a watercourse or a vernal pool,
j. 500-year floodplain (FEMA Floodzone B),
k. Natural Diversity Database sites,
l. wildlife corridors,
m. mature woodlands,
n. notable individual trees (>18” DBH),
o. ridgelines, scenic views and vistas,
p. stone walls and /or farm hedgerows,
q. key resources identified in the Plan of Conservation and Development or other natural / cultural resource inventory,
r. key open space and trail connections identified in the Plan of Conservation and Development,
s. possible connections between conservation areas on the site and adjacent protected and unprotected open space,
t. proposed open space areas, and
u. moderately well drained to excessively drained soils.
6. Areas of the site which are not considered Primary Conservation Areas or Secondary Conservation Areas shall be considered potential development areas and lots, streets, trails, and other improvements may be sited in these areas.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.G
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION
125
7. Areas of the site which are considered Primary Conservation Areas or Secondary Conservation Areas shall be considered for permanent protection by one of the following means:
a. creation of a Conservation Easement in favor of the Town of Brooklyn;
b. creation of a Conservation Easement in favor of the Town of Brooklyn reserving specific agricultural rights and uses by the Town, as approved by the Commission;
c. conveyance of fee simple ownership to a Tax Exempt Organization approved by the Commission;
d. creation of a Conservation Easement in favor of a Tax-Exempt Organization approved by the Commission;
e. conveyance of fee simple ownership to a Connecticut non-stock corporation of which all owners of land within the subdivision or resubdivision are members, along with a conservation easement over the entire open space area; or
f. any other method deemed appropriate by the Commission which accomplishes permanent dedication in accordance with the requirements set forth in this Section.
8. Where Open Space is required by the Commission, the land to be dedicated to meet Town requirements may include wetlands or watercourses as defined in the Connecticut General statutes, and slopes over twenty five (25) percent, but the Commission has the right to require that the percentage of the dedicated land within these wetland, watercourse and steep slope categories is not greater than the percentage of wetlands, watercourses and slopes over twenty five (25) percent within the property to be subdivided and, as applicable, within previous subdivision sections where dedications were not made.
9. Where at all possible, a buffer shall be maintained between the Town right-of-way and the subdivision houses to screen the development from the Town road in order to maintain the appearance of a single family residential driveway, rather than a multi-lot subdivision. A buffer of 100’ consisting of mixed deciduous and/or evergreen trees is desired.
10. A pre-application meeting with Town Staff and the Commission is strongly encouraged.
6.G.3. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
1. Density in the Conservation subdivision shall not exceed 0.6 lots per acre of buildable land.
2. There shall be no minimum lot size requirement in a Conservation Subdivision but all lots shall meet the requirements of the State Health code and the Northeast District Department of Health.
3. Within a Conservation subdivision, each lot for a building site shall have at least 100 feet of frontage on a private or public road or at least 100 feet at the building line if located on a cul-de-sac.
4. Within a Conservation subdivision, all structures shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from any front lot line and twenty (20) feet from all side and rear lot lines except that all structures at the perimeter of the parcel shall conform to the setback requirements applicable to conventional development in the underlying zone.
5. Rear lots may be permitted within a Conservation subdivisions provided that:
a. the access strip serving such lot(s) shall be at least 50 feet wide.
b. the access strip serving such lot(s) shall be located at least three hundred (300) feet from all entrances or access strips on the same side of the street.
c. the access strip serving such lots shall not exceed 400 feet in length.
d. No more than three (3) rear lots may be accessed by any one access strip.
e. The access strip shall be owned by the owner of the rear lot or, in the case of multiple rear lots, by the owner of the rear lot located farthest from the public or private way.
f. The access strip shall be encumbered by an easement if another rear lot exists, granting access to such lot.
6.G BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION
126
6.G.4. ROAD REQUIREMENTS
1. Roads created within a Conservation subdivision may be privately owned and maintained in perpetuity by a Homeowner’s Association.
2. This arrangement shall be formalized as follows:
a. A note shall be placed on the final Conservation subdivision plan stating: “This subdivision is serviced by a private road (and/or common driveway) that is intended to remain private in perpetuity. The Town of Brooklyn will provide no maintenance, repair or school bus service along this private road (and/or common driveway). ”
b. A notation shall be placed in the deed to the property stating: “This subdivision development is serviced by a private road (and/or common driveway) that is intended to remain private in perpetuity. The Town of Brooklyn will provide no maintenance, repair or school bus service along this private road (and/or common driveway).”
c. In such other form as is acceptable to the Commission which shall, at the Commission’s discretion, be subject to review by the Town Counsel prior to filing of approved plan or other documents.
3. Private roads shall:
a. be identified on the subdivision plans,
b. have a right-of-way of 50’.
c. conform to the construction standards listed in the Town of Brooklyn Public Improvement Specifications including being paved with 3” bituminous concrete (1 ½” Class I and 1 ½” Class II) to a minimum width of eighteen 18 feet.
d. have a cross slope from center crown to gutter of at least 3/8” /foot.
e. not exceed 12% grade
f. not serve as a connecting road between two public streets.
g. have the final design be subject to the recommendation of the Town Engineer since the design may need to be site specific.
4. All dead end roads shall terminate in a cul-de-sac with an outside radius of travel way of fifty (50) feet and, if a center island is proposed, the width of the travel way around the island shall be at least twenty (20) feet.
5. Curbing and formal closed drainage systems are to be held to a minimum, except as provided below.
a. Curbing shall be required:
• where a road is in a cut situation with surrounding land pitching toward the road;
• at a low point in the road with catch basins to collect storm water runoff; and
• where a closed drainage system is required.
b. Curbing is not required;
• where the land generally has flat slopes;
• where the road is in a fill situation and sheet flow away from the road is advantageous; and
• where no closed drainage system is required.
c. A closed drainage system is required where drainage structures (e.g. catch basins) are necessitated by site conditions and subdivision design.
6. Any proposed public roads shall be constructed in accordance with Public Improvement Specifications for the Town of Brooklyn.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.G
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION
127
6.G.5. LEGAL ARRANGEMENTS
1. Appropriate Certificates of Incorporation, by-laws, rules and regulations of any association or corporation of the lot owners within the proposed Conservation subdivision shall be provided as part of the application.
2. Appropriate easements shall be provided as part of the application for travelways, utilities, snow storage, maintenance, storm water drainage and to accommodate any hammerhead turnaround and associated snow shelf.
3. Following approval, a Conservation subdivision and all parcels of land within it shall be subject to the following limitations:
a. No lot or parcel within a Conservation subdivision may be further subdivided and:
• A notation to that effect shall be made on the Final Plan as to be endorsed by the Commission and recorded with the Town Clerk.
• A perpetual development restriction, running with the land, and enforceable by the Town of Brooklyn, shall be recorded with respect to the land within the Conservation subdivision and such development restriction:
• shall provide that no lot in the Conservation subdivision may be further subdivided into additional building lots.
• shall be in such form and substance as the Commission shall prescribe, and
• may contain such additional restrictions on development and use of the lots as the Commission may deem appropriate.
b. Home offices are allowed as a matter of right per Section 6.A.2 except that there shall be no non-resident employees.
c. Home enterprises and home businesses are not permitted in Conservation subdivisions.
6.H BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
EMERGENCY TRAILER
128
6.H. EMERGENCY TRAILER
6.H.1. PURPOSES
The intent of thi
The intent of this regulation is to allow s regulation is to allow for the tfor the temporary emporary use of a trailer use of a trailer as emergency housingas emergency housing in specifiin specific c circucircumstancesmstances..
6.H.2. STANDARDS
Notwithstanding any other Section of these Regulations, a temporary emergency trailer may be established and used as a residence provided that:
1. Such temporary emergency trailer shall be located on the same lot upon which the building that was destroyed was standing.
2. The location and type of temporary emergency trailer shall be subject to review and approval by the Zoning Enforcement Official, in consultation with the Building Official.
3. Such temporary emergency trailer may be used for a period of up to one year unless an extension, not to exceed six (6) months, is granted by the Zoning Enforcement Official.
4. Such temporary emergency trailer shall be connected to sanitary water and sanitary sewers if available, and to electricity and/or gas.
5. Occupancy of such temporary emergency trailer is limited to the persons who inhabited the dwelling before it was destroyed.
6. Such temporary emergency trailer shall be removed within 15 days of the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
7. If, in the opinion of the Commission, satisfactory progress is not being made to rehabilitate or reconstruct the destroyed structure the Commission shall have the right to have the temporary emergency trailer removed from the site by a date certain.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.I
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
REAR LOTS
129
6.I. REAR LOTS
6.I.1. PURPOSE
This Section of the Regulations is intended to allow the development of rear lots and to provide greater development flexibility particularly where a site has unusual lot line or natural resource configurations or where rear lot development would promote or enhance the protection of valuable natural resource features. This section is not intended to encourage development of land characterized by severe or very severe development limitations or to discourage new road development.
6.I.2. STANDARDS
1. No building shall be erected on a rear lot unless there is provided for such lot an unobstructed access strip at least fifty (50) feet wide to a public road adequate to accommodate fire apparatus and/or other emergency equipment.
2. Access strips shall not be located any closer than 300 feet from any other access strip located on the original parcel (i.e. the parcel in existence at the adoption of Subdivision Regulations, July 1, 1967). This 300 ft. restriction shall not apply to access strips across any street or on adjacent properties.
3. No more than three (3) rear lots may be accessed by any one access strip with the ownership of the access strip resting with the lot farthest from the public highway. If another rear lot utilizes the access strip, the access strip shall be encumbered by an easement granting access to such other lot.
4. No more than two (2) dwelling units shall be permitted on a rear lot.
5. Interior lots shall have a minimum lot width equal to or greater than the minimum frontage required for the respective zone. Minimum lot width shall be measured at the property line that the access strip to the street leads from.
6. The area of such access strip shall not be counted towards the minimum lot size requirement.
6.J BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
SPECIAL EVENTS
130
6.J. SPECIAL EVENTS
6.J.1. PURPOSE
This Section of the Regulations is intended to provide a process for allowing and/or managing functions such as banquets, wedding receptions, parties, entertainment, performances and/or similar gatherings which occur while protecting and conserving the neighborhood character, public safety and property values of the surrounding area, and the Town of Brooklyn.
6.J.2. APPLICABILITY
Unless exempted below, the use of land and/or buildings within the Town of Brooklyn on a recurring basis or when commercial in nature for banquets, wedding receptions, parties, entertainment, performances and/or similar gatherings or events shall obtain approval to operate an Events Facility in accordance with Section 6.J.
The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
1. Family events, yard sales, private fundraisers, and similar non-commercial social gatherings or events hosted by an owner or resident since these are considered accessory (customary, subordinate, and incidental) to the residential use provided that no such event shall last for more than three (3) consecutive days, unless specifically authorized by the Commission.
2. Entertainment, performances and/or similar gatherings since these are considered accessory (customary, subordinate, and incidental) to a fairground.
3. Banquets, wedding receptions, parties, entertainment, performances and/or similar gatherings conducted within a restaurant or hotel since these are considered accessory (customary, subordinate, and incidental) to the restaurant or hotel provided that no such event shall last for more than three (3) consecutive days, unless specifically authorized by the Commission.
4. Facilities specifically approved as a principal use for banquets, wedding receptions, parties, entertainment, performances and/or similar gatherings or events.
6.J.3. EVENTS FACILITY PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
1. An Event Facility may be permitted within all Zones by Special Permit.
2. The Special Permit application for an Event Facility shall include:
a. a general description of the use and the proposed events to be held;
b. the total number of events that are anticipated to be held for the future twelve (12) months;
c. an indication of the length of any one event and specifically whether any single event will last for more than three (3) consecutive days, and
d. the maximum occupancy of any building(s), and/or temporary structure(s), including but not limited to, tents, to be used for the event as determined by the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal.
3. Any temporary or permanent structure shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any property line.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.J
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
SPECIAL EVENTS
131
4. In terms of parking arrangements:
a. all parking shall be contained at the Event Facility;
b. at a minimum, there shall be one parking space for every four (4) persons based on the maximum occupancy for the location, building, site or structure as determined by the Fire Marshal, plus an additional one (1) parking space for every two (2) employees.
5. The Events Facility shall conform to all health standards, including securing all required permits and approvals from the Northeast District Department of Health and compliance, if necessary, with the Mass Gathering Statute (CGS Section 19a-435, et seq.).
6. In deciding whether to grant a Special Permit for an Events Facility, the Commission shall consider:
a. the Special Permit Standards set forth in Section 9.D,
b. any applicable requirements of the Zone in which the event facility is located, and
c. the minimum requirements of this Section.
7. In granting approval of a Special Permit for an Events Facility, the Commission may attach reasonable conditions necessary to preserve and protect public health, safety, convenience, welfare, neighborhood character, public safety and property values of the surrounding area including limiting:
a. the maximum number of Events held per month or per year;
b. the types of Events;
c. the hours of operation of the Events;
d. the maximum number of persons attending the Event; and/or
e. any other factor the Commission determines reasonably necessary based on the characteristics of the event facility and planned events.
8. Granting of the Special Permit shall authorize the Zoning Enforcement Official to issue a Zoning Permit valid for the term of five (5) years from date of issuance.
6.K BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
DONATION BINS
132
6.K. DONATION BINS
6.K.1. PURPOSES
The intent of this re
The intent of this regulagulattion is to ion is to aallow bins for the pllow bins for the puurrpose of acceptingpose of accepting ddononations while allowing the Town to ations while allowing the Town to mamaiintain control oventain control over r placement and site placement and site cleanliness.cleanliness.
6.K.2. STANDARDS
1. Donation bins may be established in the Planned Commercial Zone or at the Transfer Station of the Town of Brooklyn provided that:
a. Such donation bin is accessory to a commercial building or Transfer Station,
b. Landowner permission has been granted in writing, and
c. A Zoning Permit for such has been issued.
2. The application for a Zoning Permit shall include contact information for the owner of the bin and the property owner and shall include a $500 financial guarantee to allow the Town to have the donation bin removed if any violation of this section of the Regulations is not resolved following notice from the Town to either party. The $500 financial guarantee shall not be collected from an organization that is tax-exempt under section 501(c)(3) of Title 26 of the United States Code.
3. Donation bins shall be constructed of steel or fireproof material and be designed in a way that is weatherproof and secured from entry by the public.
4. Donation bins shall be no larger than seventy-two (72) inches tall, seventy-two (72) inches wide, and sixty (60) inches deep.
5. All donation bins shall clearly display a notice in block letters at least two inches high on the side of the bin where the donation is likely to be made stating:
a. The name of the organization maintaining the bin,
b. Whether the collections is for a charitable purpose, and
c. The name and telephone number of the owner of such bin.
6. The location of the donation bin shall not be located in an existing required parking space or required landscaping area, shall not occupy or obstruct an existing travel or pedestrian way, or interfere with parking, traffic flow, pedestrian traffic, or sightlines.
7. Donation bins shall not be located in a front yard nor in any setbacks unless otherwise provided by these regulations.
8. Donation bins shall be maintained in good condition, free from damage, weathered surfaces and corrosion.
9. Donation bins shall be emptied at regular intervals so that there is sufficient storage space in the bin for the public to place new donations.
10. Items left outside of the donation bins shall be removed from sight within 24 hours of being placed there.
11. Donation bins shall not be allowed on vacant lots or lots where a commercial building is unoccupied. Should a building become vacant after siting of a donation bin, the bin shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) days.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.L
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
VENDORS AND AGRICULTURAL BUSINESSES
133
6.L. VENDORS AND AGRICULTURAL BUSINESSES
6.L.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to regulate the location and operation of itinerant vendors, seasonal vendors, farmers’ markets, farm stands, and farm wineries and breweries in order to protect public safety and protect property values in the Town of Brooklyn as well as to promote and encourage agricultural businesses in the Town of Brooklyn.
6.L.2. ITINERANT VENDORS
1. Itinerant vendors may be permitted by the ZEO within the Planned Commercial and Restricted Business zones in accordance with the requirements of this Section and written permission of the property owner.
2. Itinerant vendors are subject to the following conditions:
a. Products shall only be dispensed or displayed from a mobile trailer, van, table, or tent designed for the product, which occupies an area no greater than 120 square feet and is no higher than 10 ft.
b. All products or equipment shall be removed daily.
c. Operation shall be limited to the hours between sunrise and sunset.
d. Connection to any utilities, lighting of any type, emission of any sound or distracting displays is prohibited.
e. Sales of food and beverages require a permit from the Northeast District Department of Health.
f. All permits are to be available for inspection during operating hours.
g. An Itinerant Vendor shall be allowed one A-frame sign (2 ft. x 3 ft.), placed so traffic and pedestrian safety are not affected.
3. An application for a Zoning Permit for an Itinerant Vendor shall include:
a. Complete Vendor Permit application form including signature of property owner.
b. Zoning Permit fee.
c. Sketch plan of the property to scale showing vendor location, traffic flow and all other uses.
4. An Itinerant Vendor Zoning Permit shall be valid for a period of seven (7) calendar days.
6.L.3. SEASONAL VENDORS
1. Seasonal vendors may be permitted by Special Permit within the Planned Commercial and Restricted Business zones in accordance with this Section.
2. General Provisions:
a. Products may only be dispensed or displayed from a temporary structure, trailer, van, or tent occupying an area no greater than 250 square feet with a height proportional to size.
b. Temporary structures shall adhere to State and local building codes.
c. Sales of food and beverages require a permit from the Northeast District Department of Health.
d. At least eight (8) dedicated parking spaces are required.
e. Any signage shall conform with the following:
• No more than one (1) sign for each bordering road.
• The area of any sign shall not exceed 8 square feet (16 SF for a two sided sign).
• Signs must be anchored or supported (for safety).
f. No sound or light emitting beyond property boundaries is permitted.
6.L BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
VENDORS AND AGRICULTURAL BUSINESSES
134
3. Application Requirements - An application for a Special Permit for a Seasonal Vendor shall be in accordance with Section 9.D plus the following requirements.
a. The site plan shall show:
• vehicle entrances and exits,
• traffic flow,
• customer facilities (i.e. waiting areas for window service, benches, tables, waste containers etc.),
• a sketch of the sign showing size and location, and
• any proposed lighting fixtures.
b. The site plan shall include a landscaping plan showing permanent and seasonal plantings improving the aesthetics of the total site.
c. Approval of the site plan as to pedestrian and traffic safety by a Resident Trooper.
4. A Special Permit for a Seasonal Vendor shall be valid for a period of 180 consecutive days in a single calendar year.
6.L.4. FARMERS’ MARKET
1. Seasonal outdoor farmers’ markets may be permitted by the ZEO on a temporary basis on property located in the Planned Commercial Zone, Village Center Zone, or on Town owned property provided:
a. Items on display and offered for sale shall be primarily agricultural produce and goods and may include additional processed or prepared food and craft items.
b. A minimum of one (1) off street parking space shall be provided for every one hundred (100) square feet of vendor display area. The parking spaces shall be located so that vehicles can safely back out without entering a travel lane.
2. An application for a Zoning Permit for an Farmers’ Market shall include:
a. Complete Farmers’ Market Zoning Permit application form including signature of property owner.
b. Zoning Permit fee.
c. Sketch plan of the property showing vendor display areas and parking traffic flow and all other uses.
3. A Zoning Permit for a Farmers’ Market shall be valid for a period of three (3) years.
6.L.5. FARM STANDS
1. Farm stands for the sale of local farm produce that are constructed so as to be readily removable are permitted as of right (no zoning permit required) with the following conditions:
a. Items offered for sale shall be limited to regionally grown agricultural produce and goods.
b. The farm stand may be located within the building setbacks but shall be located entirely on the lot.
c. The farm stand shall not create a nuisance or unsafe conditions.
d. The farm stand shall not operate for more than 6 consecutive months per year and shall be removed when it is not in operation.
2. Farm stands of permanent construction are permitted on farms with the issuance of a Zoning Permit based on the following conditions:
a. Items offered for sale shall primarily be regionally grown agricultural produce and goods and may include additional processed or prepared food and craft items.
b. If a detached structure, such structure shall be located not less than 20 feet from any LOT line and shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
c. A minimum of 50’ of frontage is required on a public or private road.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.L
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
VENDORS AND AGRICULTURAL BUSINESSES
135
d. A minimum of one (1) off street parking space shall be provided for every one hundred (100) square feet of display area. The parking spaces shall be located so that vehicles can safely back out without entering a travel lane.
e. The farm stand shall not create a nuisance or unsafe conditions.
6.L.6. FARM WINERIES AND BREWERIES
1. Farm wineries and breweries consistent with CT General statutes 30-16 (e) and (f) (i.e. manufacturers permit for farm winery and farm brewery) are allowed in the RA Zone by Special Permit in accordance with Sec. 9.D.
6.M BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
136
6.M. TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
6.M.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to establish guidelines and standards for the siting of telecommunication facilities in Brooklyn in order to protect the public safety and general welfare and, through design, siting, and screening, to minimize any adverse visual and operational effects.
6.M.2. FACILITIES ALLOWED
6.M.2.1. FACILITIES ALLOWED WITH NO PERMIT
1. Residential Household Antenna - An antenna used solely for residential household television and radio reception provided any such antenna meets required setbacks and does not exceed the maximum total building height for the zone in which it is located.
2. Residential Satellite Dish Antenna - A satellite dish antenna in a residential zone provided:
a. the dish antenna measures 1 meter (3.28 feet) or less in diameter.
b. a building-mounted installation complies with setback and total building height standards for a principal structure.
c. a ground-mounted installation is located in the rear yard and complies with setback and total building height standards for an accessory structure.
6.M.2.2. FACILITIES ALLOWED WITH ZONING PERMIT
1. Commercial Satellite Dish Antenna - A ground-mounted or roof-mounted satellite dish antenna in an Industrial zone provided:
a. the dish antenna measures 2 meters (6.56 feet) or less in diameter.
b. the dish antenna is screened from public view to the extent feasible.
2. Amateur Radio Antenna - An amateur radio antenna owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC provided:
a. the antenna is located on a residential property.
b. a ground-mounted installation is located in the rear yard.
c. a building-mounted installation is affixed to the rear of the structure.
d. any tower and antenna combination is less than 40 feet in total height and is erected no nearer to any property line than a distance equal to the vertical height of the tower and antenna.
e. The ZEO may require a safety fence or other method be established to preclude unauthorized access.
3. Existing Tower Repair - Repair of existing towers and antennas, provided there are no changes in design, height or appearance.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.M
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
137
6.M.2.3. FACILITIES ALLOWED WITH SITE PLAN REVIEW
1. Other Residential Antenna - An antenna that does not comply with Subsection 6.M.2.1 or Subsection 6.M.2.2 and is:
a. used solely for residential household television and radio reception,
b. a satellite dish antenna in a residential zone, or
c. is an amateur radio antenna owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC.
2. Commercial Satellite Dish Antenna - A ground-mounted or roof-mounted satellite dish antenna in a Business or Industrial zone that does not comply with Subsection 6.M.2.2.
6.M.2.4. FACILITIES ALLOWED WITH SPECIAL PERMIT
1. Other Antennas on Existing Structures - Any other antenna which is not attached to a tower, provided:
a. The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations;
b. The antenna complies with all applicable building codes;
c. The antenna does not extend more than 10 feet above the highest point of the structure; and
d. The antenna is completely screened or designed and installed to be architecturally compatible with the structure in question.
2. New Public Safety Tower or Antenna - A new antenna tower intended and used primarily for the purpose of police, fire, ambulance, and/or other emergency services or similar emergency communications.
3. New Tower or Antenna on Town-Owned Property - A new antenna located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the Town of Brooklyn.
4. New Tower or Antenna - Any new tower or antenna not regulated by the Connecticut Siting Council.
6.M.3. REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATIONS
1. Application Requirements
a. Each application shall include the following documentation:
• whether a licensed carrier or an authorized emergency services organization is either an applicant or a co-applicant on the application.
• that the proposed facility will not cause any interference with any emergency or public safety radio system.
• how the proposed facility will accommodate emergency service communications for police, fire and ambulance services or a statement from each organization that such accommodation is not desired.
• Identification of anticipated noise emission from equipment and appropriate steps to provide soundproofing so that any noise above ambient levels is inaudible at the property line.
b. Each application shall include documents indicating:
• that all towers, antennas, and/or equipment to be installed meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas.
• That, if such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this regulation shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance.
c. Each application shall include a written maintenance plan for the site, including, but not limited to, all facilities including landscaping at the site.
2. Visual Considerations
a. Towers and antenna and appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color or other such finish as determined by the Commission so as to minimize visual obtrusiveness.
b. The design of the equipment, buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding
6.M BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
138
buildings.
c. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
d. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority and unless specifically disclosed to and authorized by the Commission.
e. No signs shall be allowed on any antenna, facility, or tower unless required by an overriding legal authority, except that a 2 square foot sign is required to be posted showing the emergency contact and telephone number.
3. Equipment Considerations
a. Any equipment cabinets or other appurtenances used in association with the tower or antenna shall be clearly shown as part of the application including how such equipment is designed to blend with the surrounding landscape or be obscured from adjacent properties and streets
b. Security fencing, no more than six feet in height, may be required by the Commission around the antenna, tower, and equipment depending on the nature of the installation.
c. Landscaping, including buffering, may be required by the Commission around the antenna, tower, and equipment depending on the nature of the installation.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.M
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
139
6.M.4. TELECOMMUNICATION PRINCIPLES
With regard to the siting and permitting of telecommunication facilities, the Town of Brooklyn will seek to:
1. Provide for wireless communication towers, antennas and facilities while utilizing careful design, siting and screening to protect neighborhoods and minimize adverse visual and operational effects.
2. Be consistent with the provisions of the Telecommunications Act in terms of not discriminating among providers of functionally equivalent services, prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, or regulating the placement, construction, and modification of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with FCC regulations concerning such emissions.
3. Minimize visual and other impacts by:
a. Minimizing the number of towers and/or antennas needed in the future.
b. Encouraging suitable design measures to minimize adverse visual effects of wireless communication facilities.
c. Protecting historic and residential areas from potential adverse impacts of wireless communication facilities.
d. Encouraging joint use of new or existing towers and facilities.
e. Encouraging use of nonresidential buildings and structures, such as water storage tanks.
f. Avoiding potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of towers.
4. Implement the following siting preferences (listed from most preferred to least preferred):
a. On existing structures such as nonresidential buildings or facades, water towers or tanks, utility poles, steeples, clock or bell towers, monuments, billboards, chimneys, bridges, grain elevators, and silos except those within or in view from designated historic districts or village districts.
b. On existing or approved towers.
c. On new towers located on property occupied by one or more existing towers.
d. On new towers located in Business or Industrial zones.
e. On new towers located in residential zones.
f. On new towers located within or in view from designated historic districts or village districts.
6.N BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
SMALL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
140
6.N. SMALL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
6.N.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to establish standards for the siting of small solar energy systems in Brooklyn to promote the use of solar energy while protecting property values and without impairing the appearance and character of the neighborhood.
Small solar energy systems shall be permitted as authorized in the zone.
6.N.2. ROOF-MOUNTED SYSTEMS
1. Roof-mounted small solar energy systems shall include integrated solar shingles, tiles, or panels as the surface layer of the roof structure with no additional apparent change in relief or separate flush or rack-mounted solar panels mechanically fastened to and/or secured with ballast on the roof surface. Separate flush or rack-mounted small solar energy systems installed on the roof of a building or structure shall not:
a. Project vertically more than 4 inches above the peak of the sloped roof to which it is attached; or
b. Project vertically more than five (5) feet above a flat roof installation.
6.N.3. GROUND-MOUNTED SYSTEMS AND OTHER TYPES OF MOUNTS
1. The total height of the solar energy system, including any mounts shall not exceed 18 feet above the ground at maximum height. If the solar energy system is intended to provide power for outdoor lighting, the system shall not extend higher than the permitted height of the structure to which it is attached and/or inter-connected.
2. No solar energy system shall be located in the front yard. Solar energy systems shall comply with all standard setback requirements unless waived by the Commission.
3. Solar energy systems shall be screened from view from a public right-of-way. The Commission may require screening with any method determined to be appropriate for the location in the neighborhood.
4. Panels shall be mounted onto a pole, rack or suitable foundation, in accordance with manufacturer specifications, to ensure the safe operation and stability of the system. The mounting structure (fixed or tracking capable) shall be comprised of materials approved by the manufacturer, which are able to fully support the system components and withstand adverse weather conditions.
5. Any electrical wiring used in the system shall be underground (trenched) except where wiring is brought together for inter-connection to system components and/or the local utility power grid.
6. No ground-mounted small solar energy systems shall be affixed to a fence.
6.N.4. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
1. Glare generated by the solar energy system that creates a nuisance or safety hazard must be mitigated or directed away from an adjoining property or adjacent road.
2. The small solar energy system shall remain painted or finished the color or finish that was originally applied by the manufacturer.
3. Abandoned, obsolete, or unused solar energy systems shall be removed by the property owner.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.O
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
EXCAVATION OPERATIONS
141
6.O. EXCAVATION OPERATIONS
6.O.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Sect
This Section of the Regulations ion of the Regulations is intendis intended toed to regulate the fillinregulate the fillingg and removand removal of earth, sand, al of earth, sand, stone, gravel, soil, stone, gravel, soil, mminerainerals, loam, ls, loam, ffill, clay, peat mosill, clay, peat mosss,, and other similar and other similar susubstances, so as to prevent conditionbstances, so as to prevent conditionss in the Town of in the Town of BBrorooklyn detrimental to toklyn detrimental to the public she public safety, health, and geneafety, health, and general welfaral welfare, ire, including, but not lincluding, but not limited to, mited to, tthe loss of land he loss of land forfor subsequent uses, subsequent uses, lowelowering ring of propertof propertyy values, traffic havalues, traffic hazzaards, nuisances,rds, nuisances, unsunsigightly operationshtly operations,, erosionerosion, , dangerous dangerous oopen pits, stagnanpen pits, stagnant t water bodies, water bodies, andand the the unintended unintended depletion of natural redepletion of natural resourcessources. . TheseThese regulations regulations are desare designed to prigned to provide for the reovide for the re--esestablishment of tablishment of ground ground levellevel, , protectiprotectioon of the area by sun of the area by suiittable cover able cover and to and to eensnsure thature that, following , following excavation operaexcavation operattionsions,, land will bland will be e usable for usable for subsequent subsequent allowable uallowable uses.ses.
6.O.2. APPLICABILITY
1. This Section of the Regulations shall apply to any “excavation operation” as that term is defined in these Regulations.
2. Excavation operations are only permitted in the RA Zone.
3. This Section shall not apply to:
a. Excavation of less than 100 cubic yards of material over a 24-month period from a lot.
b. The construction of a wall, sewer or water line, septic system, swimming pool, fence, sidewalk, driveway or parking area incidental either to an existing building or to a building for which a Zoning Permit and a Building Permit (where required by the Building Code) have been issued; or any work incidental to landscape gardening on the property.
c. Excavation involving the movement of earth products from one part of the premises to another part of the same premises, when such removal/filling is made for agricultural purposes or landscaping.
d. Necessary excavation, grading, removal or filling incidental to the construction or alteration of a building or structure for which a Zoning Permit and, where required, a Building Permit has been issued.
e. Necessary excavation, grading, removal or filling incidental to the construction or alteration of a public highway, or a street in a subdivision approved by the Commission and filed in the Office of the Town Clerk in accordance with the Brooklyn Subdivision Regulations, but specifically excluding excavation operations elsewhere on-site.
6.O BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
EXCAVATION OPERATIONS
142
6.O.3. PRE-EXISTING EXCAVATION OPERATIONS
1. After October 15, 2019, there shall be no excavation operations on any premises except upon the issuance of a Special Permit in accordance with this Section.
2. Any excavation operation in existence in the Town of Brooklyn as of October 15, 2019 shall apply for a Special Permit: 1) on or before the date of next renewal if a special permit has been issued or, 2) within three months of the effective date if the operation is unpermitted. The application shall comply with the informational requirements of the Regulation. The Special Permit shall not be denied for a lack of conformance to the current standards of the Regulation as to location in violation of setback requirements. Any excavation operation in existence as of the effective date of this Regulation amendment shall not be enlarged or expanded in area or volume beyond that existing as of the effective date, except in accordance with a Special Permit issued pursuant to these Regulations.
3. Excavation operations in existence as of the effective date of this Regulation may continue operations by submitting a Special Permit application in accordance herewith. Such operation shall be bound by all procedural requirements hereof and shall conform to all operating requirements contained herein. Such application shall include a plan depicting stages by which existing areas of active excavation shall be brought into conformance herewith. The Commission may take into consideration all documented violations of any prior Special Permits in its imposition of conditions of approval of a renewal application, or of a denial of the application for renewal.
4. This Section shall: 1) not be construed to require any alteration of any area already restored in accordance with earth removal regulations previously in existence and, 2) shall not relieve any applicant from its obligation to restore in the future in accordance with this Regulation.
6.O.4. STANDARDS FOR EXCAVATION OPERATIONS
All excavation operations shall comply with the special permit considerations and criteria, as appropriate, of Section 9.D of these Regulations and the following minimum requirements:
1. Separation to Groundwater - The minimum elevation of the excavation shall be no less than five feet above seasonal high groundwater and no less than 6 feet above ledge. Approval of the creation of a pond or water body requires a separate vote of the Commission.
2. Area of Operation – The Commission may require project stages to limit the amount of land to be denuded, stripped, or otherwise left in an unrestored condition at any one time. Such requirements shall be based upon the character of the neighborhood, the topography of the site, the potential for erosion by wind or water, unique site conditions, and the recommendation of the Town Engineer or such other State or local agency, or special advisor, as may provide advice to the Commission.
3. Hours of Operation - Excavation operations, including loading and delivery of material, shall not commence before 7:00 a.m. and terminate not later than 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, nor commence before 7:00 a.m. and terminate not later than 12:00 p.m. on Saturday. No operations are permitted on Sunday or the following holidays: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas Day. The foregoing shall be deemed to be the standard maximum days and hours of operation in the absence of any condition in the Special Permit to the contrary. The Commission may require or permit greater or lesser days or hours of operation depending on:
a. the use of adjoining or nearby properties and of properties along the roads of the anticipated haul pattern;
b. the pattern and character of traffic on the roads of the anticipated haul pattern, including times of commuter traffic, school buses, and truck or other traffic from other land uses in the area;
c. the topography of the property, and its ability to contain or deflect noise and dust; and
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.O
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
EXCAVATION OPERATIONS
143
d. the presence or absence of specific measures to control noise in the excavation operation.
4. Property Line Setbacks - All property boundaries shall be clearly and permanently marked in the field. There shall be no excavation operations within fifty (50') feet of any property line or of a street line, except that the Commission may modify such buffer where the re-use plan indicates that excavation closer to the property line would facilitate a valid successive use of the property. Where the use of an abutting property is similar or compatible to the proposed use or where the topography of the property is appropriate, and when abutters have provided their consent in writing, the Commission may allow material to be removed to the property line to conform to existing or proposed grades.
5. On-Site Processing – No on-site processing of material may be permitted unless such use is separately approved under Section 6.P – Earth Materials Processing.
6. Drainage - During the period of excavation, provision shall be made for proper drainage to avoid uncontrolled stormwater runoff and unnecessary erosion and sedimentation. The drainage system may include sedimentation basins designed in accordance with the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, as amended. The drainage system shall, where recommended by the Town Engineer, include detention basins designed to prevent any increased rate of discharge due to the additional runoff caused by the excavation. The effectiveness of the drainage facilities, including vegetative cover, shall be assured for a 24-month period following completion of each stage of the operation, and no financial guarantee for such stage shall be released until the expiration of such time. The Commission may extend such 24-month period for good cause, such as the failure of the vegetative cover to become established, unusual weather conditions, failure of the drainage design, and similar factors.
7. Nuisance Avoidance - In any area where the Commission reasonably finds that there is a need to minimize the nuisance of noise, flying dust and rock, and the accumulation of ground or surface-water, the Commission may require any or all of the following measures:
a. Limitations on the height of stockpiles.
b. Provisions for watering/wetting of stockpiles, haul roads, or working surfaces/areas; or covering or temporary mulching of stockpiles.
c. Construction of noise buffers by fencing, earth mounding, vegetative screening, a particular orientation for working faces of the excavation, or other similar measures.
8. Fences and Barricades - Snow fence shall be used to clearly delineate the boundaries of the area of operation. Where necessary to protect the safety of persons entering the permit premises, the Commission may require fences, gates, or barricades to control or prevent vehicular access.
9. Truck Access - Truck access roads to and within the permit premises shall be so arranged as to eliminate danger to traffic and to minimize the nuisance to surrounding property owners. The maximum grade of truck access roads shall not exceed 12%. Such access roads shall have a dustless surface for the first three hundred (300') feet from the public street, which is to be maintained in good condition at all times. There shall be an anti-tracking pad adjacent to the street, or such other additional or alternative measures as the Commission may approve upon the written request of the applicant to prevent the tracking, washing, spillage or other deposition of material on the street.
10. Warning Signs - The applicant shall make provision for such highway warning signs as are required by the Department of Transportation or the Board of Selectmen.
11. Sale to the Public - The sale of earth products to the general public on the premises is permitted where and as designated in the application and approved by the Commission.
12. Use of Buildings - The use of any proposed buildings on the permit premises during the term of the excavation operation shall be limited to sanitary facilities, the storage of tools, equipment and materials essential to the operation, and other uses integral to the operation, and may allow human habitation by the landowner, his next of kin, or any employees of the operation in accordance with other applicable provisions of these Regulations.
6.O BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
EXCAVATION OPERATIONS
144
13. Maximum Finished Slope - Removal of material shall not result in a grade steeper than 3 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical (3:1) except for areas of ledge outcrop. Where the use of an abutting property is similar or compatible to the proposed use or where the topography of the property is appropriate, the Commission may allow grades as steep as 2 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical (2:1). All slopes shall be protected both during and after disturbance by appropriate erosion control devices or measures.
14. Restoration - As each stage of the excavation operation is completed, that portion of the permit premises shall be graded to its final contour lines as shown on the plans, as approved by the Commission, and a layer of arable topsoil, of a quality approved by the Zoning Agent, shall be spread over the previously excavated areas, except exposed rock surfaces, to a minimum depth of six (6") inches. The areas shall be mulched and seeded in accordance with the recommendations of the New York State Revegetation Procedures Manual for Surface Mining Reclamation, as amended, no later than the end of the growing season for the calendar year following completion of excavation operations. The cover vegetation shall be stabilized and maintained by the permittee for a period of twenty-four (24) months following seeding. The Commission may authorize different restoration vegetation for areas which are to be used for different future land uses specified in the restoration and reuse plan.
15. Topsoil to be Retained - The applicant shall retain A and B horizons of surface soil on-site as necessary to implement the restoration and reuse plan. If the A and B horizons of surface soil are mixed during removal, it will be classified as B horizon for the restoration plan and A horizon soils must be imported. No topsoil shall be removed unless the permittee has demonstrated that there is sufficient soil to cover the site to a depth of 6”.
16. Mining Below Grade Prohibited - Removal or disturbance of any material below the minimum elevation shown on the final approved plan is prohibited.
17. Visual Appearance - Provision shall be made for vegetative screening, fencing, and/or earthen berms for visual buffers along the property and street lines as determined to be necessary by the Commission.
6.O.5. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
The owner of the land or agent seeking a Special Permit for an excavation operation in accordance with this Section shall submit the following items in addition to the requirements of Section 9.D of these Regulations:
1. A plan of the permit premises prepared by a professional engineer and a land surveyor licensed in the State of Connecticut which shall:
a. Show the boundaries of the entire parcel of land owned by the applicant, with the permit premises delineated.
b. Be drawn to a standard scale or scales appropriate for the extent of the site.
c. Indicate existing contour lines and proposed final contour lines of the project area, as well as all area within two hundred (200') feet thereof, or such greater distance as the Commission may require to establish conformance with the criteria of this Section. Said plan shall also indicate the location of surface and determinable subsurface rock and the seasonal high groundwater table in the area to be excavated.
d. Indicate bench marks established from USGS monumentation or by a bench mark established on site.
e. Show the location and elevation of all existing and proposed streets, roads or highways on and within five hundred (500') feet of the permit premises, or such greater distance as the Commission may require to establish conformance with the criteria of this Section.
f. Indicate the existing and proposed drainage of the permit premises including drainage provisions during the excavation or filling phases.
g. Show all adjacent property owners, and indicate the names and mailing addresses of all property owners within one thousand (1,000) feet of the permit premises, as such names and mailing addresses are shown on the current records of the Assessor.
h. Locate all structures, watercourses, utilities, rights-of-way, and easements on the permit premises, and areas which are wooded or open field.
i. Provide details of regrading and revegetation of the permit premises, including the number, size at planting, and location of all landscaping material and seed mix for all restored area.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.O
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
EXCAVATION OPERATIONS
145
2. A statement and map describing the stages of operation and restoration by area and time sequence.
3. A list of the number and types of machinery to be used on the premises and for hauling; the proposed hours of operation, and the location and type of any building existing or to be erected on the permit premises.
4. An erosion and sediment control plan in accordance with Section 7.F.5 of these Regulations identifying:
a. Routes water will follow both during and after work is completed.
b. Temporary measures, both mechanical and vegetative, for erosion control.
c. Measures planned for keeping sediment on the site.
d. Any permanent mechanical measures needed to control water runoff and thus erosion and sediment.
5. A restoration and re-use plan showing the final configuration of the terrain. Such restoration and re-use plan shall include:
a. Alterations to the land resulting from the excavation operation.
b. Proposed final condition of the land and its usability for future land uses in accordance with the zoning of the premises, based on the remaining natural resource conditions after restoration.
c. Evidence (such as borings) that five feet of cover will remain over bedrock to permit development of the premises in accordance with its zoning, including adequate depth for drainage, septic systems, and other utility installation.
d. Final slopes compatible with future land use expectations.
e. Provision for permanent vegetative cover in accordance with Section 6.O.4.13 intended to provide long-term erosion and sedimentation control on the site following completion of excavation activities.
f. The anticipated interior haul pattern for the operations.
6. A statement of the total cubic yards of material to be removed from the site; the number of truck loads required to move such a volume of material, based on the types of trucks to be used in the excavation operation; and the approximate number of trips per day, based on the probable seasons of operation and the proposed hours of operation. The Commission may additionally require the submission of an off-site traffic routing plan and a traffic analysis prepared by traffic engineer.
7. Evidence of the approval of the excavation operation, where required, by the Brooklyn Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, and the final report of that Commission, as required by CGS Section 8-3c.
8. An application fee in accordance with Town Ordinances.
6.O BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
EXCAVATION OPERATIONS
146
6.O.6. CRITERIA FOR DECISION
In reviewing an application for a Special Permit pursuant to this Section, the Commission shall consider the following criteria:
1. The application shall contain all information required by this Section, and the number of copies required, and said information has been prepared by persons possessing the necessary expertise to prepare it. Information shall be presented with adequate clarity and professionalism to permit the Commission to understand it and determine compliance with these Regulations. The presentation of a complete application, as described herein, is the obligation of the applicant, and failure to meet these criteria shall be grounds for denial without prejudice to future, complete applications.
2. The application shall conform with applicable provisions of these Regulations. Further, the application shall conform to the Brooklyn Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations, as evidenced by the submission of an Inland Wetlands Permit issued by the Brooklyn Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, where required; and all relevant provisions of the United States Code and the Connecticut General statutes and regulations adopted pursuant to them (such as water diversion permits from the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection or wetlands permits from the U.S. Army Corps. of Engineers), whether or not cited in these Regulations.
3. No excavation operation shall be approved where there is substantial evidence, on the record, that such operation poses a demonstrable risk of degradation of surface- or ground-water supplies arising out of any element of the proposed use or site plan.
4. The effect of such removal or filling on the surrounding property and the future usefulness of the premises when the operation is completed.
5. The traffic and safety impacts of the haul pattern, traffic routing plan, and traffic analysis.
6. The impact of noise, dust, erosion, blasting and other proposed activities on neighbors.
7. The environmental impact of the use, including impacts on ground-and surface-water quality and quantity, wildlife habitat, aquifer protection, endangered species and similar considerations.
8. Compliance with Section 7.F (Performance Standards) of these Regulations.
9. The adequacy of the provisions for a dustless surface on access roads, and the minimization of the nuisance from noise, flying dust and rock.
10. The adequacy of vegetative screening, fencing, earth mounding for safety, visual and noise buffers along property and street lines.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.O
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
EXCAVATION OPERATIONS
147
6.O.7. FOLLOWING APPROVAL
1. Financial Guarantee Required–
a. Before excavation operations commence, the owner shall post a financial guarantee with the Treasurer of the Town of Brooklyn in a manner and form consistent with CT General statutes Sec. 8-3, as amended. The amount of such financial guarantee shall be calculated by the applicant’s engineer so as not to exceed the anticipated actual costs the implementation of erosion and sediment controls including final erosion and sedimentation measures plus a contingency amount not to exceed ten per cent of such costs. The amount of such financial guarantee shall be approved by the Town Engineer. Such financial guarantee shall be accompanied by a written agreement of terms and conditions that shall be approved by the Commission’s legal counsel.
b. The applicant may request a release of all or a portion of the financial guarantee as provided in CT General statutes Sec. 8-3 (g)(3), as amended. Any request shall be accompanied by an estimate of the cost of all remaining restoration prepared by the permittee’s engineer. At all times, the amount of the bond retained shall be sufficient to restore the site.
c. The Town of Brooklyn shall be authorized to withdraw funds or otherwise call the bond whenever the owner or operator fails to perform restorative work required to prevent environmental and neighborhood degradation following notice to the permittee. Such circumstances may include, but are not limited to, abandonment of the excavation operation by the owner or operator or failure to satisfactorily perform restoration work following revocation or termination of the permit by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Inspection - The Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Official may inspect the permit premises for compliance with these Regulations, the approved plans, and any conditions of the permit upon notice to the landowner.
3. Enforcement -
a. Any permit issued hereunder shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations.
b. Should the Zoning Enforcement Official (“ZEO”), based on an on-site inspection, determine that the holder of the Special Permit may have exceeded the approved limits of the excavation, the ZEO may require field staking of reference points by a licensed surveyor and/or submission of an updated plan by a professional engineer at the ZEO’s determination as to what information is required. Such information shall be provided by the holder of the Special Permit within 30 days of written notice of the requirement of the field staking or an updated plan, or both. In the event that the holder of the Special Permit shall fail, neglect or refuse to provide the required information, then the ZEO may contract separately for such work and use the financial guarantee as provided by the holder of the Special Permit to pay for it. If it is determined that the excavation does exceed that authorized by the Special Permit issued by the Commission, the holder of the Special Permit shall apply for a new Special Permit for such work within 30 days of written notice of the exceedance issued by the ZEO. In the event that the holder of the Special Permit does not apply for a new Special Permit within 30 days from the date of the notice from the ZEO, the ZEO may issue a cease and desist order and/or may pursue enforcement penalties as provided by the Connecticut General statutes.
4. Permit Expiration and Renewal –
a. The permit holder shall apply for such renewal no less than forty-five (45) days, nor more than ninety (90) days, prior to the expiration of the current permit.
b. A renewal fee shall be submitted in accordance with Brooklyn Town Ordinance 20-1.
c. Permit renewals shall be received and processed in accordance with CGS 8-7d (b).
d. Renewal applications shall include evidence of compliance herewith, including, but not limited to, an updated survey depicting the existing contours, as compared to the proposed contours; recent publicly available aerial photographs or orthophotos of the excavation area (such as Google, Pictometry, USDA, and State of CT flyovers) taken during the permit period; water quality or noise test data; and the like.
6.O BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
EXCAVATION OPERATIONS
148
The burden is on the applicant to provide a complete and timely renewal application.
e. The Commission may require additional information if the renewal will involve changes from the original permit.
f. The Commission may also impose additional conditions on, or modifications to, the original permit which appear necessary or desirable in light of the history of the operation.
g. Any permit or renewal thereof shall expire two years following its date of issuance.
h. The Commission may authorize renewal of any permit for additional periods of not more than two (2) years, without an additional public hearing, if the excavation operation is proceeding in accordance with all these Regulations and any permit issued hereunder.
5. Conformance - All aspects of the excavation operation shall strictly comply with the plans and other supporting information submitted, as the same may be modified by the Commission, and shall comply at all times with the provisions of these Regulations.
6. Revisions to Approved Plan - Nothing herein shall prevent the Commission from approving a revised plan, without a public hearing, depicting minor modifications, or depicting reductions to the scope of work originally approved (but not expanding or extending it), provided that the financial guarantee required in Section 6.O.7.1 shall not be released until all required provisions of these Regulations have been met, and provided further that any significant modification, or any expansion or extension of the operation shall require a public hearing prior to approval.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.P
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
EARTH MATERIALS PROCESSING
149
6.P. EARTH MATERIALS PROCESSING
6.P.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of t
This Section of the Rehe Regulgulations ations iis intended to reguls intended to regulaatte thee the processiprocessing ng ofof eearth, sand, stonarth, sand, stone, gravel, soil, mine, gravel, soil, mineerals, rals, loam,loam, fill,fill, cclay, peat moss, and other similar substances, lay, peat moss, and other similar substances, toto prevent conditions inprevent conditions in the Town of Brooklythe Town of Brooklyn detrimentn detrimental al to the public safety, health, and geneto the public safety, health, and general wral welfelfare, inare, inccluding, but not limluding, but not limiitted toed to, lowerin, lowering of g of prproperty values, toperty values, traffic raffic hazards, nuishazards, nuisaances, nces, noisenoise, and , and ununsightly operations. sightly operations.
6.P.2. APPLICABILITY
1. A Special Permit is required under this section for Earth Materials Processing. Such Special Permit may be sought simultaneous to an application for a Special Permit for Excavation Operations, but such Special Permit applications shall be considered separate.
2. Earth Materials Processing is only permitted in the RA Zone.
3. Earth Materials Processing is only permitted on sites with a valid Special Permit for Excavation Operations.
6.P.3. STANDARDS FOR EARTH MATERIALS PROCESSING
All earth materials processing shall comply with the special permit considerations and criteria, as appropriate, of Section 9.D of these Regulations and the following minimum requirements:
1. Earth materials processing shall be restricted to screening, sifting, sorting, washing, and crushing.
2. Material processed on-site shall be material that is excavated on-site.
3. All processed materials must be clean as defined by CT DEEP and free from any solid waste.
4. No processing of material shall occur within one hundred (100') feet of any property line or of any street. The Commission may increase or decrease such minimum setback depending on the projected life span of the processing operation; the character and use of adjacent or nearby properties; the topography of the property, and its ability to contain or deflect noise and dust; and the presence or absence of specific measures to control noise in the excavation operation.
5. No fixed or portable machinery shall be erected, located, or maintained within (500) feet from any residence.
6. Any access road within the area of operations shall have a dustless surface which is to be maintained at all times.
6.P BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS Effective July 30, 2020
EARTH MATERIALS PROCESSING
150
7. Screening, sifting, sorting, washing, crushing, or other forms of processing, including loading and delivery of material, shall not commence before 7:00 a.m. and terminate not later than 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, nor commence before 7:00 a.m. and terminate not later than 12:00 p.m. on Saturday. No operations are permitted on Sunday or the following holidays: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas Day. The foregoing shall be deemed to be the standard maximum days and hours of operation in the absence of any condition in the Special Permit to the contrary. The Commission may require or permit greater or lesser days or hours of operation depending on:
a. the use of adjoining or nearby properties and of properties along the roads of the anticipated haul pattern;
b. the pattern and character of traffic on the roads of the anticipated haul pattern, including times of commuter traffic, school buses, and truck or other traffic from other land uses in the area;
c. the topography of the property, and its ability to contain or deflect noise and dust; and
d. the presence or absence of specific measures to control noise in the processing operation.
8. Measures to the satisfaction of the Commission, shall be taken to minimize nuisance from noise, dust, vibration and flying debris; all trucks shall be covered for offsite transport; suitable fences or other barricades shall be provided around the processing operation to protect pedestrians and vehicles.
9. Locations for access roads, stockpiles, processing equipment and equipment storage shall be selected to minimize effects to surrounding properties.
10. The processing activity shall not generate, cause, or allow continuous noise measurements in excess of noise levels as follows at the property line:
a. When adjacent property is INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL - 62dba, and
b. When adjacent property is RESIDENTIAL - 55dba.
These standards may be exceeded (to the appropriate Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) standard) when adjacent uses are considered by the Commission. Testing per the DEP standard may be required for any change to equipment and/or complaints about change in decibels.
6.P.4. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
The owner of the land or agent seeking a Special Permit for an earth materials processing in accordance with this Section shall submit, in addition to the requirements of Section 9.D of these Regulations, a plan depicting the proposed location of such processing equipment, equipment storage, access roads, stockpiles, processing basins, process water source, and any related processing appurtenances.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 6.Q
Effective July 30, 2020 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
CHICKENS
151
6.Q. CHICKENS
6.Q.1. PURPOSES
The intent of this regulat
The intent of this regulationion is tis to ao allow llow foforr the the keeping of keeping of chichicckkensens aas an s an accessoryaccessory tto a residential use in the Ro a residential use in the R--10 10 and and RR--30 Zones under s30 Zones under spepecific circumstancescific circumstances.. CChhiicckkeennss aalloonnee ddoo nnoott rreeqquuiirree aa ppeerrmmiitt iinn tthhee RRAA ZZoonnee bbuutt ssttrruuccttuurreess uusseedd ttoo hhoouussee tthheemm rreeqquuiirree aa ZZoonniinngg PPeerrmmiitt..
6.Q.2. STANDARDS
Notwithstanding any other Section of these Regulations, chickens may be kept in the R-10 and R-30 Zones in accordance with the following provisions:
1. Up to six (6) chicks, pullets, and hens are allowed. Roosters and capons are not permitted.
2. The chickens shall be confined to a fenced enclosure of no more than 200 square feet in area, located in the rear yard and located at least 25 feet from any street line, at least 15 feet from any residential dwelling and at least 5 feet from any property line.
3. Any portion of the enclosure located closer than 10 feet to a property boundary or directly visible from a street line at any distance shall be screened by either a fence or a landscaped buffer of at least 4 feet in height.
4. A building shall be required for the hens and any such building shall be located at least ten feet from any lot line.
5. Such building(s) shall be constructed and all food products kept so as to prevent offensive odors and the presence of pests and predators.
6. The keeping of chickens shall be conducted in a manner consistent with and in compliance with the Public Health Code.
7.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BASIC STANDARDS Effective July 30, 2020
SIGNS
152
7. BASIC STANDARDS
7.A. SIGNS
7.A.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to promote the public safety and welfare by providing standards to control the location, area, number, illumination and overall design of signs in order to prevent undue distraction of motorists and pedestrians, to ensure compatibility of signs with permitted land uses, to provide reasonable standards by which uses within the various zones may relate their function to the public, and to aid in preserving and enhancing the aesthetic and historical values of the community.
7.A.2. NO SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED
The following signs are permitted in all Zones and do not require a Sign Permit provided they comply with the provisions indicated:
1. Residential Real Estate Signs - Temporary real estate signs for residential use shall not exceed 4 square feet, in area, indicating the sale, lease or rental of the property on which the sign is located and limited to one (1) such sign for each street frontage of a lot, parcel or tract.
2. Non-Residential Real Estate Signs - Temporary real estate signs for non-residential use shall not exceed 16 square feet, in area, indicating the sale, lease or rental of the property on which the sign is located and limited to one (1) such sign for each street frontage of a lot, parcel or tract.
3. Project Identity Signs - A sign or notice to be erected by a private agency such as a railroad, public utility or radio or television transmitter, solely for the direction, information or protection of the public on a temporary or permanent basis. The area of these signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet.
4. Construction Site Signs - Non-illuminated, two-sided construction signs not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per side may be permitted on sites undergoing new construction or renovation, provided they shall be removed within seven (7) days after completion of the construction work and not more than one (1) sign shall be placed on each street frontage of the construction site.
5. Warning, Directional, and Instructional Signs - Signs such as “No Trespassing”, “Private Road”, “One Way”, etc., and on-site directional signs, not to exceed two (2) square feet in sign area.
6. Farm Signs – One identification sign per road frontage identifying property used as a farm, not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in sign area provided such sign does not obstruct sight lines.
7. Farm Stands and Farmers’ Markets - One identification sign per stand and not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in sign area provided such sign does not obstruct sight lines.
8. Off-Site Signs - Signs that provide the means of representing directions to hard-to-find businesses from locations other than the premises of the establishment referred to on the sign. The purpose is to offer directions to the location of goods or services and not to provide detailed information. The sign is not to exceed four (4) square feet in area and not extending higher than ten (10) feet above ground level at its highest point, set back at least ten (10) feet from the public right-of-way.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 7.A
Effective July 30, 2020 BASIC STANDARDS
SIGNS
153
9. Political Signs - Political signs for the purpose of elections or referendums are permitted not to exceed 32 square feet. These signs shall be removed within 10 days of the said election or referendum.
10. Temporary Event Signs - Temporary signs related to municipal, educational, charitable, civic, or religious, events may be erected or displayed and maintained, provided that:
a. The signs shall not be erected or displayed earlier than thirty (30) days prior to the event to which they pertain;
b. The signs shall be removed no later than seven (7) days after the event;
c. The placement of signs not on the premises of the sponsor or the event shall have the consent of the property owner.
d. The area of these signs or bulletin boards shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
11. Home Office – One wall sign up to four (4) square feet in area indicating a permitted home office.
12. Window Signs - Signs erected or maintained in the window of a building visible from any public or private street or highway, provided that such sign(s) shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the area of the window surface.
7.A.3. SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED
7.A.3.1. RESIDENTIAL ZONES
1. Home Business / Home Enterprise / Adaptive Re-Use – In the RA zone, one or more signs indicating a permitted home business or home enterprise or indicating a permitted business in accordance with Section 6.B.3 (Adaptive Re-Use Of An Agricultural Building) provided that:
a. The total area of all such signs on any property shall not exceed six (6) square feet.
b. The signage shall not contain moving components.
c. Only exterior lighting may be used to illuminate the sign(s), the sole purpose being to make the sign visible in the dark, and such illumination shall:
• use only soft white light of constant intensity,
• be no greater than 150 watts,
• be downwardly directed, and
• contained on the premises.
d. Such signage may include one (1) free-standing sign, permanently secured to the ground per lot, parcel or tract and such free-standing sign shall not:
• extend higher than seven (7) feet above ground level at its highest point.
• be within the public right of way or less than 10 feet from the edge of the roadway.
• obstruct roadway sightlines or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
7.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BASIC STANDARDS Effective July 30, 2020
SIGNS
154
7.A.3.2. VILLAGE CENTER ZONE
1. Wall Sign - Wall signs (one per facade) shall be permitted provided that:
a. Such signs are mounted to the wall (roofs and overhangs not included).
b. Such signs are mounted parallel to the face of the building with no part thereof (including any illuminating devices) projecting more than 12 inches beyond the face of the building.
c. No such sign shall extend or project higher than the wall upon which it is located.
d. The aggregate area of all wall signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot per lineal foot of facade upon which it is attached up to a maximum size of 32 square feet per facade.
2. Hanging Sign – In addition to a wall sign, one (1) hanging sign per public roadway or driveway entrance provided that:
a. The area of any hanging sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet.
b. Any hanging sign shall be connected to the structure and protrude perpendicularly from the front of the business.
c. No portion of any such hanging sign shall interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
3. Free-Standing Sign - In addition to the above signage, one (1) freestanding sign shall be allowed per road frontage provided that such freestanding sign:
a. Shall be permanently secured to the ground.
b. Shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in sign area.
c. Shall not extend higher than seven (7) feet above ground level at its highest point, and shall not be within the public right of way or less than 10 feet from the edge of the roadway.
d. Shall not obstruct roadway sightlines or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
e. Shall not contain moving components.
f. May only be illuminated by exterior lighting using only soft white light no greater than 150 watts, of constant intensity, and shall be downwardly directed and contained on the premises, the sole purpose being to make a sign visible in the dark.
4. Portable Sign– In addition to the above signage, one (1) portable, sign is permitted per business, up to a maximum of three (3) such signs per lot, parcel or tract provided that:
a. The primary purpose of such sign is to identify special products and sales, not to serve as primary business identification sign.
b. The total sign area for each sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet, each side, and shall be a maximum of four (4) feet in height.
c. Such sign shall not be illuminated.
d. Such sign shall not be located within the right-of-way and shall be situated so as to avoid obstruction of roadway sightlines.
e. If a sign is placed in a location that is determined by the ZEO to compromise safe movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, the ZEO may, at his discretion, direct the business owner to remove the sign.
f. In the case of a structure that faces more than one public roadway or entrance, one additional portable sign for each such circumstance may be permitted.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 7.A
Effective July 30, 2020 BASIC STANDARDS
SIGNS
155
7.A.3.3. NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS ZONE / RESTRICTED BUSINESS ZONE:
1. Wall Sign - Wall signs shall be permitted provided that:
a. The aggregate area of all wall signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot per lineal foot of facade upon which it is attached.
b. Such signs are mounted to the wall (roofs and overhangs not included).
c. Such signs are mounted parallel to the face of the building with no part thereof (including any illuminating devices) projecting more than 12 inches beyond the face of the building.
d. No such sign shall extend or project higher than the wall upon which it is located.
2. Additional Signage - One freestanding sign for each road frontage or one hanging sign for each business shall be permitted as follows:
a. Freestanding signs shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height, shall not be located within the public right of way, and shall be located at least 10 feet from the edge of the roadway. A freestanding sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in sign area if for one business and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) feet in sign area if for more than one business use.
b. Hanging signs shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in sign area. Such signs shall protrude perpendicularly from the front of the building and no portion of the signs shall be permitted over any public right-of-way.
3. Illumination -
a. Signs may be externally illuminated for the sole purpose of making the sign visible in the dark using soft white light no greater than 150 watts.
b. Such lights shall be of constant intensity and no flashing, intermittent, pulsating or moving lights are permitted.
c. To minimize glare, no exposed bulbs are permitted and such light source shall be recessed or enclosed and be downwardly directed.
4. Temporary Sign - Within the Restricted Business Zone, one (1) temporary sign shall be permitted per business on the lot, parcel or tract provided that:
a. The sign area shall not exceed eight (8) square feet.
b. The Sign Permit for a temporary sign shall be valid for no more than thirty (30) days in a 365-day period. The sign must be removed at the expiration of the permit period.
7.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BASIC STANDARDS Effective July 30, 2020
SIGNS
156
7.A.3.4. SIGNS PERMITTED IN PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONE:
1. Wall Sign - Wall signs shall be permitted provided that:
a. The aggregate area of all wall signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot per lineal foot of facade upon which it is attached.
b. Such signs shall be mounted parallel to the face of the building with no part thereof (including any illuminating devices) projecting more than 12 inches beyond the face of the building.
c. No such sign shall extend or project higher than the wall upon which it is located except that where the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Zoning Enforcement Official that the design of the structure(s) are not suitable for a wall sign, a roof sign may be permitted to replace all or a portion of the wall sign permitted provided that:
• any roof sign shall run parallel to the wall it is located above.
• no roof sign including any illuminating devices, shall project higher than the peak of the roof upon which it is located.
2. Freestanding Sign – One (1) permanent, freestanding sign shall be permitted for each road frontage provided that:
a. The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
b. The maximum area of a freestanding sign shall be forty (40) square feet plus ten (10) square feet for each establishment, up to a maximum size of eighty (80) square feet.
c. Each freestanding sign shall be set back from the boundary line, one (1) foot for every foot of height; the minimum setback shall be ten (10) feet.
d. The ZEO may order the removal of any sign placed in a location that is determined to compromise safe movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
3. Alternative Signage – Where the size of the freestanding sign is limited to forty (40) square feet, the Commission may, by Special Permit, authorize an alternate arrangement for the sign area allocated to individual establishments (10 square feet each up to a maximum of 40 square feet) as additional freestanding signage or wall signage provided that:
a. The maximum height for any alternate freestanding sign shall be 10 feet.
b. The alternate signage arrangement shall be otherwise in conformance with these Regulations.
4. Illumination –
a. Signs may be externally illuminated for the sole purpose of making the sign visible in the dark using soft white light no greater than 150 watts.
b. Such lights shall be of constant intensity and no flashing, intermittent, pulsating or moving lights are permitted.
c. To minimize glare, no exposed bulbs are permitted and such light source shall be recessed or enclosed and be downwardly directed.
5. Portable Sign– In addition to the above signage, one (1) portable sign is permitted per business, up to a maximum of three (3) such signs per lot, parcel or tract provided that:
a. The primary purpose of such sign is to identify special products and sales, not to serve as primary business identification sign.
b. The total sign area for each sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet, each side, and shall be a maximum of four (4) feet in height.
c. Such sign shall not be illuminated.
d. Such sign shall not be located within the right-of-way and shall be situated so as to avoid obstruction of roadway sightlines.
e. If a sign is placed in a location that is determined by the ZEO to compromise safe movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, the ZEO may, at his discretion, direct the business owner to remove the sign.
f. In the case of a structure that faces more than one public roadway or entrance, one additional portable sign for each such circumstance may be permitted
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 7.A
Effective July 30, 2020 BASIC STANDARDS
SIGNS
157
6. Temporary Sign - One (1) temporary sign shall be permitted per business on the LOT, parcel or tract provided that:
a. The sign area shall not exceed eight (8) square feet.
b. The Sign Permit for a temporary sign shall be valid for no more than thirty (30) days in a 365-day period. The sign must be removed at the expiration of the permit period.
c. Banner signs should only be used as temporary commercial signs used to advertise a grand opening or change of business.
7. Sign Approval –
a. Signs in the Planned Commercial Zone may be authorized by Sign Permit issued by Staff provided they comply with the above requirements and the following design standards and guidelines:
i. The sign clearly identifies the business or businesses at a specific site.
ii. The sign does not advertise a specific product.
iii. The sign will be symmetrically located within a defined architectural space on the building facade.
iv. The sign does not obscure or conceal architectural elements.
v. The sign is scaled appropriately to appeal to pedestrians and/or vehicles.
vi. The sign does not cover more than thirty (30) percent of available window space.
vii. The sign does not consist of exposed neon, LCD or similar signs.
viii. Any sign lighting is incorporated as an integral part of the sign's design and any visible light fixtures used for exterior illumination of signs are consistent with the architecture of the building and are appropriately scaled relative to the sign and the structure.
b. Signs not in compliance with the above design standards and guidelines shall require Special Permit review and approval by the Commission.
7.A.3.5. SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE INDUSTRIAL ZONE
1. Wall Sign - Wall signs shall be permitted provided that:
a. Such signs are mounted parallel to the face of the building with no part thereof (including any illuminating devices) projecting more than 12 inches beyond the face of the building.
b. The aggregate area of all wall signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot per lineal foot of facade upon which it is attached.
c. No such sign shall extend or project higher than the wall upon which it is located.
2. Freestanding Sign – One (1) permanent, freestanding, sign shall be permitted for each road frontage provided that:
a. The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be ten (10) feet.
b. The maximum area of a freestanding sign shall be forty (40) square feet plus ten (10) square feet for each establishment, up to a maximum size of eighty (80) square feet.
c. Each freestanding sign shall be set back at least 10 feet from the edge of the roadway and shall not be located within the public right of way.
3. Illumination –
a. Signs may be externally illuminated for the sole purpose of making the sign visible in the dark.
b. Such lights shall be of constant intensity and no flashing, intermittent, pulsating or moving lights are permitted.
c. To minimize glare, no exposed bulbs are permitted and such light source shall be recessed or enclosed and be downwardly directed.
7.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BASIC STANDARDS Effective July 30, 2020
SIGNS
158
7.A.4. GENERAL SIGN STANDARDS
1. Applicability: -
a. The standards contained in this Section shall apply to all signs.
b. All signs other than those specifically authorized by the provisions of these Regulations are prohibited.
2. Sign Construction / Maintenance:
a. All signs shall comply with the Connecticut State Building Code.
b. Suitable, durable materials shall be used for all signs, including Portable and Temporary signs.
c. All signs shall be firmly supported and maintained in good condition.
d. Except for barber poles and the portion of a sign devoted to displaying the time and/or temperature (provided such displays do not flash at intervals of less than five seconds), no signs shall be the flashing, rotating or animated type.
e. Feather banners, inflatable devices, fan-driven devices, strung pennants or flags, strung shapes, and similar devices are not permitted.
3. Sign Location:
a. Signs or advertising devices shall not be erected or maintained at the intersection of streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of the intersection.
b. Signs shall not be located in such a manner as to reduce the sight line for vehicles entering or exiting the roadway.
c. Signs, associated plantings or lighting shall be located so as not to obscure sightlines or otherwise cause danger to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
d. Signs, except an approved DOT sign, shall not be located in or project over any street right-of-way.
4. Sign Design / Illumination:
a. Illuminated signs or lighting devices shall not cause a glare or reflection off the property that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance.
b. Any illuminated sign or lighting device shall employ only lights emitting a light of constant intensity and no sign shall be illuminated by or contain flashing intermittent, rotating, or moving light or lights.
c. Signs may be illuminated by direct or indirect lighting, but shall have such lighting shielded so no direct light will shine on abutting properties or in the normal line of vision of the public using the streets or sidewalks.
d. Neon signs or similar illuminated devices shall not diminish or detract in any way from the effectiveness of any traffic or similar safety or warning device.
e. No flood or spot lights shall be mounted higher than twenty-five (25) feet above ground level.
5. Vehicular Signs - Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such a manner that the carrying of such sign or signs no longer is incidental to the vehicle's primary purpose but becomes a primary purpose in itself shall be considered a freestanding sign and, as such, be subject to the provisions regarding freestanding signs in the zone in which such vehicle is located.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 7.A
Effective July 30, 2020 BASIC STANDARDS
SIGNS
159
7.A.5. SIGN PERMITS
1. When a Sign Permit is required by these Regulations, no sign shall be erected, hung or displayed without first obtaining a Sign Permit from the ZEO.
2. Application shall also be made for a sign permit whenever significant alteration or replacement of a sign is proposed.
3. Written application for a sign permit shall be made on forms prescribed and provided by the ZEO and shall contain the following information:
a. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
b. The location of the building, structure or land on which the sign is to be attached, erected or hung.
c. Signed consent of the owner of the sign location property if the applicant is not the owner of the building, structure or land.
d. A scale drawing of the proposed sign, its location and proposed illumination, if any.
e. A full description of materials and lighting to be used in the construction of the proposed sign.
f. A landscaping plan for the area around the proposed sign, as described in Section 7.C of these Regulations.
g. Within the Village Center Zone, any proposed sign application shall include information to demonstrate to the ZEO that the design elements of the proposed sign shall be constructed of wood, stone or materials that simulate wood or stone in appearance, and that the proposed sign shall maintain the aesthetic character of the neighborhood, including the nature and intensity of any proposed method of external or internal illumination of the sign.
4. The ZEO may require the sign location be staked in the field for inspection prior to issuance of a permit.
5. If any sign has been erected without a Sign Permit or has been constructed out of compliance with these Regulations or a filed permit, the ZEO shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the violation and revoke any permit for the sign.
6. The applicant shall apply or reapply for a permit and remediate the sign within thirty (30) days of said notice.
7.A.6. NON-CONFORMING SIGNS
1. Any sign lawfully existing or under construction on the effective date of these Regulations that does not conform to one or more of the provisions of these Regulations may be continued in operation and maintained as a legal non-conforming sign.
2. Normal maintenance of a non-conforming sign, including structural and nonstructural repair and change of copy, shall be permitted but any reconstruction or replacement shall be in conformance with these Regulations.
3. Reconstruction or replacement of a non-conforming sign which is not in conformance with these Regulations shall result in the non-conforming sign becoming illegal.
4. Any sign that was illegally non-conforming prior to amendment of these Regulations and which currently does not conform to these Regulations shall remain illegally non-conforming.
7.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BASIC STANDARDS Effective July 30, 2020
PARKING AND LOADING
160
7.B. PARKING AND LOADING
7.B.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to establish parking standards in order to meet community needs and expectations and to help promote public safety and welfare while at the same time minimizing the environmental impacts of parking stalls and lots.
7.B.2. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
For the purpose of Section 7.B.2, “floor area” shall not include areas used principally for non-public purposes such as storage and incidental repair, for rest rooms, utilities, or for required stairways or elevators.
7.B.2.1. RESIDENTIAL USES
Use Minimum Parking Spaces Required
1. Residential
Two spaces per dwelling unit
2. Multi-family development Two spaces per dwelling unit
3. Elderly Housing Development One space per dwelling unit
4. Convalescent Home, Rest Home, or Nursing Home One space for very three beds plus one space for every employee during the largest shift
7.B.2.2. RETAIL / SERVICE TYPE USES
Use Minimum Parking Spaces Required
1. Retail uses including shopping centers
3 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area
2. Personal services
3 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area
3. Theaters
One space per four seats plus one space per two employees.
4. Health or Membership Club
3 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area
5. Day Care Centers
One space per employee plus one space per 10 children
6. Indoor Sports and Recreation
3 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 7.B
Effective July 30, 2020 BASIC STANDARDS
PARKING AND LOADING
161
7.B.2.3. INSTITUTIONAL TYPE USES
Use Minimum Parking Spaces Required 1. Places of Worship One space per four people of design capacity 2. Community Centers One space per four people of design capacity 3. Education Center 4 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area
7.B.2.4. OFFICE TYPE USES
Use Minimum Parking Spaces Required
1. Offices
3 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area
2. Licensed Health Services
3 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area
3. Banks
3 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area
7.B.2.5. HOSPITALITY TYPE USES
Use Minimum Parking Spaces Required
1. Restaurants except fast food
One space per three seats
2. Fast Food Restaurants (without drive through facility)
10 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area
3. Fast Food Restaurants (with a drive through facility)
10 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area plus 9 stacking spaces for drive-through
4. Hotel/Motel
One space for each guest room; plus one space per each employee; plus additional space as required for accessory uses, such as a restaurant.
7.B.2.6. INDUSTRIAL / AUTOMOTIVE TYPE USES
Use Minimum Parking Spaces Required
1. Industrial Facilities
One and one half (1 1/2) spaces for each two (2) employees on any one (1) shift.
2. Automotive Service and Gasoline Stations
Two spaces per repair bay
7.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BASIC STANDARDS Effective July 30, 2020
PARKING AND LOADING
162
7.B.2.7. OTHER USES
Use Minimum Parking Spaces Required
1. Outdoor Special Events
One (1) space for every two-hundred (200) square feet of seating space and or display area.
2. Adult-Related Uses
One space per 1.5 persons (Maximum Occupancy) as determined by the Town of Brooklyn Fire Marshal
3. Uses Not Listed
The Commission will establish an appropriate parking standard based on best available sources.
7.B.3. REDUCTION OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS
1. Temporary Change of Use Exemption - If no new buildings or structures are being established and one use is simply being changed to another use allowed under these Regulations, no additional parking spaces shall be required provided that:
a. the number of spaces that presently exist on the property is at least ninety percent (90%) of the cumulative parking requirement for the new use(s) and the other existing use(s) on the property, and
b. no “grandfathering” or other exception shall be provided relative to any future use of such premises.
2. Permanent Parking Reduction - The Commission may, by Special Permit, reduce the cumulative number of required parking spaces on one or more contiguous properties provided:
a. the Commission finds one or more of the following based on information provided by the applicant:
• Peak parking demands among uses occur at different hours of the day and this offset results in a lower net peak parking demand;
• Synergistic relationships among uses allow patrons to park once while accessing multiple locations or allow for multiple purpose trips to occur within the development(s); or
• The uses are likely to generate transit, bicycle or pedestrian trips and accommodations have been made to support these alternative forms of transportation.
b. the Commission finds adequate parking will be provided for the current and proposed uses and for likely future uses.
c. As a condition of the Special Permit, any reduction for two or more properties shall:
• provide a functional and interconnected parking arrangement within and between the properties.
• provide for an agreement among and between property owners providing for joint access and parking, in perpetuity unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 7.B
Effective July 30, 2020 BASIC STANDARDS
PARKING AND LOADING
163
3. Temporary Parking Installation Reduction –
a. The Commission may, by Special Permit, waive the immediate installation of up to 25% of the required parking spaces where sufficient evidence has been presented, in the judgment of the Commission, to show that the reduced parking facilities will adequately serve the proposed use.
b. The Special Permit shall be applicable only to the particular use or occupancy of land, buildings, or other structures specified in the application, and such Special Permit and certificate of zoning compliance issued for the use shall become null and void in the event that such use or occupancy is changed to another use or occupancy.
c. Before approval of the reduced installation by the Commission, the applicant shall show upon the site development plan the complete layout for the full parking requirements and the design of the complete stormwater management system designed to handle the deferred parking pavement.
d. The owner shall file the plan approved by the Commission in the Office of the Town Clerk, stipulating that:
• the complete stormwater management system shall be installed at the time of initial development, and
• the owner, or the successor and assigns of the owner, will install as many of the waived parking spaces as the Commission deems necessary within six months of the Commission's request, when, in the opinion of the Commission, such installation is needed.
7.B.4. LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
1. All business facilities shall demonstrate that adequate provision has been made for loading facilities for the proposed use without interfering with the safe operation of fire lanes or travel lanes.
2. Unless modified by the Commission by Special Permit, business and industrial facilities shall provide one (1) loading space for every ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area.
3. Unless otherwise provided by the Commission, each loading space shall be twelve (12) feet wide by fifty (50) feet long by fourteen (14) feet high.
4. Loading spaces are permitted in all side and rear yards.
5. No loading facilities shall be permitted in the front yard unless approved by the Commission by Special Permit.
6. All loading shall be screened from view from other properties or the public right-of-way by the use of building design, fencing or landscaping.
7.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BASIC STANDARDS Effective July 30, 2020
PARKING AND LOADING
164
7.B.5. PARKING DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
1. Overall Layout- Parking stalls and driveways shall be of appropriate shape, vertical clearance, access and slope to accommodate the vehicles typically using the premises.
2. Pervious Spaces- Any parking spaces installed in excess of the minimum parking requirement shall have a previous surface suitable to accommodate the vehicles typically using the premises.
3. Dimensions of Parking Spaces- Parking stalls shall conform to the following standards except that handicapped parking spaces shall be sized according to state requirements:
A. Parking angle 0° 30° 45° 60° 90°
B. Parking space width
10’
10’
10’
10’
10’
C. Parking space length
22’
20’
20’
20’
20’
D. Driveway width - one way
12’
13’
15’
18’
20’
- two way
20’
20’
20’
22’
24’
4. Surface Material - Parking for uses other than single-family residential uses and uses accessory thereto shall be paved with asphalt except that the Commission may authorize the use of other surface materials (including pervious pavers):
a. in areas clearly utilized for a seasonal use.
b. where such parking is in excess of the amount required.
c. when the Commission determines that the use of pervious material, such as gravel or stone dust would enhance or protect the natural environment.
5. Grading / Drainage - All parking areas shall be graded and drained in a manner necessary so as not to increase the rate or quantity of storm water being discharged on other properties or public right-of-way; without a drainage easement obtained from the abutting landowner.
6. Driveways – Unless modified by the Commission by Special Permit, there shall be a maximum of one point of ingress for vehicles and one point of egress for vehicles to the parking lots for each street.
7. Handicapped Parking - Parking for the handicapped shall be in accordance with the requirements of the State Basic Building Code, as amended.
8. Location - Parking in the rear of the building is encouraged to shield the parking from the public right-of-way.
9. Screening - Off-street parking spaces for Special Permit uses shall be screened from abutting residential uses.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 7.C
Effective July 30, 2020 BASIC STANDARDS
LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS
165
7.C. LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS
7.C.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to:
1. Reduce surface runoff and minimize soil erosion through the natural filtering capability of landscaped areas.
2. Provide visual screening and natural buffers that reduce glare and noise.
3. Moderate any adverse impacts of paved areas by providing shade, absorbing reflected heat from paved surfaces and creating natural windbreaks.
4. Enhance the overall visual quality of new development by providing a variety of plant materials that are consistent and compatible with the existing natural vegetation of the area.
7.C.2. APPLICABILITY
These landscape regulations shall apply to all multi-family and non-residential development, except as otherwise noted.
7.C.3. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
7.C.3.1. LANDSCAPING REQUIRED
1. All areas not used for structures, off street parking and loading, outside storage and vehicular and pedestrian ways, shall be suitably landscaped in accordance with these Regulations.
2. In cases where the edge of the pavement or sidewalk within the public right-of-way shall not coincide with the front lot line, the property owner shall plant grass and maintain the area within the public right-of-way between the front lot line and the edge of street pavement or sidewalk.
3. All areas required for landscaping shall be covered with groundcover appropriate to the site, in addition to the shrubs and trees required by this Section of the Regulations.
4. All landscaping, trees and shrubs required by these Regulations shall be indigenous to the region and climate, or otherwise appropriate for the site, without the excessive use of water and/or fertilizer.
5. To the extent possible, existing trees, vegetation and unique site features such as stonewalls, shall be retained and protected during construction. Existing healthy, mature trees and other existing vegetation shall be considered in meeting the landscape requirements of these Regulations.
7.C BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BASIC STANDARDS Effective July 30, 2020
LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS
166
7.C.3.2. PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
1. Landscaping, trees and shrubs required by these Regulations shall be planted in a growing condition according to accepted horticultural practices.
2. All plant material, screening fences, or walls required by these Regulations shall be maintained by the property owner in good condition throughout the period of the use of the lot.
3. Any landscaping, trees and shrubs which are shown on an approved Site Plan and are not on the site in a healthy growing state for whatever reason shall be replaced by the property owner during the next planting season for the particular plant material.
4. Permanent watering systems shall be encouraged.
7.C.3.3. LANDSCAPING ALTERNATIVES
1. Where the Commission determines that the lot size and shape or existing structures shall make it infeasible to comply with the requirements for a front landscape area, buffer area, or landscaped parking area, the Commission may accept alternative landscaping provided it shall be necessary, reasonable and in compliance with the intent of these Regulations.
7.C.4. FRONT YARD LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
1. All parking areas located in the front yard of a non-residential use, or otherwise adjacent to a street or public right-of-way, shall be screened from view from the street or public right-of-way by a landscaped buffer located between the front lot line and the edge of the pavement of the parking area containing a continuous line of shrubs or hedges with a minimum height of three feet (3’) that shield the parking lot from view.
2. The landscaped buffer area shall have a minimum width of:
a. Ten (10) feet for parking areas containing less than 25 spaces, and
b. Fifteen (15) feet for parking areas containing 25 or more spaces.
3. A landscaped berm, with a minimum height of three feet (3'), may be used to screen the parking area instead of the continuous line of shrubs or hedges, providing that a minimum of one shrub per two feet (2') of street frontage is provided and maintained within the landscaped area.
4. If found to be consistent with the objectives of this Regulation, the Commission may permit the use of a decorative stone wall within the landscaped area to visually shield the parking area instead of a continuous line of shrubs and hedges or landscaped berm.
5. There shall be at least one deciduous tree having a caliper of at least two and one half inches (measured four feet above the root crown) and at least eight feet in height planted for every 50 feet of street frontage, within the front yard landscaped area.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 7.C
Effective July 30, 2020 BASIC STANDARDS
LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS
167
7.C.5. PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
1. Within parking lots, at least ten (10) square feet of landscaping for each parking space shall be provided internally within the parking lot as islands within the paved area.
2. Islands shall be required to indicate and assure safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular circulation and to separate the major access way through the parking area from parking aisles.
3. Each landscaped area shall contain a minimum of 100 square feet of area, shall have a minimum dimension of at least 8 feet, and shall be planted with grass or shrubs.
4. At least one deciduous tree of a species compatible with the environment of a parking lot, having a caliper of two and one half inches measured four feet above the root crown, and at least eight feet in height, shall be provided for each 100 square feet of required interior landscaping.
5. No more than 15 parking spaces in a row shall be permitted without the use of a landscaped island.
6. Internal sidewalks and pedestrian walkways shall be used in appropriate locations to provide safe pedestrian movement, and to provide separation from vehicular movement. Such sidewalks may be located within required landscaped areas.
7. All landscaping, trees, shrubs and other planting material adjacent to parking areas, loading areas, or driveways shall be properly protected by barriers, curbs or other means to prevent damage from vehicles.
8. Where best management practices are utilized, the Commission may modify these requirements to allow for the utilization of “low impact development” strategies where landscape islands are used to treat and/or detain stormwater runoff.
7.C.6. SCREENING AND BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS
2. A landscaped buffer area shall be provided along and within all boundaries of a lot or parcel used for non-residential purposes abutting residentially zoned land.
3. Such buffer area shall have a minimum width of 20 feet except that where lot size and shape or existing structures make it infeasible to provide a 20-foot width, the Commission may modify the width requirements.
4. The buffer area shall:
a. Be of evergreen planting of such type, height, spacing and arrangement as in the judgment of the Commission will effectively screen the activity on the lot from the neighboring residential area.
b. At a minimum, consist of trees 6 feet in height planted at intervals of 10 feet on center.
5. Non-evergreen planting may be included to supplement evergreen planting, but not to take its place.
6. Where the existing topography and/or landscaping provide adequate screening, the Commission may modify the planting and/or buffer area requirements.
7.D BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BASIC STANDARDS Effective July 30, 2020
ACCESS MANAGEMENT
168
7.D. ACCESS MANAGEMENT
7.D.1. PURPOSE
This Section is intended to control the number, size, and location of driveways and access points, especially those that front on heavily trafficked roads and state highways, while allowing proper and adequate access to and from premises along such thoroughfares in order to promote overall traffic control, promote public safety and welfare, provide for safer and more efficient traffic operations along major roadways and protect the public safety through the management and reduction of vehicular congestion.
7.D.2. STANDARDS
1. The shared use of a common point of access to serve more than one property shall be encouraged.
2. In reviewing proposed non-residential developments, the Commission shall review the road layout, the number and location of access points to and from the site, parking layout and configuration, traffic circulation within the site, and the nature and type of traffic circulation on adjacent roadways to ensure that public safety and welfare is promoted with the greatest efficiency.
3. In reviewing existing and future curb cuts, the following guidelines shall be considered:
a. Whether the number of site access points should be limited.
b. Internal connections between adjacent properties and the combination of access/egress driveways serving adjacent properties shall be required whenever practicable.
c. Curb cuts should generally be located opposite existing streets and/or major driveways.
d. Driveway closures should not restrict internal site circulation.
4. Where street geometry, traffic volumes or traffic patterns warrant, the Commission may:
a. limit the number of driveways that serve a specific site,
b. designate the location of any driveway,
c. require the use or provision of a shared driveway with associated easements that exists on abutting property in lieu of having a separate curb cut onto a road or street, and/or
d. limit access to a major street and require access from a minor street.
5. As part of application approval, the Commission may require:
a. the establishment of mutual driveway or other easements to provide a single point of access for two or more abutting properties in a location acceptable to the Commission and the Traffic Authority,
b. the wording of such easements as shall be acceptable to the Commission and the Town Attorney, and/or
c. the filing of such easements on the land records in favor of the abutting property owners and/or the Town.
6. Where permanent shared access secured by a mutual access easement or other appropriate legal instrument will be provided and/or existing driveways closed, the Commission may authorize an increase in building coverage and/or impervious coverage on one or more parcels so connected.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 7.E
Effective July 30, 2020 BASIC STANDARDS
DRIVEWAYS AND INTERSECTIONS
169
7.E. DRIVEWAYS AND INTERSECTIONS
7.E.1. GENERAL
1. Safe driveway entrances and exits with adequate sight lines for safe vehicle entry onto and exit off a street shall be required.
2. No planting, fence, wall, or barrier to vision shall be placed so as to create a sight hazard for vehicles entering or exiting any road or highway.
3. Construction of driveway drainage facilities shall be completed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
4. Driveway entrances onto heavily traveled roads are discouraged and wherever possible should be laid out and designed to enter onto lightly traveled roads.
5. Driveways to all lots shall be constructed to provide adequate year-round access for emergency vehicles as determined by the Fire Marshal.
6. Driveways more than 300 feet in length shall have a maximum width of ten (10) feet except as necessary for turn-arounds.
7. Proposed roads, driveway aprons, and associated drainage and utility facilities are to be designed and constructed in accordance with the Public Improvement Specifications for the Town of Brooklyn with exceptions noted below.
8. No driveway shall exceed ten percent (10%) grade unless it is paved or has an alternative all-weather surface.
9. No driveway shall exceed twelve percent (12%) grade unless it is determined necessary through the concurrence of the Road Foreman, Zoning Enforcement Officer, and the Town Engineer due to the existence of onsite conditions including but not limited to ledge outcrops, specimen trees, wetlands, or other environmental concerns.
7.E.2. RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS
1. Driveways to individual lots or rear lots shall be so located, designed and constructed so as to prevent erosion, prevent uncontrolled road drainage down driveways or uncontrolled driveway drainage onto the traveled way.
2. No private driveway shall serve more than three (3) lots.
7.E.3. STREET INTERSECTIONS
No planting, fence, wall, or barrier to vision more than two feet in total height above the street pavement shall be placed or erected on a corner lot in the triangular area bounded by the intersecting front lot lines for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from such intersection and a line connecting the ends of such lot lines.
7.F BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BASIC STANDARDS Effective July 30, 2020
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
170
7.F. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
7.F.1. PURPOSE
This Section of the Regulations is intended to discourage or prevent any use or activity which might impair the reasonable use or enjoyment of any other property or to constitute a hazard to public health or safety.
7.F.2. NOISE & VIBRATION
1. At all times the best efforts and use of the best practices shall be employed to minimize noise and vibration emitted by operations carried out on any site.
2. No operations shall emit or cause to be emitted any noise or vibration beyond the boundaries of the subject property in excess of permissible levels allowed in the State, as set forth in Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies.
7.F.3. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS, HAZARDOUS WASTE, AND SOLID WASTE
1. With regard to the occupancy or use of a property used for non-residential purposes, the owner of the property shall inform the Town of the storage or use of any material:
a. included in EPA's list of priority pollutants,
b. included in Section 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act,
c. included in Connecticut's Hazardous Waste Regulations,
d. considered a “special waste” as defined by CT DEEP, including: (1) water treatment, sewage treatment or industrial sludges, liquid, solids and contained gases; fly-ash and casting sands or slag; and contaminated dredge spoils; (2) scrap tires; (3) demolition debris; (4) asbestos; (5) residue; (6) biomedical waste; (7) land clearing debris.
e. Including radioactive waste or material.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the materials or wastes shall be contained or managed in such a manner that these substances will not pollute or degrade the natural resources, environment or ecology of the Town of Brooklyn and at least the following information shall be presented in satisfaction of this section:
a. The amount and composition of any material or waste that will be handled, stored, generated, treated or disposed of on the property.
b. Provisions for treatment, storage and/or disposal of any hazardous materials or wastes including any outside storage areas and types of materials to be stored there.
c. Provision for containment of any spills.
d. Whether or not public sewer is available or proposed at the location.
e. Septic tank location, size and capacity, and/or sewage lift stations, force mains and grease traps.
f. Expected types and amount of discharge to sewers, to the ground, and to surface water.
g. Provisions for storm water runoff controls.
h. Written comments by appropriate officials, including but not limited to the Town's Fire Marshal, Building Official, Wetlands Agent, and Town Engineer that the applicants proposed method of handling and storing hazardous materials and wastes appears safe and reasonable from the viewpoint of their office.
3. If these materials or wastes are to be present then the owner of the facility shall present evidence that all applicable permits and approvals from Federal, State or local authorities have been or are in the process of being obtained.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 7.F
Effective July 30, 2020 BASIC STANDARDS
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
171
7.F.4. OTHER HAZARD OR NUISANCE
1. No land, building or other structure shall be used for any use, trade, business or process which is obnoxious or offensive by reason of dust, dirt, smoke, odor, gas, fumes, vibration, noise, illumination, heat, solid waste, or liquid discharge so as to impair the reasonable use or enjoyment of any other property or to constitute a hazard to public health or safety.
2. Outdoor wood burning furnaces shall be in conformance with Connecticut General Statute 22a-174k, as amended. Town of Brooklyn staff shall have the authority to enforce the State’s regulations concerning outdoor wood burning furnaces.
7.F.5. SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
7.F.5.1. OVERALL REQUIREMENTS
1. All development and earth excavation operations shall establish, implement, and maintain soil erosion and sediment controls in accordance with the “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control”, as amended.
2. Erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be in place prior to the start of development and/or in accordance with any soil erosion and sediment control plan (“Control Plan”) as provided in Section 7.F.5.2.
3. Erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition and in accordance with any approved Control Plan.
4. During development, the Zoning Enforcement Official may inspect the site at any time to review sediment and erosion control measures, ensure compliance with any approved Control Plan, and ensure that control measures and facilities have been properly performed, installed and maintained.
r 7.F.5.2. CONTROL PLAN REQUIREMENTS
1. A soil erosion and sediment control plan (“Control Plan”) prepared in accordance with the “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control”, as amended shall be submitted with any application for development when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half acre.
2. The Control Plan shall identify proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available principles, methods, technology and practices as found in the “Connecticut Guideline for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control”, as amended.
3. Alternative principles, methods and practices from those found in the “Connecticut Guideline for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control”, as amended, may be used with prior approval of the Commission.
4. Said plan shall contain, but not be limited to:
a. A narrative describing the development project and time schedule for:
i. all major construction activities indicating the anticipated start and completion of development;
ii. creating and stabilizing of disturbed areas;
iii. grading operations; and,
iv. applying erosion and sediment control measures and facilities onto the land;
b. A site plan map showing:
i. existing and proposed topography;
ii. proposed area alterations;
iii. disturbed areas; identifying the extent of all proposed clearing and grading activities; and,
7.F BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BASIC STANDARDS Effective July 30, 2020
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
172
iv. location of and other detailed information concerning erosion and sediment control measures and facilities.
c. Such other information as is necessary to explain design criteria, construction details, detailed installation/application procedures and the proposed maintenance program;
5. Any soil erosion and sediment control plan submitted to the Commission may be referred to another person or organization for review or comment.
6. The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the Control Plan, may be covered in a financial guarantee or other assurance acceptable to the Commission.
7. The Commission or its designated agent shall either grant approval that the Control Plan complies with the applicable requirements and objectives of this Section or deny such application when the development proposal does not comply with this Section. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as extending the time limits for the approval of any application under Chapters 124, 125A or 126 of the Connecticut General statutes.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 7.G
Effective July 30, 2020 BASIC STANDARDS
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
173
7.G. OUTDOOR LIGHTING
7.G.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to ensure the effectiveness of site lighting, enhance public safety and welfare, raise public awareness of energy conservation, avoid unnecessary upward illumination, and discourage the installation of lighting fixtures that emit glare or light trespass.
7.G.2. APPLICABILITY
The standards herein shall apply to all exterior lighting except that the following types of lighting are exempt from these Regulations:
1. Traditional seasonal lighting.
2. Temporary lighting associated with a fair, carnival or similar function authorized by the Town of Brooklyn.
3. Temporary light used by emergency service or public safety personnel.
7.G.3. LIGHTING STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES
1. All exterior lights and sign illumination for residential uses should be designed, located, installed and directed in such a manner as to:
a. prevent direct or objectionable glare or light trespass;
b. employ soft, transitional light levels which are consistent from area to area;
c. minimize contrast between light sources, lit areas and dark surroundings; and
d. be confined within the target area.
7.G.4. LIGHTING STANDARDS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL USES
1. All exterior lights and sign illumination for non-residential uses shall be designed, located, installed and directed in such a manner as to:
a. prevent direct or objectionable glare or light trespass;
b. employ soft, transitional light levels which are consistent from area to area;
c. minimize contrast between light sources, lit areas and dark surroundings; and
d. be confined within the target area.
2. For business uses, industrial uses, multi‐family developments, and institutional uses:
a. lighting fixtures for all vehicular areas and pedestrian areas and for security or other purposes shall be full cut‐off type fixtures as approved by the Commission, or shall be fully shielded/recessed fixtures where the lens is recessed or flush with the bottom surface, and
b. no exterior direct light source (such as a bulb) shall be visible at the property line at ground level or above.
7.G BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BASIC STANDARDS Effective July 30, 2020
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
174
3. The height of luminaires on private property shall be the minimum height necessary to provide adequate illumination but in no case shall exceed a height of 20 feet.
4. Lamp posts in parking areas shall be placed within landscaped areas (i.e., end islands, interior islands, planting strips) and shall be recessed at least three feet from curbs.
5. Walkways shall be adequately lighted; the use of bollard lighting for such purpose is encouraged.
6. The Commission shall determine whether the type and style of proposed lighting fixtures and illumination meets the standards, purpose and intent of these Regulations based on the following information to be submitted by the applicant:
a. The specific fixtures to be installed,
b. A plan showing the location of all outdoor lighting fixtures,
c. The levels of illuminance projected to occur on the property, and
d. Information indicating that the proposed lighting will not cast an arc of illumination beyond the boundaries of the property.
7. The Commission may, by Special Permit, allow lighting that does not comply with the specific standards set forth in this Section provided the Commission determines that such proposed lighting is consistent with the purpose and intent of these Regulations. The Commission may consider recommendations for lighting levels as issued by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, the International Dark Sky Association, or other reference.
Lighting / Illumination Concepts
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 7.G
Effective July 30, 2020 BASIC STANDARDS
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
175
RECOMMENDED
NOT RECOMMENDED
Fixtures Which Would Not Generally Be Expected To Produce Glare or Light Trespass
Fixtures Which Would Generally Be Expected To Produce Glare or Light Trespass
7.H BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
BASIC STANDARDS Effective July 30, 2020
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
176
7.H. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
7.H.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to:
1. minimize degradation of water resources within the Town of Brooklyn from pollution from non-point source runoff,
2. mitigate impacts to the hydrologic system from development, including reduced groundwater recharge and pollutants found in stormwater runoff,
3. reduce or prevent flooding, stream channel erosion, and/or other negative impacts created by the volume of stormwater runoff resulting from development, and
4. promote the application of Low Impact Development (LID) strategies for the analysis and design of stormwater treatment systems.
7.H.2. APPLICABILITY
Except for development of a single-family dwelling and any related accessory structures or uses, the provisions of this Section of the Regulations shall apply to any development within the Town of Brooklyn which requires approval of a Site Plan or approval of a Special Permit.
7.H.3. REQUIREMENT
1. Unless modified by the Commission by Special Permit as provided in Section 7.H.4, any development within the Town of Brooklyn shall implement the following provisions of Chapter 7 of the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CSQM), as amended:
a. Pollutant Reduction (CSQM Section 7.4).
b. Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Volume Reduction (CSQM Section 7.5).
c. Peak Flow Control (CSQM Section 7.6) for the 10-year, 25-year, and 100-year storm events.
2. In the design of a stormwater management system, design professionals are encouraged to utilize low impact development techniques and on-site infiltration and filtering practices as recommended in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, as amended.
7.H.4. MODIFICATIONS
The Commission may, by Special Permit, modify the requirements of this Section provided that adequate information has been submitted by the applicant to evaluate the request and:
1. the Town Engineer has provided a positive recommendation regarding the modification, or
2. the Commission has received a report from a professional engineer hired by the Commission providing a positive recommendation regarding the modification.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 7.J
Effective July 30, 2020 BASIC STANDARDS
UTILITIES
177
7.I. PEDESTRIAN IMPROVEMENTS
7.I.1. PURPOSE
This Section is intended to make provision for pedestrians.
7.I.2. STANDARDS
1. Every non-residential development shall provide sidewalks along the public street frontage and from the street sidewalk to the entrance of the building, unless modified by the Commission.
2. Every multi-family development shall provide sidewalks:
a. within the development as approved by the Commission, and
b. along the public street frontage unless modified by the Commission.
3. Residential subdivisions in the R-10 zone shall make provision for sidewalks along the public street frontage in accordance with the requirements in the Subdivision Regulations or as required by this Section.
4. Such sidewalks shall be extended to connect to sidewalks (if any) on adjacent property.
5. Any new or reconstructed sidewalks shall be at least five (5) feet in width along the street frontage or frontages of the parcel or parcels, unless the Commission determines that sidewalks are either impractical or unnecessary at that location, considering prospective pedestrian traffic.
6. The Commission may require additional pedestrian improvements (such as trails) when such improvements will enhance the overall pedestrian environment within the site or the neighborhood.
7. Such sidewalks shall be constructed on private property with an easement to allow for public use except that the Commission may allow such sidewalks to be provided within the road right-of-way when and where feasible.
7.J. UTILITIES
7.J.1. REQUIREMENTS
1. For any uses that require approval of a Site Plan or a Special Permit, utility services shall be placed under ground unless otherwise approved or authorized by the Commission.
2. This requirement may be waived if engineering data substantiates that underground placement of utilities is impractical.
8.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
EXCEPTIONS AND NON-CONFORMITIES Effective July DIMENSIONAL EXCEPTIONS
178
8. EXCEPTIONS AND NON-CONFORMITIES
8.A. DIMENSIONAL EXCEPTIONS
8.A.1. EXCEPTIONS TO LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS
1. Where municipal sewers are available and used, the minimum lot area requirement in the R-10, R-30, and R-A Zones may be reduced by twenty-five (25) per cent for all permitted uses except multi-unit dwellings provided any application submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer is accompanied by a site plan, stamped with the seal of a certified land surveyor or professional engineer, registered in the State of Connecticut, showing that the following regulations have been met:
a. frontage, building coverage, impervious coverage, setbacks and other bulk requirements,
b. location of buildings, parking, facilities, sidewalks, and restricted areas,
c. number of units proposed, and
d. the parking requirements of Section 7.B including necessary circulation space and at least two (2) accessible off-street automobile parking spaces per dwelling unit at nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet, with no parking locatedwithin five (5) feet of a property line.
8.A.2. EXCEPTIONS TO LOT WIDTH
1. Cul-de-sac lots - Any lot defined as a cul-de-sac lot shall have a minimum frontage requirement of fifty (50) feet and a minimum lot width requirement equal to or greater than the minimum frontage required for the respective zone.
2. Rear lots - A rear lot shall have a minimum lot width requirement equal to or greater than the minimum frontage required for the respective zone where the access strip enters the lot.
8.A.3. EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITATION
1. The height provisions of these Regulations shall not apply to the erection of: place of worship belfries and towers designed exclusively for ornamental purposes, flagstaffs, chimneys, silos, water tanks, spires, masts, elevator penthouses, or similar structures provided such appurtenances shall not exceed:
a. 50 feet in total height, or
b. Ten percent (10%) of the building coverage of the structure.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 8.A
Effective July 30, 2020 EXCEPTIONS AND NON-CONFORMITIES
DIMENSIONAL EXCEPTIONS
179
8.A.4. EXCEPTIONS TO SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
1. Eaves, pilasters, columns, belt-courses, sills, cornices, or similar architectural features may project up to one foot into a required yard setback.
2. Steps, terraces, fences, walls, fence/wall combinations, and similar structures less than six (6) feet in height may be erected in required setbacks.
3. Propane tanks, generators, condensers, and similar mechanical equipment may be located within a required side yard setback provided such equipment is located closer to the principal structure on the subject property than to the principal structure on any abutting property and, if such equipment is located six (6) feet or less from a property line, then such equipment shall be visually shielded from abutting property.
4. Entry stairs and access ramps for the handicapped may extend into any required yard setback provided the extent of encroachment is minimized while still allowing for a reasonable accommodation to meet the needs of the resident(s).
5. Sheds, garages, and similar accessory buildings may be located up to ten (10) feet from a property line provided they are located in a rear yard. Otherwise, an accessory building shall comply with standard setbacks.
8.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
EXCEPTIONS AND NON-CONFORMITIES Effective July NON-CONFORMING CONDITIONS
180
6. 8.B. NON-CONFORMING CONDITIONS
8.B.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to recognize that some uses, structures, and lots were legally existing at the time of adoption of these Regulation or amendments hereto but became non-conforming following such adoption. This Section of the Regulations is intended to permit such non-conforming uses, structures, and lots to continue until they are removed or made more conforming.
8.B.2. NON-CONFORMING USES
1. Existing Uses: Where a use lawfully existed at the effective date of adoption of these Regulations or any applicable amendments hereto, such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful.
2. Alteration/Expansion: After the effective date of adoption of these Regulations or any applicable amendments hereto, a non-conforming use shall not be altered or expanded unless
a. such alteration or expansion is approved by the Commission as a Special Permit in accordance with Section 9.D upon a finding by the Commission that the overall compatibility with the neighborhood will be improved or enhanced as a result of mitigating the alteration or expansion with building improvements, buffering, landscaping, or other means.
3. Change in use: No non-conforming use may be changed except:
a. to a conforming use, or
b. with the approval of a Special Permit by the Commission in accordance with Section 9.D, to another non-conforming use, not more objectionable, and deemed to be more conforming.
4. Repairs: Structural alterations and ordinary repairs may be made or remodeling done to any structure devoted in whole or in part to a non-conforming use, provided that such work does not make the use more non-conforming (i.e., floor area, volume, etc.).
5. No Reversion: If a non-conforming use is superseded by a conforming use or a less intensive non-conforming use, the non-conforming use shall not thereafter be resumed.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 8.B
Effective July 30, 2020 EXCEPTIONS AND NON-CONFORMITIES
NON-CONFORMING CONDITIONS
181
8.B.3. NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES
1. Existing Structures: Where a structure lawfully existed at the effective date of adoption of these Regulations or any applicable amendments hereto, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful.
2. Move/Alteration/Expansion: After the effective date of adoption or amendment of these Regulations, a non-conforming structure:
a. May be moved within its existing lot so long as such move decreases its nonconformity.
b. May be altered if such alteration does not increase the non-conforming aspect of the structure.
c. May be enlarged provided:
i. such enlargement does not increase the non-conforming aspect of the structure, or
ii. in the case of an intrusion into a required yard setback, the resulting horizontal and/or vertical enlargement does not intrude any further into the required yard setback than the existing non-conformity.
d. Shall not be enlarged or altered in a manner which increases the non-conformity unless such alteration or expansion is approved by the Commission as a Special Permit in accordance with Section 9.D upon a finding by the Commission that the overall compatibility with the neighborhood will be improved or enhanced as a result of mitigating the enlargement or alteration with building improvements, buffering, landscaping, or other means.
e. Shall not, if removed, be re-established thereafter.
3. Restoration: Any non-conforming structure which has been damaged or destroyed by any means (fire, flood, explosion, act of God, or the public enemy, etc.) may be repaired or replaced to an extent which does not increase the non-conformity (i.e., height, building coverage, impervious coverage, setback, etc.) provided such restoration commences within 18 months and is completed within 36 months of such disaster. The Commission may, upon finding of good cause, grant one or more extensions of these times frames.
4. Repair: Structural alterations and ordinary repairs may be made to a non-conforming structure, provided that such work does not increase the non-conformity (i.e., height, building coverage, impervious coverage, setback, etc.).
5. Safety: Nothing in these Regulations shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any non-conforming structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.
6. Mobile Home Replacement: Notwithstanding any other provision of these Regulations, a mobile home which has been in existence since 1972 may be replaced with another mobile home on a one-time basis.
7. Mobile Home Enlargement: Notwithstanding any other provision of these Regulations, a mobile home may be enlarged up to fifty percent (50%) on a one-time basis. The one-time enlargement may occur concurrently with a one-time replacement.
8.B.4. NON-CONFORMING LOTS
1. Structures on Non-conforming Lots: In any zone, a principal building and customary accessory buildings may be erected on a lawful lot existing as of the adoption of these Regulations provided that such building(s) shall conform to the requirements of the zone in which such lot is located except for lot area, frontage, and lot width.
2. No Reduction: A non-conforming lot shall not be reduced in area, dimension or any other manner which would increase its non-conformity.
3. Lot Merger: Where two or more adjacent lots exist in single ownership on or after the effective date of these Regulations, one or more of which lots is non-conforming, such lots shall be joined in such a manner as to provide maximum possible conformity. Thereafter, such land may not be divided, sold, transferred or
8.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
EXCEPTIONS AND NON-CONFORMITIES Effective July NON-CONFORMING CONDITIONS
182
improved in any manner which would create or result in a nonconformity or an increased nonconformity. In the event that all contiguous land under common ownership is together insufficient to meet the minimum requirements of these Regulations, then all contiguous land shall be considered a single non-conforming parcel for the purposes of this Section.
4. No Reversion: If a non-conforming lot is converted to a conforming lot, it shall thereafter conform to the requirements of the zone in which it is located, and the non-conforming lot shall not thereafter be resumed.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.A
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
ZONING PERMIT APPLICATION
183
9. PROCEDURES
9.A. ZONING PERMIT APPLICATION
9.A.1. ZONING PERMIT
1. Until the Zoning Enforcement Officer has issued a Zoning Permit:
a. no site development shall commence except for agricultural purposes or maintenance of existing landscape; and
b. no building, structure or part thereof shall be constructed, reconstructed, altered, extended, enlarged, moved, gutted, or occupied; and
c. no new uses or changes of use shall commence; and
d. in accordance with CGS Section 8-3(f), no Building Permit including a permit for a building foundation shall be issued.
2. A Zoning Permit application shall not be needed for interior alterations, provided there is no change of use, number of uses, or number of bedrooms.
3. No Zoning Permit shall be issued unless and until the following pre-conditions have been completed:
a. A decision by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, if applicable, has been reported to the Commission.
b. A Site Plan or Special Permit has been approved by the Commission for a use requiring Site Plan or Special Permit approval.
c. For any lots within a subdivision or resubdivision until a financial guarantee has been posted in accordance with the Brooklyn Subdivision Regulations securing the subdivision improvements, or in lieu thereof, the subdivision improvements have been completed to the satisfaction of the Commission.
4. An application for a Zoning Permit shall be made on an official form obtained from the Town.
5. An application for a Zoning Permit shall be accompanied by a survey, plans, and/or other information needed by staff to determine compliance with the Zoning Regulations.
6. Location Verification –
a. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may order the submission of a certified plot plan drawn by a land surveyor currently licensed to practice in Connecticut showing the exact location of a building or structure on the site. Such order shall be in writing and shall state the reasons such survey is warranted.
b. No building or structure shall thereafter be constructed above the foundation walls until compliance has been demonstrated.
c. Failure to submit a certified plot plan may result in a demolition order for that portion of the building in violation of these Regulations.
7. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3(f), the recipient of a Zoning Permit may publish notice of issuance of the Zoning Permit in a newspaper with substantial circulation in Brooklyn in order to establish the appeal period per CGS Section 8-7. Any such notice to be published by the recipient shall contain:
a. a description of the building, use or structure and its location,
b. the identity of the applicant, and
c. a statement that an aggrieved person may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 8-7.
8. Any Zoning Permit issued under these Regulations shall expire two (2) years from the date of issuance unless a valid building permit is in effect or the Commission renews the Zoning Permit for one additional period not to exceed twelve (12) months when it is determined that the use, building and/or site development authorized by the Zoning Permit is in conformity with these Regulations.
9.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
ZONING PERMIT APPLICATION
184
9. In the event that any Zoning Permit is issued based on incorrect information or the specific conditions of approval are not strictly adhered to, such Zoning Permit shall be null and void.
10. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, the ZEO may require submittal of information from a P.E. or L.S. to determine compliance with permit requirements and these regulations.
9.A.2. CHANGE OF USE
1. A Zoning Permit may be issued by the ZEO for a change of use when:
a. no or Minor Modifications to the site or structure are proposed,
b. such proposed use is permitted in the zone, and
c. such proposed use is substantially similar to the previous use.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.A
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
ZONING PERMIT APPLICATION
185
9.A.3. CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
1. Until the Zoning Enforcement Officer has issued a Certificate of Zoning Compliance which certifies conformance of the building, structure or use with these Regulations or with a variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or that the building, structure or use is a valid non-conforming building, structure or use under these Regulations:
a. no use of land shall be occupied, used or changed;
b. no use of a building or structure shall be undertaken or changed.
2. Pursuant to CGS Section 8-3(f), no Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued.
3. Final “As Built” Survey - Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, an "as-built" survey to ensure compliance with these Regulations. Such "as-built" survey shall:
a. Be prepared at the same scale as the Site Plan or Sketch Plan by a surveyor registered and licensed to conduct business in Connecticut;
b. Show the actual installation of all site improvements, the exact location of buildings, and other required items at a level of detail at or exceeding that of the approved Site Plan or Sketch Plan;
c. Include a certification as to substantial compliance with the approved Site Plan or Sketch Plan; and,
d. List or show all deviations from the approved Site Plan.
4. In the case of a Site Plan approved by the Commission, all "as-built" drawings which substantially deviate from the approved Site Plan shall be submitted to the Commission for its determination of acceptance or need for plan amendment.
5. When the Zoning Enforcement Office finds that the building, structure or use conforms with the requirements of these Regulations or with a variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued.
6. If the site improvements cannot be completed because of weather, or if an alteration does not require the vacating of the premises, or if a portion of a building or development is ready for occupancy before the completion of the entire building or development, or for other pertinent reasons, a conditional Certificate of Zoning Compliance may be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer for a period not to exceed 180 days, provided that a portion of the posted financial guarantee shall be retained in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of completing the remaining site improvements or, if necessary, a new financial guarantee shall be posted. Upon satisfactory completion of the remaining site improvements and the written request of the applicant, the Zoning Enforcement Officer and/or the Commission shall then release the financial guarantee.
7. In the event that any Certificate of Zoning Compliance is issued based on incorrect information or the specific conditions of approval are not strictly adhered to, such Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be null and void.
8. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3(f), the recipient of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance may publish notice of issuance of the Zoning Permit in a newspaper with substantial circulation in Brooklyn in order to establish the appeal period per CGS Section 8-7. Any such notice to be published by the recipient shall contain:
a. a description of the building, use or structure and its location,
b. the identity of the applicant, and
c. a statement that an aggrieved person may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 8-7.
9.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
PRE-APPLICATION REVIEWS
186
9.B. PRE-APPLICATION REVIEWS
9.B.1. PRE-APPLICATION REVIEW BY STAFF
1. Prior to the submission of an official application, it is recommended that the applicant meet with the Town Planner and/or the Zoning Enforcement Officer to discuss the proposed application in order to:
a. identify areas of concern or further study,
b. suggest possible enhancements,
c. identify the potential need for third party consultants, and
d. minimize delay, expense and inconvenience to the public, the applicant, and the Commission upon the future receipt, if any, of a formal application.
2. This meeting is recommended in order to facilitate consideration of factors that may be associated with a particular proposal before the applicant proceeds with preparation of detailed maps, plans and documents required for formal consideration.
3. Neither the pre-application plan nor the informal consideration by the Town Planner and/or the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be deemed to constitute any portion of the official and formal procedure of applying for any approval as contemplated herein or under the provision of the Connecticut General Statutes.
9.B.2. PRE-APPLICATION REVIEW BY COMMISSION
1. For larger and/or more complex applications, it is recommended that the applicant present a pre-application plan for informal consideration by the Commission prior to the submission of an official application.
2. This meeting and optional pre-application plan is recommended to:
a. facilitate consideration of factors and problems that may be associated with a particular proposal before the applicant proceeds with preparation of official maps, plans and documents required for formal consideration by the Commission, and/or
b. identify the potential need for third party consultants.
3. Neither the pre-application plan nor the informal consideration by the Commission shall be deemed to constitute any portion of the official and formal procedure of applying for any approval as contemplated herein or under the provision of the Connecticut General statutes.
4. While the meeting and optional pre-application plan should benefit any formal application, neither the applicant nor the Commission shall be bound by any statement made during such informal review, nor shall the statement of any Commission member be deemed to be an indication of prejudgment or prejudice, it being acknowledged by the applicant that the Commission response like the request itself are preliminary and subject to further refinement.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.C
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
SITE PLAN APPLICATION
187
9.C. SITE PLAN APPLICATION
9.C.1. PURPOSE
A Site Plan application is intended to provide the Commission with information that will enable it to determine that the proposed building, use or structure is consistent with the requirements of these Regulations.
9.C.2. APPLICABILITY
A Site Plan application in conformance with Section 9.C shall be submitted:
1. For any activity designated in the Regulations as requiring Site Plan Review.
2. For any activity designated in the Regulations as requiring Special Permit approval.
9.C.3. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
1. A Site Plan application shall be submitted to the Commission or its agent and shall include a completed application form and the appropriate fee as specified by town ordinance.
2. Consultant Review: The Commission may engage consultants including but not limited to, Consulting Town Planner, Consulting Town Engineer, or Consulting Town Landscape Architect to review the application(s), to prepare written findings and recommendations, to pre-pare oral testimony for the public hearing(s), to act as the commission’s agents, to meet with the applicant and the applicant’s agents prior to or during the application review process, and to function as or to advise the Architectural/Design Review Committee. If the Commission does engage consultants for any of these services for the subject application, the applicant shall be required to reimburse the Town for the costs of such consulting services. The Town shall set up a payment schedule/policy for said reimbursement payments.
3. A Site Plan application shall be accompanied by detailed plans that comply with the requirements in the Appendix A of these Regulations, signed and sealed by an appropriate professional, for review by the Commission and its designees.
4. The following information shall be provided by a qualified professional, as appropriate:
a. Name, address, telephone number, and email of the applicant, the owner of record as listed in the Town's land records, and the person responsible for preparing the application. If the applicant is not the owner of record, the owner of record shall also sign the application.
b. Statement of Use: A written description of the proposed use or uses in sufficient detail to permit the Commission to determine whether the proposed use complies with these Regulations.
c. An estimate of the amount and type of vehicular traffic to be generated on a daily basis and at peak hours.
d. Neighborhood Context: The Applicant shall provide a statement that describes the visual context of the street(s) on which the proposed project fronts. The statement will describe significant natural and built features in the immediate vicinity of the proposed project to include common landscape elements, walls, fences, architectural style of structures, common use of materials and any other materials or treatment which contributes to the visual appearance of the neighborhood. The applicant may submit photographs or graphics to illustrate how the pro-posed project fits into its immediate visual surroundings.
9.C BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
SITE PLAN APPLICATION
188
e. Evidence of submission, and review of plans to other State and Local regulatory agencies including but not limited to the following permits: Inland Wetlands permits, Department of Transportation encroachment permit and/or State Traffic Commission permit, Department of Environmental Protection water diversion permit, floodway encroachment permit, Discharge Permit, Water Pollution Control Authority, permission for sewer connection. Such evidence shall include a copy of application materials and comments from the review agency if available.
5. The Commission may, in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations and the Appendix A of these Regulations, require the submission of additional information as deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the application.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.C
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
SITE PLAN APPLICATION
189
9.C.4. PROCEEDINGS
1. The date of receipt for the Site Plan application shall be determined in accordance with Section 9.I.2.
2. An incomplete Site Plan application may be denied in accordance with Section 9.I.3 of these regulations.
3. If a Site Plan application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission not later than the day such Site Plan application is filed with the Commission.
4. Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with Section 9.I.6.4 of these regulations.
5. Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with Section 9.I.6.5 of these regulations.
6. Whenever a Site Plan application is required in conjunction with another application requiring a public hearing (such as a Special Permit application or a Zone Change application):
a. the time period for acting on the Site Plan application shall coincide with the time period for acting on the related application, and
b. a decision on the application shall be rendered within sixty-five days after the close of the public hearing on such other application except that the applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such period provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed sixty-five days.
7. Whenever approval of a Site Plan is the only approval required, a decision on the application shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after the date of receipt of such Site Plan application except that the applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such period provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed sixty-five (65) days.
8. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, if an application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive and the time for a decision by the Commission would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth (35th) day after a decision by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, the time period for a decision shall be extended to thirty-five (35) days after the decision of such agency.
9. The Commission may hold a public informational meeting on a Site Plan application.
10. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3(g), as amended, a Site Plan shall be presumed approved unless a decision to deny or modify it is rendered within the applicable time period specified above.
11. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such application.
12. To assist with its consideration of an application for Site Plan Review, the Commission may refer the plan to any department, agency or official it deems appropriate, to review and comment upon those technical matters which are the concern or responsibility of such department, agency or official.
13. As provided in Brooklyn Town Ordinance Chapter 20, the Commission may require additional technical assistance in evaluating an application, the expense of which is to be paid by the applicant.
9.C BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
SITE PLAN APPLICATION
190
9.C.5. CONSIDERATIONS
1. On a Site Plan application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the Commission shall:
a. wait to render its decision until the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission has submitted a report with its final decision, and
b. give due consideration to any report of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission when making its decision.
2. On a Site Plan application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under Section 9.I.6.4 of these regulations or notice to water companies under Section 9.I.6.5 of these regulations, the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received.
3. In accordance with CGS Section 8-25a, no proposal for development using water supplied by a company incorporated on or after October 1, 1984 shall be approved by the Commission unless such company has been issued a certificate pursuant to CGS Section 16-262m.
4. Before the Commission approves a Site Plan application, it shall determine that the application is in conformance with these Regulations.
5. A Site Plan may be approved with modifications by the Commission or denied if it fails to comply with the standards set forth in these Regulations.
6. In approving a Site Plan application, the Commission may impose conditions or modifications deemed necessary to protect public health, safety, welfare, convenience, and/or property values.
7. In cases where the development of the property is proposed to be undertaken in phases, the Commission may grant Site Plan Review limited to each phase of development. Each phase shall be capable of independent existence without the completion of succeeding phases.
8. As a condition of approval of a Site Plan, the Commission may require submission of a financial guarantee in accordance with Section 9.I.8 of these Regulations to ensure the installation and performance of erosion and sediment control measures at the site.
9. As a condition of approval of a Site Plan, the Commission may require a financial guarantee in accordance with Section 9.I.8 of these Regulations to ensure timely and adequate completion of any site improvements that will be conveyed to or controlled by the municipality.
10. When a financial guarantee is required by the Commission, the applicant shall provide a cost estimate of improvements to be guaranteed, together with a description of the basis for the estimate, prepared by a Professional Engineer.
11. When a financial guarantee is provided, the financial guarantee shall be held by the Town and the Commission shall not release the financial guarantee until it has determined that all of the improvements subject to the guarantee have been satisfactorily completed.
12. The Commission may require an "as built" A-2 survey of the lot showing the location of the buildings and improvements to determine compliance with the approved Site Plan.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.C
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
SITE PLAN APPLICATION
191
Site Plan Objectives – In reviewing and acting on a Site Plan application, the Commission’s objectives are as follows: 1. Protect the health, safety, convenience and property values of the public in general and the immediate neighborhood in particular. 2. Encourage or require such modifications of the plans as it shall deem necessary to ensure the accomplishment of the general objectives outlined in this Section. 3. Ensure that the proposed site plan will be in general conformance with the Plan of Conservation and Development, including the provision and adequacy of public improvements. 4. 5. Ensure that all buildings, structures, uses, equipment, or material are readily accessible for fire and police protection. 6. Ensure that appropriate provision is made for transportation including: ▪ adequate off-street parking and loading spaces are provided to prevent on-street and off-street traffic congestion; ▪ all parking spaces, maneuvering areas are suitably identified; ▪ entrances and exits are suitably identified and designed to specific use radii; ▪ the interior circulation system is adequately designed to provide safe and convenient access to all structures, uses, and/or parking spaces; ▪ parking areas are provided with suitable bumper guards, guard rails, islands, crosswalks, speed bumps and similar safety devices when deemed necessary to adequately protect life and property; and ▪ provision is made for safe pedestrian movement by avoidance of vehicular conflict within and adjacent to the property by the installation of sidewalks and other appropriate means. 7. Ensure that all proposed traffic and pedestrian access ways do not create traffic hazards and are: adequate, but not excessive in number; adequate in width, grade, alignment, and visibility; adequate in distance from street corners, places of public assembly and other access ways; and adequate in design for other similar safety considerations. 8. Ensure that the general landscaping of the site complies with the purpose and intent of these Regulations; that existing trees are preserved to the maximum extent possible; and that parking, storage, refuse and service areas are suitably screened during all seasons from the view of adjacent residential areas and public rights-of-way. (continued on next page)
9.C BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
SITE PLAN APPLICATION
192
(continued from previous page) Site Plan Objectives – 9. Ensure that lighting of the site shall be adequate at ground level for protection and safety of the public in regard to pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 10. Ensure that glare from the installation of outdoor lights of illuminated signs is properly shielded from the view of adjacent property and public rights-of-way. 11. Ensure that all utility systems are suitably located, adequately designed, and properly installed to serve the proposed uses, to protect the property from adverse air, water, or land pollution. 12. Ensure that the general landscaping of the site complies with the purpose and intent of these Regulations; that existing trees are preserved to the maximum extent possible; and that parking, storage, refuse and service areas are suitably screened during all seasons from the view of adjacent residential areas and public rights-of-way. 13. Ensure that the rate and quantity of storm water being discharged onto adjacent properties is not to be increased without drainage easements obtained from abutting landowner. 14. Ensure that in planning the layout on the site, and design of structures, consideration is given to energy conservation. 15. Ensure that the development of the site will preserve sensitive environmental land features such as steep slopes, wetlands, watercourses, and large rock outcroppings and will attempt to preserve public scenic views or historically significant buildings or sites.
9.C.6. ACTION DOCUMENTATION
1. Whenever it grants or denies a Site Plan application, the Commission shall state upon its record the reason(s) for its decision.
2. The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.
3. The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of a Site Plan to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Brooklyn within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered and, in any case where such notice is not published by the Commission, the person who submitted such plan may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.
4. On any application for which the period for approval has expired and on which no action has been taken, the Commission shall send a letter of approval to the applicant within fifteen (15) days of the date on which the period for approval expired and such letter of approval shall state the date on which the five-year completion period expires.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.C
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
SITE PLAN APPLICATION
193
9.C.7. FOLLOWING APPROVAL
1. A Zoning Permit must be obtained before the commencement of site work or uses approved as part of a Site Plan application.
2. The Zoning Permit and all site improvements shall be carried out in compliance with the Site Plan approved by the Commission.
3. Minor amendments or modifications to the Site Plan (adjustments in utility locations, landscaping materials, or other items but not including changes to building size, parking configuration, buffers, etc.) may be approved by Land Use Staff provided such approval is in writing.
4. Major amendments or modifications to the Site Plan (changes to building size, parking configuration, buffers, etc.) may only be approved by the Commission.
5. All conditions and improvements shown on the approved Site Plan shall continue in force as long as the use indicated on the approved Site Plan shall be in operation, regardless of any change in ownership of the property.
9.C.8. EXPIRATION AND COMPLETION
1. Unless otherwise provided in CGS Section 8-3, all work in connection with a Site Plan shall be completed within five (5) years after the date of approval of the plan and failure to complete all work within such five-year period shall result in automatic expiration of the approval of such Site Plan unless the Commission shall have granted an extension of the time to complete such work.
2. Provided the applicant has requested an extension prior to the expiration of the completion period, the Commission may grant one (1) or more extensions of the time to complete all or part of the work in connection with the Site Plan provided the total extension or extensions shall not exceed ten (10) years from the date of approval of such Site Plan.
3. The Commission may condition the approval of such extension on a determination of the adequacy of any financial guarantee in accordance with Section 9.I.8 or other surety.
9.D BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
194
9.D. SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
9.D.1. PURPOSE
Uses permitted as special permit uses subject to the approval of the commission are deemed to be permitted uses in their respective districts, subject to the satisfaction of the requirements and standards of this section. All Special Permit uses are declared to possess characteristics of such unique and distinct form that each specific use shall be considered as to its suitability in the proposed location on an individual basis.
9.D.2. APPLICABILITY
1. A Special Permit application shall be submitted for any activity designated in the Regulations as requiring Special Permit approval.
9.D.3. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
1. Each application for a Special Permit shall be accompanied by a complete Site Plan application in accordance with Section 9.C unless the Zoning Enforcement Officer finds that there are no physical changes proposed to the site or any building or structure and the submission of a Site Plan application is not necessary for the Commission to evaluate the proposal.
2. A Special Permit application, including five sets of the following information, maps, and plans in accordance with the requirements of this Section, shall be submitted to the Commission or agent and shall include a completed application form and the appropriate fee.
3. The following information shall be provided by a qualified professional, as appropriate:
a. Architectural design data, including architectural profiles and identification of texture, color and type of building materials to be used.
b. Environmental Impact Statement: If the scale or nature of the development warrants, the Commission may require, by a majority vote of the members of the commission present and voting, the applicant to provide additional environmental information for the purpose of compiling a complete environmental impact analysis.
c. For all site plans involving 25 or more parking spaces, a drive-thru window (s), and/or any uses projected to generate more than 200 vehicle trips per day, a traffic impact analysis report, prepared by a Connecticut-licensed professional engineer specializing in traffic studies, shall be submitted with the application. Said traffic report shall include:
1) Background traffic volumes
2) Projections of traffic volumes due to development and distribution of same on roadway system
3) Analysis of background & projected traffic volumes and impacts on adjacent roadway network
4) Analysis if historical accident record
5) Sight line analyses for all driveways
6) Traffic analysis to include AM and PM peak hours and daily volumes
7) Sites having significant truck traffic (greater than 5% of total site-generated traffic) will require analysis to determine impacts on the roadway system
8) Other items that may need to be addressed include: vehicle noise, impacts on neighbors; headlight impacts; internal circulation of site; and any other traffic related concerns as may apply to the site.
4. Notwithstanding the basic submission requirements, the Commission may require the submission of such additional information as the Commission deems necessary to determine compliance of the proposed use with these Regulations.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.D
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
195
5. If the Commission finds that certain information is not necessary for review of the project, they may waive the submission of that information by a three-quarters affirmative vote of the membership present. All requests for waiver shall be in writing, indicating why the applicant believes that the application can be reviewed completely by the Commission without the information to be waived.
6. The Commission shall not be required to hear an application relating to the same request or substantially the same request, more than twice in a twelve-month period.
9.D.4. PROCEEDINGS
1. The date of receipt for the Special Permit application shall be determined in accordance with Section 9.I.2.
2. An incomplete Special Permit application may be denied in accordance with Section 9.I.3 of these regulations.
3. If a Special Permit application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission not later than the day such application is filed with the Commission.
9.D BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
196
4. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Special Permit application and shall:
a. publish a legal notice in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.I.6.1 of these Regulations,
b. require the applicant notify abutting property owners in accordance with Section 9.I.6.2, and
c. require that the applicant post a sign on the land affected by the application in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.I.6.3 of these Regulations.
Public Hearing Sign Required
5. Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.I.6.4 of these regulations..
6. Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.I.6.5 of these regulations.
7. The Commission shall process the Special Permit application within the period of time provided under CGS Section 8-7d:
a. the public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application,
b. the public hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences,
c. all decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing, and
d. the applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days.
8. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, if an application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, and the time for a decision by the Commission would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth day after a decision by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, the time period for a decision shall be extended to thirty-five (35) days after the decision of such agency.
9. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such application.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.D
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
197
9.D.5. SPECIAL PERMIT CRITERIA
In considering an application for a Special Permit, the Commission shall evaluate the application with respect to the following factors, except that the Commission may determine that some factors may not be applicable to certain types of applications:
1. Zoning Purposes Whether the proposed use or activity is consistent with the purposes of the Regulations. 2. Environmental Protection and Conservation Whether the use or activity will materially impair the natural environment of the nearby area or the community and whether appropriate consideration has been given to the protection, preservation, and/or enhancement of natural, scenic, historic, or unique resources including, where appropriate, the use of conservation restrictions to protect and permanently preserve natural, scenic, historic, or unique features which enhance the character and environment of the area. 3. Overall Compatibility Whether the proposed use will serve a community need or convenience and whether the proposed use will have a detrimental effect on neighboring properties or the development of the zone. 4. Suitable Location and Lot for Use Whether the nature, scope, size and intensity of the operations involved with the use or resulting from the proposed use and the location of the site are such that the use will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development in the zone in which it is located. The lot on which the use is to be established shall be of sufficient size and adequate dimension to permit conduct of the use and provision of buildings, other structures and facilities in such a manner that will not be detrimental to the neighborhood or adjacent property. 5. Appropriate Improvements Whether the design elements of the proposed development (such as location, type, size and height of buildings and other structures, parking, access, landscaping, screening, lighting, signage, etc.) will be attractive and suitable in relation to the site characteristics, the style of other buildings in the immediate area, and the existing and desirable future character of the neighborhood in which the use is located.
9.D BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
198
6. Suitable Transportation Conditions Whether the streets, driveways and other traveled ways are or will be of such size, condition and capacity (width, grade, alignment, sight lines, and visibility) to adequately accommodate the traffic volume and parking demand to be generated by the particular proposed use and not create problems. 7. Adequate Public Utilities and Services Whether the provisions for water supply, sewage disposal, waste management, storm water drainage, and emergency access conform to accepted engineering practices, comply with all standards of the appropriate regulatory authorities, and will not unduly burden the capacity of such facilities. 8. Long Term Viability Whether adequate provision has been made for the sustained maintenance of the proposed development (structures, streets, and other improvements). 9. Nuisance Avoidance Whether the use, configuration, design and/or hours of operation are appropriate in order to control noise, light, odors, parking visibility, unsightly appearance, erosion, water contamination and storm-water runoff on the site and in relation to the surrounding area and whether the proposed activities will unreasonably impact nearby properties. 10. Plan of Conservation and Development Whether the proposed use or activity is in accordance with or facilitates achievement of one or more of the goals, objectives, policies, and recommendations of the Plan of Conservation and Development, as amended. 11. Mitigation Whether adequate provisions have been made to moderate or mitigate neighborhood impacts by limiting the intensity of use of the property (including, without limitation, such considerations as the area devoted to the use, the number of people involved in the use, the number of events or activities proposed, the hours of operation, etc.) or by modifying the location or configuration of the proposed use.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.D
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
199
9.D.6. CONSIDERATIONS
1. The applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating that the applicable Special Permit criteria in Section 9.D.4 of these Regulations are addressed.
2. Before the Commission approves a Special Permit application, it shall determine that the application:
a. has, in the sole discretion of the Commission, satisfied the applicable Special Permit criteria Section 9.D.4 of these Regulations, and
b. is in conformance with other applicable provisions of these Regulations, and
c. is in harmony with the purposes and intent of these Regulations.
3. For a Special Permit application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the Commission shall:
a. wait to render its decision until the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission has submitted a report with its final decision, and
b. give due consideration to any report of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission when making its decision.
4. On a Special Permit application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under Section 9.I.6.4 of these regulations or notice to water companies under Section 9.I.6.5 of these regulations, the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received.
5. In accordance with CGS Section 8-25a, no proposal for development using water supplied by a company incorporated on or after October 1, 1984 shall be approved by the Commission unless such company has been issued a certificate pursuant to CGS Section 16-262m.
6. In granting a Special Permit, the Commission may determine whether and to what extent permitted uses may be undertaken and stipulate such conditions as are reasonable and necessary to:
a. protect or promote the public health, safety or welfare;
b. protect or promote public convenience or property values; or
c. enhance overall neighborhood compatibility.
7. A Special Permit and any condition attached to the granting of a Special Permit shall:
a. remain with the property as long as the Special Permit use is in operation, and
b. continue in force and effect regardless of any change in ownership of the property.
9.D BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
200
9.D.7. ACTION DOCUMENTATION
1. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve, disapprove or approve with conditions the proposed Special Permit.
2. Whenever it acts on a Special Permit application, the Commission shall state upon its record the reason(s) for its decision.
3. In granting a Special Permit, the Commission may attach such conditions and safeguards as may be required to protect the public health, safety and general welfare and to ensure continued compliance with these Regulations. Such conditions and safeguards may include, but shall not be limited to:
a. Periodic review and renewal of the Special Permit by the Commission to determine continuing compliance therewith.
b. Conservation restrictions necessary to protect and permanently preserve unique natural site features.
c. A financial guarantee in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.I.8 of these Regulations.
4. Whenever it acts on a Special Permit application, the Commission may:
a. Establish a condition that commencement of the use or construction begin within a certain time frame.
b. Require a financial guarantee in accordance with Section 9.I.8 of these Regulations in an amount and in a form satisfactory to the Commission, based upon a cost estimate of improvements provided by the applicant, to ensure satisfactory completion of site improvements other than buildings.
5. Any decision to grant a Special Permit shall:
a. state the name of the owner of record,
b. contain a description of the premises to which it relates,
c. identify the section of the Regulations under which the Special Permit was granted,
d. specify the nature of the Special Permit, and
e. state the conditions of approval, if any.
6. The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Special Permit application to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.
7. The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Special Permit application to be published within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Brooklyn.
8. In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen-day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.D
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
201
9.D.8. FOLLOWING APPROVAL
1. Following approval of a Special Permit application and expiration of the appeal period, a Special Permit granted by the Commission shall become effective only upon the filing of a copy, certified by the Commission, in the land records of the Town, in accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 8-3d.
2. Additionally, one (1) copy of each page of the approved plans shall be printed on archival material (mylar) and shall be submitted to Town staff for signature by the Chairman. Paper proof plots for review by Town staff are recommended before printing on archival material.
a. Each such plan shall bear the seal and signature of the appropriate professional(s) which prepared the drawing.
b. At least one (1) sheet shall bear a copy of the decision letter of the Commission and any other Town regulatory agencies authorizing the activity.
c. Each such plan shall contain a signature block where the Chairman of the Commission can indicate the approval of the Commission and state the date on which the five-year period for completing all work in connection with such Site Plan, as set forth CGS Section 8-3d, expires.
d. Following signature by the Chairman, such plans shall be filed in the Town Clerk’s Office within ninety (90) days after the expiration of the appeal period or conclusion of any appeal. An extension of not more than one hundred and eighty (180) days may be granted by the Commission upon written request by the applicant prior to the expiration date.
3. Failure to file such record of Special Permit and associated plans within the time frame specified above will render the approval null and void.
4. A Special Permit shall authorize only the particular use or uses specified in the Commission's approval.
5. Failure to strictly adhere to the documents, plans, terms, conditions and/or safeguards approved by the Commission shall be a violation of these Regulations. The Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Commission shall notify the applicant in writing of the specifics of the non-compliance and shall provide a reasonable time period for compliance therewith. Unless there is full compliance within such time period, the Commission may, following a duly advertised public hearing, rescind and revoke such Special Permit.
6. An approved Special Permit may be amended or modified, provided that application shall be made in the same manner as the original application:
a. Amendments to the Special Permit which the Commission finds to be minor in nature, do not substantially alter the Special Permit, and will not adversely affect adjacent properties or the neighborhood, may be approved by the Commission without another public hearing.
b. Amendments to the Special Permit which would substantially alter the Special Permit or increase the existing building coverage or gross floor area of the use may be approved by the Commission only after a public hearing and subject to the same procedures for approval of a Special Permit.
7. The Special Permit uses as set forth in these Regulations are deemed to be permitted uses in their respective zones when the Special Permit is granted by the Commission, subject to compliance with the requirements and standards set forth in this Section in addition to all other requirements of these Regulations.
8. Unless otherwise established by the Commission, a Special Permit, along with any conditions and safeguards attached thereto, shall remain with the property as long as the use allowed by the Special Permit remains in operation. Such conditions and safeguards shall continue in force regardless of any change in ownership of the property.
9.E BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
TEXT AMENDMENT APPLICATION
202
9.E. TEXT AMENDMENT APPLICATION
9.E.1. APPLICABILITY
A Text Amendment application shall be submitted for any proposal to amend, change, or repeal any section of these Regulations.
9.E.2. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
1. A Text Amendment application shall be submitted to the Commission or agent and shall include a completed application form and the appropriate fee. The Commission shall not be required to pay a fee for a text amendment application made on its own initiative or as a result of a petition submitted by residents.
2. A Text Amendment application shall be accompanied by the wording of the existing and proposed text and any other supporting information, including reason(s) for the proposed amendment.
3. The Commission shall not be required to hear any petition or petitions relating to the same text changes, or substantially the same text changes, more than once in a period of twelve (12) months unless it finds, on facts presented in writing, that a material change in the situation justifies this action. A change of ownership of property or any interest therein shall not be deemed a material change in the situation for the purpose of this Section.
9.E.3. PROCEEDINGS
10. The date of receipt for the Text Amendment application shall be determined in accordance with Section 9.I.2.
11. An incomplete Text Amendment application may be denied in accordance with Section 9.I.3.
12. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Text Amendment application and:
a. shall cause a legal notice to be published in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.I.6.1. of these Regulations.
b. may publish the full text of such proposed regulation in such notice.
13. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3b, the Commission shall give written notice to the regional planning agency when any portion of the land affected by a regulation change affecting the use of a zone is located within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of another municipality and:
a. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested.
b. Such notice shall be made not later than thirty (30) days before the public hearing.
c. The regional planning agency may submit its advisory findings and recommendations to the Commission at or before the hearing but if such report is not submitted, it shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove of the proposal.
14. Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.I.6.4.
15. The Commission may refer any application to amend these Regulations to any Town department or other agency the Commission deems appropriate and may request any such department or agency to submit a report to the Commission on matters that are of concern to such department or agency.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.E
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
TEXT AMENDMENT APPLICATION
203
16. A copy of the proposed regulation shall be filed by the applicant in the office of the Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten (10) days before the public hearing.
17. The Commission shall process the Text Amendment application within the period of time provided under CGS Section 8-7d:
a. The public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application.
b. The public hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences.
c. All decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing.
d. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days.
e. These provisions shall not apply to any action initiated by the Commission regarding adoption or change of any Regulation.
18. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such application.
9.E.4. DECISION CONSIDERATIONS
1. The Commission shall act upon the changes requested in such Text Amendment application.
2. On a Text Amendment application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under Section 9.I.6.4 or notice to a regional planning agency under CGS Section 8-3b:
a. Any report received from those agencies shall be made a part of the record of such hearing.
b. The Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received.
3. In making its decision the Commission shall:
a. consider whether the text amendment will be in accordance with a comprehensive plan (the overall scheme of the zoning map and these Regulations), and
b. take into consideration the Plan of Conservation and Development, prepared pursuant to CGS Section 8-23.
4. Before approving any Text Amendment application, the Commission shall determine that the proposed regulation change will aid in:
a. protecting the public health, safety, welfare, or property values, and
b. attaining the purposes of these Regulations.
5. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3(b), such text change(s) shall be established, changed or repealed only by a majority vote of all the members of the Commission (i.e., the full number of regular members of the Commission, not just those in attendance).
9.E BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
TEXT AMENDMENT APPLICATION
204
9.E.5. ACTION DOCUMENTATION
1. Whenever the Commission acts upon a Text Amendment application, it shall state upon the record the reason(s) for its decision.
2. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3a(a), the Commission shall state on the record its findings on consistency of a proposed zoning regulation or text change with the Plan of Conservation and Development, as may be amended.
3. As part of approving a Text Amendment application:
a. the Commission shall establish an effective date for the Regulation change provided that a notice of the decision of the Commission shall have been published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Brooklyn before such effective date, or
b. if an effective date is not so specified, the text amendment shall become effective fifteen (15) days after publication in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Brooklyn.
4. The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Text Amendment application to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.
5. The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Text Amendment application to be published within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Brooklyn.
6. In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen-day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.
9.E.6. FOLLOWING APPROVAL
A regulation amendment approved by the Commission shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk before the effective date.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.F
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
ZONE CHANGE APPLICATION
205
9.F. ZONE CHANGE APPLICATION
9.F.1. APPLICABILITY
A Zone Change application shall be submitted for any proposal to alter the zoning designation of any parcel(s) of land or part thereof.
9.F.2. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
1. A Zone Change application shall be submitted to the Commission or agent and shall include a completed application form and the appropriate fee. The Commission shall not be required to pay a fee for a zone change application made on its own initiative.
2. A Zone Change application shall be accompanied by a listing of the Assessor’s map and lot of all affected properties and a map at an appropriate scale indicating existing and proposed zone boundaries.
3. The Commission shall not be required to hear a Zone Change application that has been rejected within one (1) year from the date of rejection unless it finds, on facts presented in writing, that a material change in the situation justifies this action. A change of ownership of property or any interest therein shall not be deemed a material change in the situation for the purpose of this section.
9.F.3. PROCEEDINGS
1. The date of receipt for the Zone Change application shall be determined in accordance with Section 9.I.2.
2. An incomplete Zone Change application may be denied in accordance with Section 9.I.3.
3. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Zone Change application and shall:
a. publish a legal notice in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.I.6.1 of these Regulations,
b. require the applicant notify abutting property owners in accordance with Section 9.I.6.2, and
c. require that the applicant post a sign on the land affected by the application in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.I.6.3 of these Regulations.
Public Hearing Sign Required
9.F BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
ZONE CHANGE APPLICATION
206
4. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3b, the Commission shall give written notice to the regional planning agency when any portion of the land affected by a map change is located within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of another municipality and:
a. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested.
b. Such notice shall be made not later than thirty (30) days before the public hearing.
c. The regional planning agency may submit its advisory findings and recommendations to the Commission at or before the hearing but if such report is not submitted, it shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove of the proposal.
5. Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.I.6.4.
6. The Commission may refer any application to amend the zoning map to any Town department or other agency the Commission deems appropriate and may request any such department or agency to submit a report to the Commission on matters that are of concern to such department or agency.
7. A copy of the proposed zoning map change shall be filed by the applicant in the office of the Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten (10) days before the public hearing.
8. The Commission shall process the Zone Change application within the period of time provided under CGS Section 8-7d:
a. The public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application.
b. The public hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences.
c. All decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing.
d. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days.
e. These provisions shall not apply to any action initiated by the Commission regarding a zoning map change.
9. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such application.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.F
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
ZONE CHANGE APPLICATION
207
9.F.4. DECISION CONSIDERATIONS
1. The Commission shall act upon the changes requested in such Zone Change application.
2. On a Zone Change application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under Section 9.I.6.4 or notice to a regional planning agency under CGS Section 8-3b:
a. Any report received from those agencies shall be made a part of the record of such hearing.
b. The Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received from such agencies.
3. Changes in zone boundaries shall follow property lines or geo-physical features, where appropriate.
4. Before approving any Zone Change application, the Commission shall determine that the proposed regulation change:
a. is in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and Development,
b. is suitable for the intended location,
c. will aid in protecting the public health, safety, welfare, or property values, and
d. will aid in attaining the purposes of these Regulations.
5. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3(b), such zone change(s) shall be established, changed or repealed only by a majority vote of all the members of the Commission (i.e., the full number of regular members of the Commission, not just those in attendance) except that, if a protest against a proposed change is filed at or before a hearing with the Commission, signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the area of the land affected by such proposed change including lots within five hundred feet in all directions of the property included in the proposed change, such change shall not be adopted except by a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the Commission.
9.F BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
ZONE CHANGE APPLICATION
208
9.F.5. ACTION DOCUMENTATION
1. Whenever the Commission acts upon a Zone Change application, it shall state upon the record:
a. The reason(s) for its decision.
b. Its findings on consistency of the proposed zone change with the Plan of Conservation and Development, as amended.
2. As part of approving a Zone Change application:
a. the Commission shall establish an effective date for the zoning map change provided that a notice of the decision of the Commission shall have been published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Brooklyn before such effective date, or
b. if an effective date is not so specified, the zoning map change shall become effective fifteen (15) days after publication in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Brooklyn.
3. The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Zone Change application to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.
4. The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Zone Change application to be published within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Brooklyn.
5. In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen-day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.
9.F.6. FOLLOWING APPROVAL
1. The new Zoning Map with the approved change shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk before the effective date.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.G
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
209
9.G. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
9.G.1. POWERS AND DUTIES
A Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall be established and the ZBA shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General statutes, prescribed by these Regulations, or conferred by general law.
1. Appeals –
d. The ZBA shall have the authority to hear and decide upon any appeal where it is alleged that there is an error in the order, requirements, decision or determination of any official charged with the enforcement of these Regulations.
e. No question of hardship shall be involved in such an appeal, and the action of the ZBA thereon shall be limited to the question of whether or not, and to what extent such order, requirement, decision, or determination was a correct interpretation of the subject provision of these Regulations.
2. Variances –
a. Except as provided below, the ZBA shall have the authority to vary or adjust the strict application of these Regulations in only those cases where the unusual size, shape or topography of a lot or other unusual physical conditions pertaining to it or to any building situated thereon make it impossible to strictly apply a specific provision of these Regulations to such lot without resulting in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship, so that substantial justice shall be done and the public health, safety and welfare secured.
b. The Board is prohibited from granting a variance:
• that has the effect of varying any condition or requirement set forth in these Regulations for a Special Permit use when such uses are only permitted in the subject zone when all conditions or requirements are satisfied.
• which permits or extends a use which is otherwise not permitted by these Regulations.
• that has the effect of permitting a use in any zone that is not permitted in that zone by these Regulations.
c. Variances are to be granted sparingly, and only to the minimum extent necessary to allow property to be used for the least intense use that is permitted in the subject zone.
3. Other Matters - To hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under any provisions of these Regulations or the Connecticut General statutes.
4. The Board may adopt such other procedures as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section or the provisions of the Connecticut General statutes.
9.G BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
210
9.G.2. APPEALS OF ORDER
1. All appeals to the ZBA from an order, requirement, decision or determination of any official charged with the enforcement of these Regulations shall be taken within fifteen (15) calendar days of such order, requirement, decision or determination.
2. Such appeals shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the ZBA and shall be accompanied by a filing fee to cover the cost of processing the appeal.
3. When acting on an appeal from a decision of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Board shall have all the powers of such Officer, but only to the extent that the Board’s actions deal directly with the subject of such appeal.
4. The Board may reverse, affirm wholly or partly, or may modify any order, requirement or decision appealed from and make such order, requirement or decision as in its opinion should be made.
9.G.3. VARIANCES
1. All applications for variances shall be submitted in writing in a form prescribed by the ZBA. The ZBA may deny an application for incomplete information having been submitted.
2. If the ZBA has previously denied a variance request, it shall not be required to hear an application for the same variance or substantially the same variance for a period of six months after the date of denial, unless the circumstances associated with the application have substantially changed. A change in ownership of property or any interests therein shall not be deemed a substantial change.
3. The Board may require the filing of a survey prepared by a land surveyor licensed to practice in Connecticut when the variance is dimensional in nature or such survey is integral to the understanding of the application.
4. The date of receipt for the Variance application shall be determined in accordance with Section 9.I.2.
5. Whenever an application for a variance is joined with an appeal of any order, requirement or decision of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Board shall decide the issues presented in the appeal before considering the variance application.
6. The ZBA shall hold a public hearing on all appeals and applications for variances and shall publish a legal notice in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.I.6.1 of these Regulations.
7. The Board shall process the Variance application within the period of time provided under CGS Section 8-7d, as amended:
a. The public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application.
b. The public hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences.
c. All decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing.
d. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days.
8. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Board, withdraw such application.
9. To assist with its consideration of an appeal or application, the ZBA may refer such appeal or application to any department, agency or official it deems appropriate, to review and comment upon those technical matters which are the concern or responsibility of such department, agency or official.
10. Every application for variance shall be transmitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission and, on or before the public hearing held by the ZBA on such application for variance, the Planning and Zoning Commission may make a report with recommendations thereon, such report to be a part of the record of the case.
11. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to vary the application of the Zoning Regulations.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.G
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
211
12. Variances shall only be granted where such an action would be in harmony with the purposes of these Regulations, and where the literal enforcement of these Regulations would result in unusual hardship.
13. The burden is on the applicant to demonstrate that the requirements for a variance have been met.
14. No variance shall be granted by the ZBA unless it makes the following findings:
a. a peculiar or unique characteristic of the property (which shall be recorded in the minutes of the Board) is such that the literal enforcement of the zoning regulations would result in exceptional or unusual hardship other than a financial hardship or loss of financial advantage;
b. the nature of the hardship (which shall be recorded in the minutes of the Board) is not a self-inflicted hardship which is the result of an action by the applicant or by someone other than the applicant such as a previous owner of the property, nor is the hardship a result of conditions which the applicant can alter, but prefers not to change;
c. the applicant has demonstrated that he or she has pursued all other alternatives available under these Regulations; and
d. the applicant has demonstrated that the granting of the requested variance will have no adverse effect on the surrounding properties with regard to health, safety, welfare or property values, and that the variance is consistent with the general purpose of these Regulations.
9.G.4. ACTION DOCUMENTATION
1. Whenever the ZBA makes a decision, it shall include the reason for its decision in its minutes as part of the record and, for a variance application, shall also indicate:
a. the specific provision of these Regulations which was varied,
b. the extent of the variance,
c. the specific hardship upon which its decision was based, and
d. its findings with regard to the criteria listed in Section 9.G.3.
2. In exercising any of its authority, the ZBA may attach any conditions and safeguards as may be required to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, and to ensure ongoing compliance with these Regulations. Violation of such conditions and safeguards shall be deemed to be a violation of these Regulations.
3. The Board shall send, by certified mail, a copy of its decision to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.
4. The Board shall cause notice of the approval or denial of any application to be published within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Brooklyn.
5. In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen-day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.
6. Any variance granted by the ZBA shall only become effective upon its filing by the applicant in the office of the Town Clerk and in the Town land records except that any variance which is not recorded within one year from its effective date shall be null and void.
9.G BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
212
9.G.5. USE VARIANCES
1. In addition to complying with all the requirements contained in Section 9.G.3, no use variance shall be granted by the ZBA which would permit:
a. a use prohibited either implicitly or explicitly by these Regulations;
b. the expansion of a non-conforming use;
c. the number of dwelling units on a lot to exceed the maximum allowed in the zone in which the lot is located; or,
d. a use otherwise allowed by Special Permit in the zone in which the use is located.
2. No use variance shall be granted where a dimensional variance would relieve the exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship.
3. The use variance granted shall be the minimum variance necessary to allow a reasonable use of the property
9.G.6. RECORD KEEPING AND REPORTING
1. The Board shall maintain a record of all actions, including findings upon their issuance or denial, as the case may be.
2. A summary of this record shall be included in the annual report of the Board, a copy of which is to be filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission.
3. The Board shall maintain a computerized record of all variance actions including the following:
a. the unique identification number of the variance application; and
b. the information specified in Section 9.G.4.1. of these Regulations.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.H
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
ENFORCEMENT
213
9.H. ENFORCEMENT
9.H.1. ENFORCEMENT
1. The Commission shall provide for the manner in which the Zoning Regulations shall be enforced.
2. The Commission shall appoint a Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) who shall be responsible to the Commission and act as its representative in the performance of such inspection duties in connection with the enforcement of these Regulations. As necessary, the Commission may designate one or more agents to act on their behalf.
3. No commission, board, agency, officer or employee of the Town shall issue, grant, or approve any permit, license, certificate, or other authorization for construction, reconstruction, alteration, enlargement, or moving of any building or structure or for any use of land or building that would not be in full compliance with the provisions of these Regulations, except as permitted by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 9.G. Any such permit, license, certificate, or other authorization issued, granted or approved in violation of the provisions of these Regulations shall be null and void and of no effect without the necessity of any proceeding or revocation or nullification thereof.
4. The Brooklyn Planning and Zoning Commission, the ZEO, or other official having jurisdiction, in addition to other remedies may institute an action or proceeding to prevent the erection, alteration, reconstruction or to prevent the illegal occupation of buildings or land.
9.H BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
ENFORCEMENT
214
9.H.2. PENALTIES
1. Any person who shall violate any provision of these Regulations may be issued a citation in accordance with Section 20-2 of the Brooklyn Town Code and may be subject to any applicable remedy and/or penalty prescribed by the General statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended.
2. The penalties prescribed in CGS Section 8-12, as amended, shall be applied to any person who:
a. having been served by the Zoning Enforcement Officer with an order to discontinue any such violation, fails to comply with such order within 10 days after such service; or,
b. having been served with a cease and desist order with respect to a violation involving unauthorized cutting of trees, grading of land or removal of earth in violation of an approved plan, fails to comply with such order immediately; or,
c. continues to violate any provision of these Regulations in the manner named in such order.
3. Penalties in accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 8-12, as amended, may apply to:
a. the owner or agent of a building or premises where a violation of any provision of these Regulations has been committed or exists;
b. the lessee or tenant of an entire building or an entire premises where such violation has been committed or exists;
c. the owner, agent, lessee or tenant of any part of a building or premises in which such violation has been committed or exists; and/or
d. the agent, architect, builder, contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation exists.
Excerpts From CGS Section 8-12: • [Fines of] not less than ten dollars or more than one hundred dollars for each day that such violation continues; but, if the offense is willful, the person convicted thereof shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars or more than two hundred fifty dollars for each day that such violation continues, • [Imprisonment of] not more than ten days for each day such violation continues not to exceed a maximum of thirty days for such violation, • [Both fines and imprisonment] • [Failure to comply with] an order to discontinue any such violation … within ten days after such service, or [failing to comply] with a cease and desist order … immediately, or [continuing] to violate any provision of the regulations … shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars, • If the court renders judgment for such municipality and finds that the violation was willful, the court shall allow such municipality its costs, together with reasonable attorney’s fees to be taxed by the court.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.I
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
215
9.I. PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
9.I.1. APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Applications to the Commission or Board shall be submitted to Land Use staff.
2. Applications shall be submitted on forms obtained from the Land Use staff for the type of application being submitted.
3. Applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee(s) in accordance with the Ordinance Establishing Individual Cost Based Fees for Municipal Land Use Applications of the Town of Brooklyn, except that the Commission or the Town of Brooklyn shall be exempt from any application fee.
4. Applications shall be submitted with such supporting plans, materials, and other information as required by these Regulations.
5. Applications shall be signed by the applicant or an authorized agent.
6. Applications shall be signed by the owner of the property affected unless the application is for a text change or is a map change initiated by the Commission.
7. Applications should be submitted at least 10 days prior to the monthly Commission meeting.
9.I.2. DATE OF RECEIPT
For the purposes of calculating statutory timeframes for processing applications, the date of receipt of an application to the Commission or the Board shall be:
1. the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission or the Board immediately following the day of submission of the application to the Zoning Enforcement Officer or agent, or
2. thirty-five (35) days after submission, whichever is sooner.
9.I.3. INCOMPLETE APPLICATIONS
1. Each application shall be reviewed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or agent to determine whether the application is substantially complete.
2. An application requiring approval from the Commission or Board shall not be considered actually complete until all of the information as required by these Regulations, the Commission, or the Board has been received by the Commission or the Board at a regularly scheduled meeting.
3. An incomplete application or an application submitted without the requisite fee may be denied.
9.I.4. SEQUENCE OF HEARINGS
Where a proposed development or activity requires multiple applications, the Commission or the Board may conduct any public hearings simultaneously or in the order they deem appropriate.
9.I BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
216
9.I.5. CONSULTATIONS / EXCESS COSTS
9.I.5.1. ADVISORY REFERRALS
1. On any application, the Commission or Board may seek the advice and opinion of other officials, boards, or commissions (such as the Brooklyn Conservation Commission) to assist it in evaluating applications.
9.I.5.2. OUTSIDE CONSULTANTS
1. In accordance with Brooklyn Ordinance 20-1.3.B, the Commission or Board may, at the applicant’s expense, retain a civil engineer, a traffic engineer, an environmental professional, an architect, a landscape architect, a professional land use planner, and/or other consultant(s) to review, comment, and guide its deliberations on any application.
2. Prior to actually retaining such outside consultant(s), the Commission or the Board shall make findings that the nature and intensity of the proposal may have a significant impact on Brooklyn and that:
a. Town staff will not be able to complete a technical review of the application in a timely fashion, or
b. that the proposal is of such a nature as to require expertise not available from staff.
3. The Commission, Board or Zoning Enforcement Officer or agent shall estimate the projected expenses for reviewing, evaluating and processing the application based upon information received from the potential consultant(s) and shall notify the applicant of such supplemental fee estimate.
4. The applicant shall submit funds sufficient to cover the basic application fee plus the cost of the consultant review within fifteen (15) calendar days of being notified by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and the application shall be deemed incomplete until the fee(s) have been submitted.
5. Should the estimate of supplemental funds prove inadequate, the Commission, Board or Zoning Enforcement Officer shall recalculate the projected expenses for reviewing, evaluating and processing the application and notify the applicant of such supplemental fee estimate.
6. The applicant shall submit funds sufficient to cover the supplemental fee estimate within fifteen (15) calendar days of being notified by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and the application shall be deemed incomplete until the fee(s) have been submitted.
7. Any portion of the estimated processing fee not expended by the Town on the project shall be refunded to the applicant upon completion of the review, evaluation and processing of the application.
8. No permits shall be issued until all consulting fees are paid.
9.I.5.3. EXCESS COSTS
1. In accordance with Brooklyn Ordinance 20-1.3.B, the Commission or Board shall bill the applicant for any costs incurred by the Town of Brooklyn in processing the application in excess of the estimated processing fee(s) paid by the applicant and this bill shall be paid by the applicant within fifteen (15) calendar days of such notice regardless of whether the application is approved, denied, or withdrawn.
2. No permits shall be issued until all processing fees are paid.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.I
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
217
9.I.6. NOTICE PROVISIONS
9.I.6.1. NOTICE BY NEWSPAPER
1. When a public hearing is required by these Regulations or scheduled by the Commission or Board, the Zoning Enforcement Officer or agent shall cause notice of the hearing to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Brooklyn.
2. Such notice shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days, nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the date of the hearing.
9.I.6.2. NOTICE TO ABUTTERS
1. When notice to abutters is required by these Regulations, the applicant shall, at their own expense, send notice of the nature of the application and the date and place of the public hearing to all owners of record of any abutting properties as well as to owners of record of those properties that lie opposite the parcel across any street or thoroughfare.
2. The current assessor records shall be utilized to determine mailing addresses.
3. Such notice shall be mailed at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing and evidence of such mailing shall be provided to the Commission by submitting:
a. A copy of the notice sent, and
b. certificates of mailing.
9.I.6.3. POSTING OF SIGN
1. When posting of a sign is required by these Regulations, the applicant shall, at their expense, post at least one sign in a conspicuous location visible to passersby on each street on which the property affected by the application has frontage or access.
2. The sign shall be at least two feet by three feet with letters at least three inches (3”) in height.
3. The sign shall:
a. give information as to the type of application,
b. give information as to the time, date and location of the public hearing pertaining to the application,
c. be clearly legible from the street, and
d. be posted at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing.
4. The applicant shall file a written statement with the Commission at the time of the public hearing certifying that the required signs were posted as required by these Regulations.
5. Failure to post and maintain the signs as required by this Section or unclear signage shall constitute grounds for denial of the application.
6. Any signs shall be removed within two (2) days following the close of the public hearing.
9.I BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
218
9.I.6.4. NOTIFICATION TO ABUTTING MUNICIPALITIES
1. In accordance with CGS Section 8-7d(f), the Commission or Board shall notify the clerk of an adjoining municipality of any application concerning any project on any site in which:
a. any portion of the property affected by a decision is within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality,
b. a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project shall use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site,
c. a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project shall flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality, or
d. water runoff from the improved site shall impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
2. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the day of the submission to the Zoning Enforcement Officer or agent of the application, petition, request or plan.
3. No hearing shall be conducted on any such application unless the adjoining municipality has received the notice required under this Section.
4. Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, request or plan.
9.I.6.5. NOTIFICATION TO WATER COMPANIES
1. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3i, an applicant shall provide written notice to a water company and the Commissioner of Public Health when an application is filed with the Commission or Board concerning any project on any site that is within:
a. an aquifer protection area provided such area has been delineated in accordance with CGS Section 22a-354c, or
b. the watershed of a water company provided such water company or said commissioner has filed a map with the Commission or the Board and on the Brooklyn land records showing boundaries of the watershed.
2. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed not later than seven days after the date of the day of the submission to the Zoning Enforcement Officer or agent.
3. Prior to the scheduled meeting regarding the application, the applicant shall submit the following to the Zoning Enforcement Officer or agent or the application shall be considered incomplete:
a. a copy of the complete package of information, and
b. proof of mailing.
4. Such water company and the Commissioner of Public Health may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, request or plan.
9.I.7. BENEFICIARIES OF A TRUST
Any person who makes an application to the Commission or Board pertaining to real property, the record title to which is held by a trustee of any trust, shall file with said application a sworn statement disclosing the name(s) of the equitable owner (s) of such real property or the beneficiary(ies) of the trust.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 9.I
Effective July 30, 2020 PROCEDURES
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
219
9.I.8. FINANCIAL GUARANTEE
1. Where a financial guarantee is required by any Section of these Regulations, an itemized estimate of the cost of the site improvements shall be prepared by the applicant, including a separate inflation factor for the estimated construction period, and shall be submitted to the Commission's Engineer for approval.
2. The financial guarantee shall be posted with the Town for an initial period of 18 months unless an extension of time shall be requested by the applicant and granted by the Commission.
3. Where a financial guarantee is required by any Section of these Regulations, it shall be in one (1) of the following forms and the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall require evidence of compliance with the following standards before accepting any financial guarantee:
a. Cash deposited with the Town.
b. Certified bank check to the order of the Town when the amount of the check is fully insured by the FDIC.
c. Bank deposit (such as a passbook savings account or a statement savings account) assigned irrevocably and solely to the Town when the amount of the deposit is fully insured by the FDIC.
d. Irrevocable letter of credit naming the Town as sole beneficiary provided that:
i. such letter of credit shall be issued by, and drafts thereunder presentable at, a branch of a bank in Connecticut provided that;
• such bank is included in the most recent list issued by the Securities Valuation Office of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (or any successor office or organization, “NAIC”) as a bank meeting NAIC standards for issuing letters of credit for reinsurance purposes; or
• the long-term unsecured debt of such bank (or the long-term unsecured debt of its holding company) is rated BBB or better by Standard & Poor's rating service or Baa or better by Moody's rating service.
ii. The terms and conditions of such letter of credit shall be acceptable in form and substance to the Town, and
iii. if and when such letter of credit shall, through the passage of time, have less than thirty (30) days remaining until its expiration or lapse date, and such date shall not have been extended, the Town may draw under said letter of credit the full amount thereof and the proceeds may be retained by the Town as the financial guarantee.
e. Other form of financial guarantee (such as a performance bond) acceptable in form and substance to the Town.
4. Upon the completion of at least 25%, 50% or 75% of the cost of the site improvements subject to a performance, the applicant may request in writing a reduction of the financial guarantee. The Commission shall cause the site to be inspected by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and/or other appropriate Town officials to determine if the portion of the required site improvements for which the reduction is being requested has been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the approved Site Plan. Based upon these findings, the Commission may authorize the reduction of such financial guarantee.
9.I BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
PROCEDURES Effective July 30, 2020
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
220
5. No portion of any required financial guarantee shall be released by the Commission until:
a. a release has been requested, in writing, by the applicant,
b. the applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the Town, in writing, that an appropriate level of improvements in relation to the requested release have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with approved plans,
c. if such release is a final release, the applicant's engineer or surveyor has submitted a set of detailed "Record" plans on mylar, that all improvements and other work are in accordance with approved plans, and
d. the Zoning Enforcement Officer has confirmed, in writing, that the appropriate level of improvements in relation to the requested release have been satisfactorily completed and that all conditions and requirements of the Commission's approval have been satisfied.
6. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3, if the person posting a financial guarantee requests a release of all or a portion of such financial guarantee, the Commission shall, not later than sixty-five days after receiving such request:
a. release any such financial guarantee or portion thereof, provided the Commission is reasonably satisfied that the improvements for which such financial guarantee or portion thereof was posted have been completed, or
b. provide the person posting such financial guarantee with a written explanation as to the additional work that must be completed before such financial guarantee or portion thereof may be released.
7. Before the release of a financial guarantee, the Commission:
a. shall require the applicant to submit "as-built" drawings; and,
b. may require that the applicant post a maintenance financial guarantee to be retained for a period of two years after vegetative cover and plantings have been installed in order to guarantee the survival of landscaping and to ensure any other relevant improvements.
8. Any cost of collecting a financial guarantee, including without limitation, attorney’s fees, bank fees, and other collection fees and expenditures, shall be for account of the applicant and may be deducted from amounts released accordance with this Section.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 10.A
Effective July 30, 2020 APPENDICES
APPENDIX A - SITE PLAN CHECKLIST
221
10. APPENDICES
10.A. APPENDIX A - SITE PLAN CHECKLIST
10.A.1. SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS AND CHECKLIST
For all uses requiring Site Plan Approval, a Site Plan application shall include five sets of the following information, maps, and plans:
A Class A-2 Property/Boundary and Zoning/Improvement Survey prepared, signed and sealed by a land surveyor licensed in the State of Connecticut.
A Site Development Plan prepared, signed and sealed by a professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect (whichever is appropriate) licensed in the State of Connecticut. All plans shall be prepared at a minimum scale of one inch equals 40 feet. The following data will be included:
Date, north arrow, and numerical and graphical scale on each map.
A table or chart indicating the proposed number or amount and types of uses, lot area, lot width, yards, building height, coverage, floor area, parking spaces, landscaping, and open spaces as they relate to the requirements of the Zoning Regulations.
Location Map: A map at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet shall be submitted showing the subject property and all property and streets within 1,000 feet of any part of the subject property.
Easements: Location, width, and purpose of all existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way on the property and written approval of the easement holder when work is pro-posed in or affecting the easement.
Proposed Buildings and Uses:
Location, dimensions, area, height and setbacks of all existing and proposed buildings, signs, fences, underground structures, and walls.
Location of all existing and proposed uses and facilities not requiring a building such as swimming pools, tennis courts, light standards, tanks, transformers and dumpsters.
Building elevation or preliminary drawings showing the general type of building proposed for construction and the gross floor area of proposed buildings and uses.
Parking, Loading and Circulation:
Location, arrangement, and dimensions of automobile parking spaces, aisles, vehicular drives, fire lanes, entrances, exits, and ramps.
Location, arrangement, and dimensions of loading and unloading areas.
Location and dimensions of pedestrian walkways, entrances, and exits.
Location, size, height, orientation and plans of all signs.
Location, size, height, orientation and design of any outdoor lighting.
Utilities: Location and design of all existing and proposed sanitary sewer, storm drainage, water supply facilities, and refuse collection areas, as well as other underground and above ground utilities.
Storm drainage calculations that identify the rate and quantity of discharge shall be provided.
A topographic map shall illustrate the existing and proposed conditions of the property including existing and proposed contours with intervals of two feet and location of all existing wooded areas, watercourses, wetlands, rocky outcrops, and other significant physical features, and, where appropriate, the wetlands boundary, wetland buffer areas, and the flood hazard area.
10.A BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
APPENDICES Effective July 30, 2020
APPENDIX A - SITE PLAN CHECKLIST
222
An Open Space and Landscaping Plan shall illustrate the existing and proposed landscape development of the property, including location, general layout, type and size of buffer or landscape area, plant material, fencing, screening devices, decorative paving, or other materials proposed.
Staging Plan Map: When the applicant wishes to develop in stages, an overall site and staging plan indicating ultimate development of the entire property shall be submitted at the same scale as the Site Plan.
Hazardous Materials and Wastes: The applicant shall identify any hazardous materials or wastes to be associated with the proposed occupancy and use of a non-residential property in accordance with Sec. 7.F. At least, the following information shall be presented in satisfaction of this section:
The amount and composition of any hazardous material that will be handled, stored, generated, treated or disposed of on the property.
Provisions for treatment, storage and/or disposal of any hazardous materials.
Distance to nearest natural resource.
Whether or not public sewer is available or proposed at the location.
Septic tank location, size and capacity, and/or sewage lift stations, force mains and grease traps.
Expected types and amount of discharge to sewers, to the ground, and to surface water.
Provisions for storm water runoff controls which will minimize suspended solids.
Location of loading and unloading docks.
Provision for containment of any spills.
Location and description of outside storage areas and types of materials to be stored.
Written comments by appropriate officials, including but not limited to the Town's Fire Marshall, Building Official and Town Engineer that the applicants proposed method of handling and storing hazardous materials and wastes appears safe and reasonable from the view-point of their office.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 10.B
Effective July 30, 2020 APPENDICES
APPENDIX B – AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS BY ZONE
223
10.B. APPENDIX B – AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS BY ZONE
10.B.1. TABLE OF AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS BY ZONE*
ZONE R-10 R-30 RA
Minimum Lot area (sq.ft.)
10,000
30,000
87,120 (2 ac.)
Minimum Lot frontage (ft.)
75
110
150
Principle Building
Minimum Front Yard Setback (ft.)
35
50
50
Minimum Side Yard Setback (ft.)
15
30
40
Minimum Rear Yard Setback (ft.)
15
50
50
Accessory Building
Minimum Front Yard Setback (ft.)
35
50
50
Minimum Side Yard Setback (ft.)
Half the height of the accessory building or 10 feet, whichever is greater
Half the height of the accessory building or 15 feet, whichever is greater
Half the height of the accessory building or 20 feet, whichever is greater
Minimum Rear Yard Setback (ft.)
Half the height of the accessory building or 10 feet, whichever is greater
Half the height of the accessory building or 15 feet, whichever is greater
Half the height of the accessory building or 20 feet, whichever is greater
Maximum Building Height (ft.)
35
35
35
* See Section 8.A for possible exceptions to these dimensional requirements.
10.B BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
APPENDICES Effective July 30, 2020
APPENDIX B – AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS BY ZONE
224
ZONE VC NB RB
Minimum Lot area (sq.ft.)
30,000
(or the area of the existing lot of record, if it is smaller)
10,000
20,000
Minimum Lot width (ft.)
60
None
None
Minimum Lot frontage (ft.)
60
None
None
Principle Building
Minimum Front Yard Setback (ft.)
10
20
20
Minimum Side Yard Setback (ft.)
8
10
15
Minimum Rear Yard Setback (ft.)
10
20
15
Accessory Building
Minimum Front Yard Setback (ft.)
10
20
20
Minimum Side Yard Setback (ft.)
8
10
10
Minimum Rear Yard Setback (ft.)
10
10
10
Maximum Building Height (ft.)
35
35
35
Maximum Building Width (ft.)
100
None
None
Maximum Building Size (sq. ft.)
5,000
None
None
Maximum Impervious Coverage (%)
80
80
80
Maximum Building Coverage (%)
None
20
20
* See Section 8.A for possible exceptions to these dimensional requirements.
BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS 10.B
Effective July 30, 2020 APPENDICES
APPENDIX B – AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS BY ZONE
225
ZONE PC I PL-O
Minimum Lot area (sq.ft.)
30,000
87,120 (2 ac.)
No minimum provided Public Health Code is met.
Minimum Lot width (ft.)
100
None
None
Minimum Lot frontage (ft.)
100
200
50
Minimum Front Yard Setback (ft.)
-
20
10
Minimum Front Yard Setback (ft.)
if no parking between building and street
30
-
-
Minimum Front Yard Setback (ft.)
if parking between building and
street
45
-
-
Minimum Side Yard Setback (ft.)
20
(see Sec. 4.D.6.1)
20
10
Minimum Rear Yard Setback (ft.)
20
20
10
Maximum Building Height (ft.)
-
35
35
Maximum Building Height (ft.)
If within 200’ of residential property
or zone
30 and 2 story
(see Sec. 4.D.6.2)
-
-
Maximum Building Height (ft.)
If not within 200’ of residential property or zone
40 and 3 story
-
-
Maximum Building Width (ft.)
None
None
None
Maximum Building Size (sq. ft.)
None
None
None
Maximum Impervious Coverage (%)
65
None
None
Maximum Building Coverage (%)
None
None
None
* See Section 8.A for possible exceptions to these dimensional requirements.
10.C BROOKLYN ZONING REGULATIONS
APPENDICES Effective July 30, 2020
APPENDIX C – REVISIONS SINCE OCTOBER 15, 2019
226
10.C. APPENDIX C – REVISIONS SINCE OCTOBER 15, 2019
REVISIONS
Effective Date Section(s) Affected Page # Generalized Description
July 30, 2020
3.A.5.2.1, 3.B.5.2.1, 3.C.5.2.1, 4.A.4.2.1, 4.B.4.2.1, 4.C.4.2.1
39,43,48,53,64,70
Change to allow accessory buildings in the front yard provided they meet the same minimum front yard setback as principle buildings in the zone.
July 30, 2020
3.C.2.4.5, 4.D.2.1, 7.B.5.4,
44,71,164
Technical corrections, numbering errors and typos.
July 30, 2020
6.K.2.2
132
Change to eliminate financial guarantee of $500 for donation bins placed by tax-exempt organizations.
July 30, 2020
6.O.4.1
142-144
Change to reinstate separation to groundwater requirement for excavation operations.
July 30, 2020
6.P.3.3
149
Removal of incorrect reference to importation of material.
HOW YOU MIGHT USE THESE REGULATIONS
You have a property in mind and want to know what can be done …
You have a use in mind and want to know where and how it can be sited …
You have another type of question …
1. Find the property on the ZONING MAP and determine what zone it is in
1. Go to the section of the ZONING REGULATIONS dealing with zones and uses
1. Go to the section of the ZONING REGULATIONS that may apply: • parking required • NON-CONFORMING conditions’ • telecommunications • earth removal
2. Go to the section of the ZONING REGULATIONS for that zone
2. Find out if the use is permitted in any zone
3. Find out what: • uses are permitted • dimensional standards apply
3. Go to the ZONING MAP and see which areas are appropriately zoned
2. Find out what approval procedures apply
4. Check other sections of the ZONING REGULATIONS that may apply: • parking required • signage
4. Check other sections of the ZONING REGULATIONS that may apply: • parking required • signage
5. Find out what approval procedures apply
5. Find out what approval procedures apply
START THE PROCESS!
If you have any questions, call the Land Use Office at
(860) 779-3411, press "9".
TOWN OF BROOKLYN
Planning and Zoning Commission

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
1
PURPOSE
1
2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
2
2.1
Sale of Lots
2
2.2
Town Clerk
2
2.3
Adjacent Development
2
2.4
Character of Land
2
2.5
Health, Safety & General Welfare
2
2.6
Preservation of Natural Features
2
2.7
Conformance to Zoning and Plan of Development
2
2.8
Presentations
2
2.9
Application Documents
2
2.10
State Highway Consideration
3
2.11
Formal Consideration
3
2.12
Commission Approval
5
2.13
Easements and Deeds
5
2.14
Filing and Records
5
2.15
As-Built Plans
5
2.16
Release of Bond
6
3
DEFINITIONS
7
4
PROCEDURES
11
4.1
Advance Discussion
11
4.2
Application Procedures
12
4.3
Submitting and Considering Applications
13
4.4
Decision
14
5
PLAN REQUIREMENTS
15
5.1
Maps and Plans
15
5.2
Accuracy Standards
15
5.3
Record Subdivision
15
5.4
Property Information
17
5.5
Street Improvement
18
5.6
Site Analysis Plan
18
5.7
Plan Notations
19
5.8
Construction
19
5.9
Grading Plan
20
5.10
As-Built Drawings
21
PAGE 2
SECTION TITLE
PAGE
5A
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS
22
6
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
29
6.1
Information and Requirements
29
6.2
Minimum Acceptable Standards
30
6.3
Issuance of Denial of Certificate
30
6.4
Conditions Relations Relating to ESC
30
6.5
Inspection
30
7
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA
31
8
OPEN SPACE
32
9
SOLAR ACCESS
38
10
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
39
10.1
Supervision and Inspection
39
10.2
Building Lots
39
10.3
Street Design and Construction
40
10.4
Street Planning
40
10.5
Street Lines
41
10.6
Existing Streets
41
10.7
Access
41
10.8
Intersections
41
10.9
Street Names
42
10.10
Scheduling
42
10.11
Storm Drainage Design and Construction
42
10.12
Easements
43
10.13
Easements for Pipe Systems
44
10.14
Driveways
44
10.15
Monuments and Pins
44
10.16
Special Structures
45
10.17
Street and Traffic Signs
45
10.18
Street Trees
45
10.19
Fire Ponds
45
10.20
Sidewalks
45
10.21
Maintenance Requirements
46
10.22
Street lights
46
10.23
Buffers
46
11
WATER SUPPLY AND SANITARY REQUIREMENTS
47
12
ENFORCEMENT, SEPARABILITY & AMENDMENTS
50
PAGE 3
SECTION TITLE
PAGE
13
EFFECTIVE DATE & REPEAL
51
APPENDIX A HYDROLOGY REPORT FORMAT
52
APPENDIX B PLAN REVIEW WORKSHEET FOR ESC PLAN
54
APPENDIX C APPLICATION FORM
55
PAGE 4
PAGE 1
SECTION 1- PURPOSE
1.0 Purpose: The Town of Brooklyn, through the Planning and Zoning Commission, for the purpose of providing for orderly growth and to establish proper standards for the designs of subdivision and construction of streets and other improvements, to protect and preserve the wetlands and water courses to encourage the preservation of its farms and forests, to maintain adequate open space, to protect its ecosystems and to accomplish its plan of development as adopted the following regulations in accordance with Section 8-25 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve or disapprove a subdivision after applying these regulations to reasonably protect the rights of individuals, property values, public health, public safety and public welfare and after considering the following:
1.1 Land to be subdivided shall be suitable for building purposes without danger to health or the public safety, water or air pollution, excessive noise, or other menace;
1.2 Proper provision shall be made for water supply, drainage, waste disposal, fire protection and other appropriate utility services:
1.3 Proper provision shall be made for protection of the quality and quantity of water supplies;
1.4 In areas subject to flooding, proper provision shall be made for protective flood control measures;
1.5 Proposed roads shall be located in accordance with the Town road system as recommended in the Town Plan of Development or approved by the office of the First Selectman. Existing and proposed roads and related improvements shall be of such width, grade, location and design as to provide a safe and convenient system for present and prospective traffic;
1.6 Proper provision shall be made for the conservation of natural and cultural resources and the preservation of open space, streambelts, agricultural lands and recreation areas as identified in the Town Plan of Development and the Brooklyn Zoning Regulations, as amended;
1.7 Proper provision shall be made to control soil erosion and sedimentation and to prevent the pollution of wetlands, watercourses and water bodies;
1.8 Provision shall be made to permit land to be developed in an energy efficient pattern, with consideration given to 8-25 (b) CT General Statutes;
1.9 Proper provision shall be made for securing the construction of required improvement and utilities.
PAGE 2
SECTION 2 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
2.0 General Provisions: The Regulations shall be applied to subdivision and resubdivision of land within the Town of Brooklyn, Connecticut.
2.1 No person or other entity shall make a subdivision of land or sell or offer for sale lots from a subdivision until a plan for subdivision has been approved by the Commission and has been filed or recorded by the Town Clerk as provided for in Section 2.14 of these Regulations.
2.2 No subdivision plan shall be filed or recorded b y the Town Clerk until its approval by the Commission is indicated upon the plan as prescribed in Section 5.7 of these Regulations and any recording of a subdivision plan without such approval shall be void.
2.3 Every subdivider shall be required to follow these regulations and shall be familiar with them and with other proposed and existing developments in the vicinity of this proposal before preparing a subdivision plan.
2.4 Any land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health and safety. Land subject to flooding shall not be put to any use which will aggravate flood hazard conditions and shall comply with Town Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
2.5 Each subdivision plan shall provide for storm water drainage, surface water drainage, sanitary sewage disposal, fire hydrants, fire ponds and dry hydrants, underground utilities, curbs, walkways and other improvements, in amounts and locations considered necessary by the Commission to protect health, safety and general welfare.
2.6 Due regard shall be given to the preservation and enhancement of natural features, scenic points, large trees and natural cover and contours of the land and other community assets.
2.7 The subdivision plan shall conform to the Brooklyn Zoning Regulations and to the Brooklyn Plan of Development as adopted by the Commission in accordance with Section 8-23 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
2.8 Presentations: All Applications, maps, plan, documents, and data required by these Regulations shall be submitted by mail or hand to the Brooklyn Planning and Zoning Commission at the office of the Commission in the Town Hall.
2.8.1 Such materials shall be considered received the day of the next Regular Meeting of the Commission immediately following the day of submission at the office of the Commission or 35 days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
2.9 Application Documents: In order to make Application for approval of a subdivision or re-subdivision, the Applicant shall submit the following:
2.9.1 Application: Application for approval of a subdivision or resubdivision shall be made to the Commission in writing on forms prescribed by the Commission and signed by the Applicant or his/her lawful agent: if the subdivision or resubdivision is proposed by a person, firm or corporation other than the owner of the land to be subdivided, the Application shall also be signed by the owner or his/her lawful agent.
PAGE 3
2.9.2 Application fee: The maximum fee as listed in Schedule A of Individual Cost Based Fees for Municipal Land Use Applications shall be submitted with the application. A refund will be smutted at the time of filing if the cost of processing does not exceed the maximum. Application fees shall be made payable to the Town of Brooklyn.
2.9.3 All maps, plans, reports, data and documents required by these regulations.
2.10 State Highway Connection: Where a proposed street or storm drainage system joins with a State Highway, the Applicant shall present a copy of a letter or other document giving evidence that the construction plans have been submitted to the Connecticut Department of Transportation with an application for such connection in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes.
2.11 Formal consideration: After the application requirements have been me tot the satisfaction of the Commission, the following procedures shall be followed by the Commission in its formal consideration of the Application:
2.11.1 Submission Review: The Commission shall determine that the Application submitted is complete. Failure to submit a complete Application will be cause for disapproval of the Application.
2.11.2 Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Commission: The Commission shall determine where applicable, that an Application has been submitted to the Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Commission no later than the date the Application has been filed with the Planning and Zoning commission.
2.11.3 Review by Others: Te Commission shall transmit copies of the maps and plans to other boards and Commissions, other public agencies and officials, and to consultants as in the opinion of the Commission may be advisable, for their information, review and recommendations.
2.11.4 Hearing: A pubic hearing regarding an Application for approval of a subdivision may be held by the Commission, if in its judgment, the circumstances require such action. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on any Application for a resubdivision. Notice of any public hearing shall be given as required by law. Whether or not a public hearing is held, every Applicant shall be afforded the opportunity to appear before the Commission to discuss the Application before final action by the Commission.
Any application involving a public hearing:
2.11.4.1a - Will require the petitioner, at the petitioner’s own expense, to send
notice of the same at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing, via certificate of mailing to all owners of record of any abutting properties as well as to owners of record of those properties that lie opposite the parcel across any street or thoroughfare.
PAGE 4
2.11.4.1b - On the day of the public hearing, a copy of the certificate of mailing
shall be presented to the Commission to show compliance. An honest effort to reach the owner of record at their last known address will be accepted with postal regulations governing. The property owner shall be the owner indicated on the property tax map or on the last completed grand list as of the date such notice is mailed
Approved September 6, 2006
Effective September 29, 2006
2.11.5 Decision: After the public hearing, if any, or after the meeting afforded the Applicant, the Commission shall approve the Application if it shall find the maps, plans, documents and data conform to the requirements of these Regulations. Approval shall include and be conditioned upon the following as applicable to the particular Application.
a. A date when construction of roads, drainage and other improvements is authorized and a date when such construction is authorized;
b. Completion of any required road, drainage, or other subdivision improvements, prior to endorsement of the RECORD SUBDIVISION MAP or, in lieu of such completion prior to endorsement execution of an agreement and posting of a bond or other security acceptable to Town Counsel guaranteeing such completion;
c. Presentation of conveyances for easements and open spaces to the Town or other Commission designated entity;
d. Presentation of one(1) mylar each of the approved RECORDSUBDIVISON PLANS, THE construction plans AND THE grading plan, with original signatures of all appropriate professionals for required signatures by the Town of Brooklyn, incorporating all modifications and conditions by the Commission.
Submit three (3) copies of all the above with original signatures of all appropriate professionals
The approval letter of the Planning and Zoning Commission or list of conditions shall be required on the final mylars
Approved- October 4, 2006
Effective- October 30, 2006
e Presentation of one (1) mylar each of the approved RECORD SUBDIVISON MAP, the CONSTRUCTION PLANS and GRADING PLAN, for modifications, and conditions specified by the Commission; if such map and plans have been modified since submission of the Application, three (3) blue line or black line prints thereof shall also be presented;
f. Authorization, by majority vote of the Planning and Zoning Commission for the Commission Chairman or Secretary to endorse the RECORD SUBDIVISON MAP when all conditions of approval have been met.
PAGE 5
2.12 In granting approval the Commission may modify the RE CORD SUBDIVSION MAP when all conditions of approval have been met.
2.12.1 If the Commission does not approve the Application and all the accompanying maps, plans, certifications and documents as presented, it may modify and approve or disapprove the Application.
2.12.2 In approving, modifying and approving, or disapproving an Application, the Commission shall state in its records any conditions of approval, any modifications required, and the grounds for its action.
2.12.3 The Commission shall give notice of its decision as required by law.
2.13 Easements and Deeds: Any open space, parks or playgrounds to be dedicated to the Town of Brooklyn and any easements for storm drainage, sanitary sewers or rights of way to be dedicated to the Town shall be confirmed by written conveyance and Certificate of Title describing the land involved and privileges of the Town in a form satisfactory to the Town Counsel.
2.13.1 Open space, parks, playgrounds, easements and rights-of way which are not to be dedicated to the Town shall also be confirmed by written conveyance, approved as to form by the Board of Selectman describing the land involved and the privileges of the owner of the open space, easement or right-of-way.
2.14 Filing and Recording: The endorsed RECORD SUBDIVSION MAP showing any modifications upon which final approval of the subdivision was contingent, shall constitute the approved subdivision map.
2.14.1 The date of endorsement of the RECORD SUBDIVISION MAP shall be noted on the map by the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission as well as the date, five (5) years from approval hence, when approval may expire as provided in Sec. 8-26c of the Connecticut General Statutes.
2.14.2 Within 90 days after delivery of the endorsed map to the Applicant, the Applicant shall file and record the map in the Office of the Brooklyn Town Clerk, except that the Commission may by resolution extend the time for such filing and recording for additional periods of 90 days and the map shall remain valid until the expiration of such extended time.
2.14.3 Filing and recording fees shall be paid by the Applicant.
2.15 As-built Plans: Before release of any subdivision completion bond, or before the Commission endorses any RECORD SUBDIVISON MAP to permit filing or recording wit the Town Clerk when no bond has been posted, the Applicant shall present construction plans, meeting the standards of the Regulations showing streets, drainage and other subdivision improvements as built, including the location of any water mains, sanitary sewers, and gas mains, and also showing clearly where the as-built plans differ from the approved CONSTRUCTION PLANS. In lieu of such submission, the Applicant’s land surveyor and engineer may update and certify the mylars of construction plans approved by the Commission.
PAGE 6
2.16 Release of Bond (performance guarantee): Before release of any subdivision completion bond, or before the Commission endorses any RECORD SUBDIVISION MAP to permit filing or recording with the Town Clerk when no bond has been posted:
2.16.1 The roads, drainage and other required improvements in the subdivision shall have been inspected and approved by the Commission or its agent;
2.16.2 The as-built plans shall have been submitted to the Commission as specified in Section 5.10 and 2.15;
2.16.3 Certification from a licensed surveyor shall have been received by the Commission stating that all required monuments and pins have been set in place, and;
2.16.4 The option of the Commission the Applicant shall execute an agreement and file a bond to guarantee by the sole discretion of the Commission or its agent in the required road, drainage and other subdivision improvements. In the case of improvements which are not to be offered for acceptance by the Town, a maintenance bond shall run for a period of one (1) year from the date of such release of filing; in the case of improvements which are offered for acceptance by the Town, the maintenance bond shall terminate no earlier than one (2) year after the date of acceptance of the improvements by the Town;
2.16.5 The maintenance bond shall be in a form as required by Town Counsel and with surety as required in the Regulations or by Town Counsel and shall be an amount approved by the Commission as not less than 10% nor more than 50% of the current cost of the original improvements.
PAGE 7
SECTION 3- DEFINITIONS
3.0 Definition: Certain words used in these Regulations are defined and explained as follows:
3.1 Applicant: The term “Applicant” refers to the person proposing a subdivision or resubdivision.
3.2 Application: Refers the maps, tests, reports and supporting data required by these Regulations and proposing a subdivision or resubdivision.
3.3 Board: The term “Board” refers to the Board of Selectman of the Town of Brooklyn.
3.4 Building: Any structure having a roof and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or materials.
3.5 Certification: Approval by the Brooklyn Planning Zoning Commission or its authorized agent that a soil erosion and sediment plan complies with the applicable requirements of erosion and sediment control plan regulations.
3.6 Commission: The term “Commission” refers to the Brooklyn Planning and Zoning Commission.
3.7 Dead End Street – Permanent: A street having only one intersection with another street and having a turn-around entirely surrounded on its frontage with separate lots.
3.8 Dead End Street – Temporary: A street with a temporary turn-around having on intersection with another street and designed to be extended into adjoining undeveloped land.
3.9 DEVELOPED AREA - means the portion of a lot within which a house, garage, shed and other structures, swimming pools, driveways, parking areas, outside storage areas, septic system, septic reserve area, water supply well, utility lines, lawn areas and other site improvements are to be located.
3.10
3.11 Disturbed Area: An area where the ground cover or topsoil is destroyed or removed.
3.12 Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
3.13 Flood Plain: The terms “base flood”, “base flood elevation”, “floodway” and “Special Flood Hazard Area” as used in these Regulations are defined as follows:
13.1 Base flood (200 year flood means the flood having a one percent change of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
13.2 Base flood elevation is the particular elevation of the base flood as specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
13.3 Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 1.0 foot anywhere
PAGE 8
in Brooklyn: the regulated floodway is delineated on the Flood Boundary and Flood Insurance Rate Map, which is a part of the Plan of Development prepared by the Commission.
13.4 Special Flood Hazard Areas consist of Zones delineated on the map entitled “FIRM: Flood Insurance Rate Map, Town of Brooklyn, Connecticut, Windham County” prepared as part of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration, such Zones may be amended from time to time by such Administration, which map is a part of such Regulation.
3.14 Inspection: The periodic review of construction of a subdivision
3.15 Open Space: Any land designated for land preserve, park or playground purposes in a location approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
3.16 Person: Includes Corporations, Partnerships, Firms, Associations or any other entity.
3.17 Resubdivision: Means a change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision or resubdivision if such change:
a. Affects any street lay out shown on such map,
b. Affects any area reserved thereon for public use or
c. Diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional
building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the
approval or recording of such map;
3.18 Sediment: Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion.
3.19 Soil: Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin.
3.20 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan: Means a scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation and includes but is not limited to a map and narrative. The map shall show topography, cleared and graded areas, proposed area alterations and the location of detailed information concerning erosion and sediment measures and facilities. The narrative shall describe the project, the schedule of major activities on the on the land, the application of conservation practices, design criteria, construction details and the maintenance program for any erosion and sediment control facilities that are installed.
3.21 Soils Map: All Wetlands and Watercourses shall be flagged in the field by a certified soil scientist. A Soils map of the proposed use and property which will be affected shall be drawn by a licensed surveyor, professional engineer, or professional architect, who must be registered with the State of Connecticut, and such Map shall be submitted with the Application. The soil information on the Soils Map shall be certified by a soil scientist who is qualified in accordance with the standards set by the United States Civil Service Commission. The Soils Map shall include the identification of “Wetlands”, “Watercourses” and “Regulated Areas” as delineated in the field by a licensed soil scientist within the meaning of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act of the State of Connecticut. The Soils Map shall indicate soil types consistent with categories established by the National Cooperative Soil Survey of the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department
PAGE 9
of Agriculture. The Soils Map shall be at a scale of not less than 1” = 100’ and shall include an inset parcel location map and north arrow, Contours, both existing and proposed, shall be shown at five (5) foot intervals or less. The Soils Map shall also show the approximate acreage of wetlands which continue onto adjoining property if such wetlands are potentially affected by the proposed activity. The Soils Map shall show the boundaries of soil types having severe limitations and low or very low potential for soil absorption sewage disposal facilities. In Brooklyn, soils having severe limitations and very low potential are defined in Soil Interpretations for waste disposal by David E. Hill, The Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station, June 1979. Additional soils information shall be submitted in accordance with Section 11 where soils with severe limitations and low or very low potential for on-site sewage disposal occur in any proposed lot.
3.22 Street: Avenue, boulevard, road, lane highway or any other thoroughfare between taking lines or right of way lines which provides a principal means of access to property, which is improved to allow the safe movement of traffic and which will handle storm water drainage adequately. Types of streets:
22.1 Accepted Street: A street which has become public by virtue of dedication to and formal acceptance by the Town of Brooklyn.
22.2 Collector Street: A street or road which carries traffic from local streets to the principal entrances to developments and streets for circulation within such developments.
22.3 Local Street: A street or road used primarily for access to abutting property.
22.4 Primary Street (or arterial highway): A street or road used primarily for heavy volumes of traffic or high vehicle speeds.
3.23 Street Profiles: A plan-profile of new streets, showing exiting grades and new street profiles, cross-sections, center line data, vertical curves, and drainage and utilities data,
coordinated by stations, together with such additional information as may be required by the Commission.
3.22 Structure: A structure is anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground.
3.23 Subdivider: An Applicant for approval of a subdivision or resubdivision plan, who shall be the owner of record of the premises to be subdivided or resubdivided, or who shall have a legal or equitable interest therein, at the time of the Application for approval of such plan.
3.24 Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more parts or lots made subsequent to the adoption of Subdivision Regulations by the Commission, for the purpose, whether immediate or future of sale or building development expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation or agricultural purposes, and includes resubdivision.
3.25 Town: Shall mean the Town of Brooklyn, Connecticut.
3.26 Walkway: A sidewalk, path, trail, way or any easement which provides for the movement of pedestrian or other non-motorized traffic.
PAGE 10
3.27 Water Courses: The term “water courses” shall have the meaning set forth in the Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Regulations of the Town of Brooklyn, Connecticut.
3.28 Wetlands: The term “wetlands” shall be defined in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of Brooklyn, Connecticut.
PAGE 11
SECTION 4- PROCEDURES
4.0 Procedures: The Commission, in reviewing any proposed subdivision or resubdivision, and the person proposing a subdivision or resubdivision, shall follow the procedure hereinafter specified. The Commission shall approve any subdivision or resubdivision which conforms to the standards hereinafter specified.
4.1 Advance Discussion: The Commission recommends but does not require for subdivisions involving one or more new streets, or an appreciable number of lots or any unusual planning or design problems, that an advance discussion be held with the agent to the commission (Town Planner or Zoning Enforcement Officer) prior to the submission of an Application for subdivision approval. An Advance Discussion is not a substitute for a formal Application, and neither an Applicant nor the Commission is bound by the comments made during an Advance Discussion. Binding decisions can only be made by the Commission after a formal Application is submitted to it.
4.1.1 As to any subdivision proposed in the RA zone that will result in the creation of five (5) or more lots, the Commission requires Applicants to follow the procedures listed in Section 5A.3 of the Conservation Subdivision Regulations prior to filing a formal application for subdivision. This alternative approach to a conventional subdivision provides the applicant with additional flexibility in subdivision design, reduces infrastructure costs, and can result in additional lots without changing the underlying density.
4.1.2 Informal Review of Preliminary Plans The purpose of the informal review of preliminary plans is to provide guidance to the applicant and to identify areas of concern or further study, so as to minimize delay, expense and inconvenience to the public, the applicant, and the Commission upon the future receipt, if any, of a formal application for subdivision. The applicant shall submit preliminary plans for informal review, however, neither the applicant nor the Commission shall be bound by any statement made during such informal review, nor shall the statement of any Commission member be deemed to be an indication of prejudgment or prejudice, it being acknowledged by the applicant that the Commission response like the request itself are preliminary and subject to further refinement. After review, the Commission shall, provide informal, suggestions to the applicant regarding the overall layout and design of the proposed subdivision, and a determination whether to proceed with an application under this Section or to adhere to the Conventional Subdivision requirements of the applicable Sections of the Brooklyn Subdivision Regulations.
4.1.3 Preliminary Plan Review: Any applicant who meets the criteria for a Conservation Subdivision is required to submit two concept plans for the proposed subdivision, one of which shall depict how the parcel could be developed as a conventional subdivision (Yield Plan) and another which shall depict how the parcel could be developed as a Conservation Subdivision. For purposes of determining the size of the parcel proposed for subdivision, all land within the parcel, including any land not immediately proposed for use as building lots, shall be included. The applicant shall submit, at a minimum, plans incorporating the following:
a) At Least a Class-D Survey
b) North arrow
PAGE 12
c) Scale 1”= 100’
d) Location map (1” = 1000’)
e) Name of Applicant
f) Name of Subdivision
g) Date of Plan and plan number or identification
h) Existing Streets
i) Proposed streets, or private drives
k) Proposed lot lines
l) Proposed Open Space, including a narrative description of the characteristics of the proposed open space
m) topographic contours, at a contour interval of no more than more than ten(10) feet;
n) Slopes greater than 25%
o) Inland wetlands and watercourses in areas of the property not being proposed for development (on either the Conventional Plan or the Conservation Subdivision Plan) may be depicted as they appear on various sources of other mapping, inland wetlands and watercourses in areas of proposed development shall be delineated by a Professional Soil Scientist;
p) Existing zoning on adjacent properties
q) Preliminary septic field and well location
r) 100-year floodplains (Flood Zones A, as shown on FEMA maps); and easements and rights-of-way affecting the parcel.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent an applicant from presenting plans and documentation in greater detail and containing more information to the Commission, its staff or other public agencies or officials.
(Adopted 6/03/10) Effective 6/23/10
4.2 Application Procedure: The Applicant shall submit to the Commission or its authorized agent an Application consisting of the following documents:
2.1 A written Application, completed in full on forms especially provided by the Commission, signed by the Applicant or lawful agent, and if the Application is other than the owner of the land, signed by the owner of the land.
2.2 A fee in accordance with Section 2.9.2. The Commission may waive the Application fee requirement for a) the resubmission of an Application disapproved by the Commission within the previous 90 days, or b) submission of a revision of a previously approved subdivision when such revision does not constitute a resubdivision.
2.3 A Sanitary Report as required by Section 11 of these Regulations.
2.4 An Application involving lands or regulated areas under the jurisdiction of the Brooklyn Inland Wetlands Commission no later than the day the Application is filed for subdivision or resubdivision with the Planning and Zoning Commission. In order to facilitate review by both Commissions. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not render a decision until the Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted a report with its final decision. In making its decision the Planning and Zoning Commission shall give due consideration of the report of the Inland Wetlands Commission. If time for a decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission elapses prior to the thirty-fifth day after a decision by the Inland
PAGE 13
Wetlands Commission, the time period for a decision shall e extended to thirty-five days after the decision of the Inland Wetlands Commission. This provision shall not be construed to apply to an extension consented to by the Applicant.
2.5 Three (3) copies of the proposed plan for the development of the property showing all information required by Section 5 of these Regulations.
2.6 An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan as required by Section 6 of these Regulations.
2.7 A certificate of public convenience and necessity as required by Section 16-262m of the Connecticut General Statutes, if water is to be supplied by a water company by means of a community water supply system as defined in that section.
2.8 Copies of all other Applications filed with local, state or federal Commissions or agencies in connection with the proposed development, and as dispositions of those Applications. If such an Application is made subsequent to the filing of a subdivision or resubdivision Application with the Planning and Zoning Commission and prior to its decision on the subdivision or resubdivision Application, or if any decision is made on an Application submitted to such other Commission or agency during that period, the Applicant shall forward a copy of such Application and decision to the Planning and Zoning Commission immediately.
2.9 An agreement signed by the Application, and the owner of the land if other than the Application, granting to officials and agents of the Town and of the Commission permission to enter onto any part of the land that is the subject of the Application for the purposes of inspection and, in the event of the failure of the Applicant to make required improvements, in order to make such improvements.
2.10 The Applicant shall send notice of the proposed subdivision to land owners within a radius of 200 feet by certified mail, return receipt requested and mailed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days before the submission of the subdivision application. A copy of the notification and signed receipt will be submitted along with the application.
4.3 Procedure for Submitting and Considering Applications: All Applicants shall follow these procedures for submitting Applications:
4.3.1 Formal Application: No Application may be submitted to the Commission until the Application is completed. All Applications including maps, plans, documents and data required by these Regulations shall be filed no later than seven days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission. Applications received less than seven (7) days before such meeting will be considered received as set forth below, but the Commission will not be required to consider such Applications on the agenda of the upcoming meeting.
The official date of receipt of Applications and requests shall be the date of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission immediately following the day of submission at the office of the Commission, or thirty-five 935) days after such submission whichever is sooner.
The official date of receipt for Application is and requests submitted at a regular or special meeting shall be the date of the next regularly scheduled meeting or thirty-five (35) days after such submission whichever is sooner. If the Commission concludes that the Application is incomplete, it may vote to reject the Application for that reason, specifying the deficiencies in the Application.
PAGE 14
4.3.2 Receipts of notice of proposed subdivision, as required by Section 4.2.10, shall be submitted.
4.3.3 After the Application has been received by the Commission, three copies shall be retained for study by the Commission and other interested agencies. Three additional copies shall be submitted for the use of the Regional Planning Agency when any part of a parcel of land being subdivided is within 500 feet of an adjoining town.
4.3.4 The Commission reserves the right to require additional copies as necessary for review by the Commission or other interested parties.
4.3.5 The Commission may hold a public hearing on a proposed subdivision plan if, in its judgment, the specific circumstances require such action. No plan of a resubdivision shall be acted upon without a public hearing. If a public hearing is held, it shall commence within sixty-five (65) days of the official receipt of the Application by the Commission, and shall be completed within thirty (30) days thereafter. Due notice of the pubic hearing shall be given in accordance with Chapter 126 of the General Statues of the State of Connecticut.
4.3.6 A decision on an Application for subdivision approval, on which no hearing is held, shall be rendered within sixty-five days after receipt of such Application. The Applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such period, provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed sixty-five days. If the Commission votes to disapprove an Application, it shall state its reasons for so doing. Notice of the Commission’s decision shall be given as required by Chapter 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
4.4 Decision: The Commission shall approve an Application if it finds that the Application, maps, plans, and the accompanying documents, certificates and data conform to the requirements and standards of these Regulations.
4.4.1 No Application shall be approved by the Commission until the streets have been graded and improved and public utilities and services provided to the extent and in the manner specified by the Commission pursuant to these Regulations and to other ordinances of the Town. In lieu thereof, the Commission may accept a performance guaranteed as set forth in Section 12 of these Regulations, filed by the Applicant to guarantee completion of such improvements within five (5) years of the Commission’s approval of the Application or such shorter period as may be designated by the Commission. The performance guarantee shall b in an amount established by the Town Engineer as to the amount estimated necessary to complete all improvements if the Town would be required to do so.
4.4.2 No Application shall be approved by the Commission without the approval by the Town engineer of construction and grading plans.
PAGE 15
SECTION 5- SUBDIVISON PLAN REQUIREMENTS
5.0 Subdivision Plan Requirements: The maps and plans required by these Regulations shall show the information and shall be prepared in accordance with the standards hereinafter specified.
5.1 The maps shall be prepared by a land surveyor and plans by a professional engineer both licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, and shall be signed and sealed by the engineer or land surveyor.
5.1.1 All prints shall be in three (3) sets and shall be clear and legible and shall be bound along the left side.
5.1.2 The North point shall, when practical, be consistent on all maps and plans, other than road profiles, and shall be to the top, or right side of sheet depending upon the shape of the subdivision.
5.1.3 Each sheet shall include the name of the subdivision (which shall not have been previously used in the Town of Brooklyn nor be so similar to a previously used names as to cause confusion), the date of the preparation of the map or plan, the last revision, and the scale.
5.1.4 If this is a resubdivision, the maps and plans will be so titled.
5.2 The subdivision map is to be filed as a permanent record in the Town Land Records, and shall meet the accuracy standards for an “A-2” survey as specified in the “Code of Recommended Practice for Standards of Accuracy of Survey and Maps” by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors of the State of Connecticut. The Commission may accept a Class “D” Survey, subject to the above-referenced code, for large parcels not proposed for sale or development or to establish the perimeter ownership boundary of a large parcel where a portion of the parcel is proposed for subdivision and shall have subject an “A-2” survey.
5.3 The record subdivision map shall include all the following information in a neat and legible manner, drawn on polyester, film (mylar) at least .003 inches thick on sheets 24” by 36”. The map shall be drawn to a scale of minimum of 1” = 100’ and shall show the following:
5.3.1 Date of preparation of the map and revisions thereto, scale, visual scale, North point, Town and State.
5.3.2 A location map showing the location of the subdivision in relation to existing roads in the Town, at a scale of 1” = 1000’; north same as sheet.
5.3.3 An index map, if the proposed subdivision is divided into sections or is of such size that more than one sheet is required, showing the entire subdivision with lots, lot numbers, streets, street names, delineation of areas covered by each section or sheet and match lines between sections.
5.3.4 Name, width and location of existing and proposed property lines, streets, walks and other rights-of way or easements including those for utility lines, sewers, septic systems, storm sewers, water mains, catch basins, culverts, other underground
PAGE 16
structures, buildings, monuments and water courses within and adjacent to the area to be subdivided.
5.3.5 A Soils Map, as defined in Section 3.21 and any subdivision proposal which incorporates any wetlands or any watercourse shall show the boundaries of soil types having severe limitations and low or very low potential for soil absorption sewage disposal facilities as such soil types are defined in Soil Interpretations, for Waste Disposal by David E. Hill, the Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station, June 1979.
5.3.6 All inland wetlands and watercourses and areas regulated by the Brooklyn Inland Wetlands Commission shall be “flagged” by certified soil scientists.
5.3.7 On a Soils Map as defined in Section 3.18, all areas of severe slope, slopes exceeding 15% and all areas of shallow depth to bedrock, twenty inches (20”) of consolidated till or less above bedrock, shall be shown.
5.3.8 Areas within 100-year flood hazard areas as delineated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and as shown on the most recently amended maps prepared by FEMA. When a subdivision does not include land within the 100-year flood hazard area, the map shall include the following notations: “This subdivision does not include land areas within the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s 100-year flood hazard area”.
5.3.9 Area in square feet of each proposed lot exclusive of areas designated as inland wetlands and watercourses by the Brooklyn Inland Wetlands Agency.
5.3.10 For each proposed lot, the proposed septic-leach field system and reserve field shall be mapped showing distance to adjacent uses of land, including distances from all wells within 200’ (on or off the tract), and distance form any manure handing systems. The minimum separating distances as listed in section 14.7 of the Brooklyn Sewer Ordinance shall be indicated on the map.
5.3.11 Location of percolation test hole and deep hole tests for each lot, keyed to the Sanitary Report as required by Section 11 of these Regulations.
5.3.12 Location of proposed wells and water sources by each lot, keyed to the Sanitary Report required by these Regulations.
5.3.13 The location of any pints of drainage discharge onto the tract from any street or other property.
5.3.14 Approval Block as follows:
Approved by the Brooklyn Planning & Zoning Commission
Final approval Date________________________________________
Chairman _________________________ Date: ___________________
Expiration Date: ___________________
PAGE 17
The following statement: Per Section 8-26c of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, approval automatically expires_________________ if all public improvements required by this plan are not completed by that date.
The following statement: The Subdivision Regulations of the Brooklyn Planning and Zoning Commission are a part of this plan. Approval of this plan is contingent on completion of the requirements of said regulations, excepting any variances or modifications made by the Commission. Any such variances or modifications are on file in the office of the Commission.
Adopted October 4, 2006
Effective October – 30-2006
5.4 Property ownership information and development proposals as follows:
5.4.1 All lines on the Record Subdivision Map, except as noted, drawn with dimensions to the hundredth of a foot, bearings or deflection angles on all straight lines and the central angle, tangent distance and radius of all arcs.
5.4.2 Name and address of the owner of the tract; name and address of the Applicant if different from the owner.
5.4.3 Existing property lines within 200’ of the perimeter boundary of the area to be subdivided and the approximate area and dimension of adjacent tracts.
5.4.4 Both the street right-of-way lines of any street abutting or within 500 feet of the tract and the survey relationship of the tract to nearby monuments, Town Roads or State Highways where practical.
5.4.5 Names of adjacent subdivisions and all owners of property abutting the tract, and the Assessor’s map and lot numbers for all such properties.
5.4.6 Proposed lots and lot numbers, and the area and dimensions of each lot.
5.4.7 Location and dimensions of existing and proposed easements, and existing and proposed monuments.
5.4.8 The Zoning District in which the tract is located, and any Zoning District line upon or within 500 feet of the tract; any municipal or district boundary line; any channel encroachment line.
5.4.9 Land Trust Preserves, Tow open spaces, parks and playgrounds on the tract and within 200 fee from the tract.
5.4.10 Any reserved areas for water courses and wetlands protection or for conservation areas.
5.4.11 Property history map at a scale of 1” = 200’ (corresponding to the assessor’s maps) indicating all divisions of property since the adoption of subdivision regulations in the Town of Brooklyn (July 1, 2967). A table including dates, names of grantees and grantors, and the proposed lot layout shall accompany the map.
PAGE 18
5.5 Each subdivision that requires street improvements shall be accompanied by street profiles showing the following information at scales of 1” = 40’ horizontal and 1” = 4’ vertical, drawn on 24” by 36” sheets of polyester film (mylar) at least .003” thick:
5.5.1 Existing and proposed grades at the center line and at both street lines, width of pavement, rate of slope, curve data, elevations of control points and of fifty-foot stations, and dimensions in accurate figures.
5.5.2 Typical cross-section of the streets with paving, shoulders, curbs, ditches and walkways in such detail as may be required by Commission to evaluate compliance within these Regulations and the Public Improvement *** Ordinance.
5.5.3 Connections to existing streets.
5.5.4 Top of frame, invert, slope and size of all pipes, ditches, culverts, manholes, catchbasins, headwalls, water courses, water mains, sanitary sewers and other structures and underground utilities.
5.5.5 The limits of any area proposed for grading by major excavation and filling; the limits of any areas proposed to be reserved and protected from excavation filling.
5.5.6 Detail drawings of any bridges, box culverts, deep manholes and other special structures including those required by Section 6 of these Regulations, Erosion and Sediment Control Plans.
5.6 Site Analysis Plan: A site analysis plan shall be submitted for such Application, which shall show the following information on maps drawn to a scale of not less than 1” = 100’. The purpose of the site analysis plan is to enable the Commission to evaluate the impact of the proposed subdivision on the land that is the subject of the Application, on neighboring parcels, and on the natural and cultural resources and features of the area.
5.6.1 Existing and proposed contours at 2’ intervals or at intervals as required by the Commission; contour intervals based upon an aerial survey completed for the proposed subdivision or on field data.
5.6.2 Wooded areas, swamps, wetlands, water courses, flood plains, streambelts, rock outcropping, specimen trees exceeding 30” dbh (diameter breast height, 5’ above the ground), and other unique and fragile natural feature.
5.6.3 Prime and important farmland soils as defined by the Soil Conservation Service.
5.6.4 Stonewalls and monuments, and other structures having an historical or cultural significance.
5.6.5 Areas recommended for preservation for open space in the Brooklyn Open Space Plan and Map which is part of the Plan of Development.
PAGE 19
5.6.6 Archaelogical sensitive areas and Historic Buildings and Sites including those known to and listed by the Office of the Connecticut State Historical Commission or listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Sites that are identified as examples of significant Historical, Architectural and Archeological value by the Brooklyn Historical Society shall be shown.
5.6.7 Soils map as defined in section 3.19.
5.6.8 Unless the site analysis plan is prepared to the same scale as the final subdivision map so it can be used as an overlay to correlate the above site features with the development proposal, the site analysis plan shall also include existing and proposed; street and lot lines; buildings; structures; easements; well locations; septic system and reserve leaching fields if septic systems are used; and proposed drainage facilities.
5.6.9 The Commission may require the Subdivider to submit a written report from a qualified expert evaluating the impact of the proposed development on each of the resources shown on the site analysis plan and on the objectives of the Brooklyn Subdivision Regulations.
5.7 Plan Notations: the following additional information shall be required as noted;
5.7.1 A signature block entitled “Approved by the Brooklyn Planning and Zoning Commission” with a designated place for the signature of the Chairman and a date of signing, and words “Expiration date per Sec. 8.26c, Connecticut General Statutes”, with a designated place for such date;
5.7.2 When a proposed public street or drainage easement is part of the subdivision, a signature block entitled “Reviewed by the Town Engineer” with a designated place for the signature of the First Selectman and the Date of signing;
5.7.3 A signature block entitled, “Endorsed by the Brooklyn Inland Wetlands Commission” with a designated place for the signature of the Chairman and the date of signing;
5.7.4 Such additional notes as may be required or approved by the Commission, such as restrictions pertaining to stream belt set backs and building lines, reserved areas, easements and other features on the map.
5.8 Construction Plans: Construction plans for all proposed roads, drainage and other improvements shall be submitted on three (3) good quality blue line or black line prints. Construction plans shall show plan and profile drawings of all proposed streets, storm drains, sanitary sewers, catch basins, manholes, ditches, road cross sections, water courses, headwalls (including typical cross sectional drawings or suitable reference notes), sidewalks, gutters, curbs, underground utilities and other structures. All construction plans shall be submitted on drawings approximately 24” x 36” in size and shall be drawn to a horizontal scale of 1” = 40’ and a vertical scale of 1” = 4’. Profile drawings and elevations shall be based on official Town, State or United States Geological Service topographic bench-marks or other permanent bench marks approved
PAGE 20
by the Town Engineer; the bench-marks used shall be noted on the plan. The seal of the registered professional engineer who prepared the plans shall be imprinted on each print submitted. Construction drawings shall show at lease the following information in accordance with good engineering practice and as appropriate for the particular subdivision:
5.8.1 Title of the subdivision, date scale, North Point, Town and State;
5.8.2 For streets, the existing grades at the center line and both street lines and the proposed grade at the center line at appropriate intervals, street lines and width of pavement; a typical street cross section; and a cross section at all culverts;
5.8.3 Top of frame, invert, slope and size of all pipes, ditches, utility conduits, culverts, manholes, catch basins, headwalls and water courses; typical ditch and water course cross sections;
5.8.4 On the plan drawing, the location of lot lines intersecting the street line; lot numbers and street names;
5.8.5 Curbs, gutters, water mains, hydrants and special structures;
5.8.6 Detailed drawings on any bridges, box culverts, deep manholes and other special structures;
5.8.7 Provision for temporary or permanent storm water detention, and provision for control of erosion and sedimentation during and upon completion of construction (see Section 6.1);
5.8.8 A signature block entitled “Approved by the Town Engineer of the Town of Brooklyn” with a designated place for signing and date of signing” and;
5.8.9 The words “For location of underground electric, telephone and other facilities of public utilities, inquire of appropriate utility company”;
5.9 Grading Plan; shall be drawn and submitted in the same manner as the Construction Plan requirements. Contours and elevations shall be based on the same bench marks as provided in 5.8. The grading plan shall show at least the following information:
5.9.1 Title of the subdivision, date, scale, North Point, Town and State:
5.9.2 Layout of existing and proposed lot lines and street lines;
5.9.3 Existing and proposed contours at an interval not exceeding two (2) feet based on field or aerial survey to determine the adequacy of particular grading plans related to subsurface sewage and/or control of erosion;
5.9.4 Existing and proposed drainage, wetlands and watercourses;
5.9.5 The boundaries of any special flood hazard areas and floodways, and the base flood elevation data therefore;
PAGE 21
5.9.6 Existing and proposed buildings and structures, together with the proposed locations of the well and subsurface sewage disposal systems;
5.9.7 Location of all test holes, test pits r borings and data, and;
5.9.8 Provision for temporary or permanent storm water detention, and provision for control of erosion and sedimentation during and upon completion of regarding (see Section 6), and;
5.9.9 In addition to the above grading plan, the Commission may request the submission of cross section drawings covering the proposed excavation area.
5.10 As-Built Drawings: Upon completion of the road and storm drainage construction, an “as-built” drawn on polyester film (mylar) at least .003 inches thick on sheets 24” x 36” together with one blue or black line print per sheet must be submitted by the owner or their authorized agent. These drawings shall show the “as-built” location of all items depicted on the plan and profile construction drawing(s) approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or their authorized agent. The specifications for the preparation of the “as-built” drawings shall be the same as for the preparation of the construction plans as denoted in 5.8
PAGE 22
Article 5A - Conservation Subdivision Regulations
5A.1 - Purpose: The purpose of this regulation is to provide a Conservation method for development of land which permits a reduction in lot sizes without a significant increase in density of population or development, while at the same time providing for the protection of surrounding properties, persons and neighborhood value and allowing greater flexibility and creativity in the design and layout of residential and/or development in order to:
5A.1.1 - Protect the existing rural appearance and character of the Town of Brooklyn in accordance with the Town’s Plan of Conservation and Development;
5A.1.2- Minimize alteration of or damage to the natural, historic and scenic resources;
5A.1.3 - Avoid adverse impacts of new development on the value of existing homes and reduce sprawl;
5A.1.4 - Promote development that is compatible with existing neighborhoods;
5A.1.5 - Preserve open spaces, large unfragmented forests, wildlife habitat and other undeveloped open land particularly along Town roads;
5A.1.6- Establish buffers for adjacent land uses such as agriculture and fragile ecosystems;
5A.1.7 - Reduce public costs for the maintenance of roads and other public infrastructure;
5A.1.8 – Protect water resources by reducing the amount of impervious surfaces, volume of runoff, and pollutant loads to streams and other water resources; and
5A.1.9 – Conserve energy resources.
5A.2 - General Requirements: Conservation Subdivisions:
5A.2.1 - Shall only be permitted in the RA zone.
5A.2.2 - Shall lead to the creation of five (5) or more lots.
5A.2.3 - Shall be used only for detached single-family dwellings and permitted accessory uses.
5A.2.4 - Shall require a minimum of forty (40) percent Open Space set aside.
5A.2.5 – Density shall not exceed the number of lots that could be attained within a Conventional Subdivision unless a Density Bonus is granted in accordance with Section 5A.7.
5A.2.6 – Home enterprises and home businesses are not permitted in Conservation Subdivisions. Home offices are allowed as a matter of right per Section 6.2 with the exception that there shall be no non-resident employees.
PAGE 23
5A.3 - Applicability/Procedure: Subdivision of land that meets the criteria listed in Section 5A.2.1 – 5A.2.3 shall be made according to the design; either Conservation or Conventional Subdivision that best promotes enhances and assists in the accomplishments of the objectives listed in Section 5A.1.
5A.3.1 –Prior to submission of a Preliminary Plan, an applicant is strongly encouraged to review with the Town Planner or other authorized agent any proposal for a Conservation Subdivision.
5A.3.2 – Prior to formal Subdivision application, any landowner/developer, whose property/proposed development or Subdivision Application meets the requirements listed in Section 5A.2.1 -5A.2.3 shall file a Preliminary Design for a Conservation Subdivision for review by the Commission.
5A.3.3 -The Preliminary Design shall follow the requirements set forth in Section 5A.4.
5A.3.4 - The Commission shall make a determination of the suitability of the Preliminary Design for a Conservation Subdivision based on the information provided in the Preliminary Plans and the objectives listed in Section 5A.2.
5A.3.5 - Formal Application for Conservation Subdivision shall conform to the applicable requirements for a Subdivision Plan as set forth in the Commission’s Regulations for the Subdivision of Land, and the Conservation Subdivision requirements contained herein.
5A.4 - Preliminary Design Review:
5A.4.1- Informal Review of Preliminary Plans The purpose of the informal review of preliminary plans is to provide guidance to the applicant and to identify areas of concern or further study, so as to minimize delay, expense and inconvenience to the public, the applicant, and the Commission upon the future receipt, if any, of a formal application for subdivision. The applicant shall submit preliminary plans for informal review, however, neither the applicant nor the Commission shall be bound by any statement made during such informal review, nor shall the statement of any Commission member be deemed to be an indication of prejudgment or prejudice, it being acknowledged by the applicant that the Commission response like the request itself are preliminary and subject to further refinement. After review, the Commission shall, provide informal, suggestions to the applicant regarding the overall layout and design of the proposed subdivision, and a determination whether to proceed with an application under this Section or to adhere to the Conventional Subdivision requirements of the applicable Sections of the Brooklyn Subdivision Regulations.
5A.4.2 - Preliminary Plans: Land Owners/Developers are required to submit two concept plans for the proposed subdivision. One of which shall depict how the parcel could be developed as a Conventional Subdivision (Yield Plan) consisting of lot and street layouts conforming to the Brooklyn Zoning and Subdivision Regulations governing Conventional Subdivision lots, and the Town of Brooklyn’s Public Improvement Specifications, and another which shall depict how the parcel could be developed as a Conservation Subdivision.
PAGE 24
Although such Plans shall be conceptual in nature, and are not intended to involve significant engineering costs, they must be realistic and must not show potential house sites or streets in areas that would not ordinarily be permitted in a Conventional Subdivision layout. Plans shall include the following elements as well as identify physical and other features that would limit or restrict the use of the parcel for development, including, but not limited to;
j) At Least a Class-D Survey
k) North arrow
l) Scale 1”= 100’
m) Location map (1” = 1000’)
n) Name of Applicant
f) Name of Subdivision
g) Date of Plan and plan number or identification
h) Existing Streets
i) Proposed streets, or private drives
j) Proposed lot lines
s) Proposed Open Space, including a narrative description of the characteristics of the proposed open space
t) Topographic contours, at a contour interval of no more than more than ten (10) feet;
u) Slopes greater than 25%
v) Inland wetlands and watercourses in areas of the property not being proposed for development (on either the Conventional Plan or the Conservation Subdivision Plan) may be depicted as they appear on various sources of other mapping, inland wetlands and watercourses in areas of proposed development shall be delineated by a Professional Soil Scientist;
w) Existing zoning on adjacent properties
x) Preliminary septic field and well location
y) 100-year floodplains (Flood Zones A, as shown on FEMA maps); and easements and rights-of-way affecting the parcel.
5A.4.3- The Commission shall require that the Preliminary Plans include a “Property Survey” prepared in accordance to the Standards for “Surveys and Maps in the State of Connecticut”, as adopted by the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors, Inc. on September 26, 1996, and as may be amended.
5A.4.4- On lots that would not be served by public sewage or a centralized private sewage treatment facility, soil suitability for individual septic systems shall be demonstrated. The Commission may select a small percentage of lots (10 to 15%) to be tested, in areas considered to be marginal. If all tests on the sample lots meet applicable Public Health Code requirements, the applicant’s other lots shall be deemed suitable for septic systems, for the purpose of calculating total lot yield. However, if any of the sample lots fail, several others (of the Commission’s choosing) shall be tested, until all the lots in a given sample pass.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent an applicant from presenting plans and documentation in greater detail and containing more information to the Commission, its staff or other public agencies or officials.
PAGE 25
5A.5 - Dimensional Requirements: A Conservation Subdivision may authorize the creation and use of lots meeting the following dimensional requirements in lieu of the conventional dimensional requirements:
5A.5.1 - Lot Area: Each lot shall contain at least 30,000 square feet of buildable area, exclusive of wetlands, ledge, and slopes in excess of 25% and must be able to support a septic system and well approved by the local health authority or serviced by public sewer and water.
5A.5.2 – Frontage: The frontage of each lot for a building site created in a Conservation Subdivision shall not be less than 100 feet on a private or public road, or, on a cul-de-sac, not less than 100 feet at the building line.
5A.5.3 – Setbacks: All structures shall be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet from any front lot line and twenty (20) feet from all side and rear lot lines, provided, however, that with respect to lot lines which abut land outside the Conservation Subdivision, setbacks from said lot lines shall conform to the setback requirements applicable to conventional development in the underlying zoning district.
5A.5.4 – Interior Lots: Are permitted within Conservation Subdivisions provided;
15.5.4.1 –Lots shall have a minimum of three hundred (300) feet separating all entrances or access strips on the same side of the street.
15.5.4.2 - Access strips have a maximum length of 400 feet.
15.5.4.3- No more than three (3) interior lots may be accessed by any one access strip with the ownership of the access strip resting with the lot farthest from the public or private way.
15.5.4.4 - The access strip shall be encumbered by an easement if another interior lot exists, granting access to such lot.
5A.5.5 - Restrictions Against Further Development: No Conservation Subdivision may be further subdivided. A notation to that effect shall be made on the Final Plan as to be endorsed by the Commission and recorded with the Town Clerk. In addition, a perpetual restriction, running with the land, and enforceable by the Town of Brooklyn, shall be recorded with respect to the land within the Conservation Subdivision. Such restriction shall provide that no lot in the Conservation Subdivision may be further subdivided into additional building lots. Said restriction shall be in such form and substance as the Commission shall prescribe and may contain such additional restrictions on development and use of the lots as the Commission may deem appropriate.
5A.6 - Standards: In reviewing an Application for a Conservation Subdivision, the Commission shall consider the extent to which the Application meets the purposes of a Conservation Subdivision by satisfying the following standards:
5A.6.1 - The developed areas, roads, storm drains, sewage disposal systems, and utilities shall work with the natural features of the parcel, minimizing changes to the topography and maximizing the amount of preserved wooded areas and other open space and shall, to the extent appropriate, use low impact development techniques.
PAGE 26
5A.6.2 - The amount of land to be disturbed for the construction of buildings, driveways, septic systems, utilities, storm drainage systems, and roads shall be minimized.
5A.6.3-Natural and historic features of the land, as determined by the Commission with recommendations from the Conservation Commission, shall be protected.
5A.6.4 – The plans demonstrate that the impacts of road and utility installations for each dwelling unit served shall be less than those generated by a conventional development of the same land.
5A.6.5 - The design, number, and location of curb cuts shall be such that any conflict with existing traffic flow is minimized. Combined driveways on private drives are encouraged to reduce the number of cuts.
5A.6.6 - Provision, satisfactory to the Commission, shall be made with regard to the ownership and maintenance of any and all private roads, common driveways, common land, or other common facilities within a Conservation Subdivision.
5A.6.7 - The design shall minimize the size of proposed Developed Areas.
5A.6.8 - The balance of the land not contained in the building lots shall be in condition, size and shape as to be readily usable for recreation or conservation, and shall be preserved in perpetuity by one of the following means:
5A.6.8.1 - creation of a Conservation Easement in favor of the Town of Brooklyn;
5A.6.8.2 - creation of a Conservation Easement in favor of the Town of Brooklyn reserving specific agricultural rights and uses by the Town, as approved by the Commission;
5A.6.8.3 - conveyance of fee simple ownership to a Tax-Exempt Organization approved by the Commission;
5A.6.8.4 - creation of a Conservation Easement in favor of a Tax-Exempt Organization approved by the Commission;
5A.6.8.5 - conveyance of fee simple ownership to a Connecticut non-stock corporation of which all owners of land within the subdivision or resubdivision are members, along with a conservation easement over the entire open space area; or
5A.6.8.6 - any other method deemed appropriate by the Commission which accomplishes permanent dedication in accordance with the requirements set forth in this Section.
5A.6.9 – Where Open Space is required by the Commission, the land to be dedicated to meet Town requirements may include wetlands or watercourses as defined in the Connecticut General Statutes, and slopes over twenty five (25) percent, but the Commission has the right to require that the percentage of the dedicated land within these wetland, watercourse and steep slope categories is not greater than the percentage of wetlands, watercourses and slopes over twenty five (25) percent within the property to be subdivided and, as applicable, within previous subdivision sections where dedications were not made.
PAGE 27
For example, consider a tract to be subdivided with 40% of the land to be divided consisting of wetlands, watercourses and slopes over 25 percent. and 60% of the land to be subdivided without these limitations. The Commission shall have the right to require 60 % of Open Space without any limitations and to allow 40% of the Open Space to include wetlands, watercourses or slopes over 25%.
5A.7 - Density Bonuses: The maximum number of building lots may, subject to Commission approval, be increased in only one of the following ways:
5A.7.1 - A density bonus may be granted for the provision of excess Open Space, meaning the amount of any open space acreage that is greater than the minimum amount that would be required under this Article. The additional Open Space may be within the parcel to be subdivided or elsewhere within the Town of Brooklyn in accordance with Section 8 of the Subdivision Regulations, as may be amended. For each five acres of excess Open Space accepted by the Commission, one additional building lot shall be allowed, up to a maximum of fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of lots that would otherwise be allowed under Article 5A of these regulations. The decision whether to accept an applicant's offer to dedicate excess Open Space shall be at the discretion of the Commission, which shall be guided by the recommendations contained in the Town's Plan of Conservation and Development and its determination as to the value of the excess land for any of the purposes described in Article 5A of these regulations.
5A.7.2 - Where a proposed subdivision contains soils defined as prime or important agricultural soils as defined by the USDA soil classification system, for each five acre tract preserved two additional lots shall be allowed up to 20% of the total number of lots allowed under Article 5A of these regulations.
5A.8 - Road Requirements
5A.8.1 - Proposed Public roads are to be constructed in accordance with Public Improvement Specifications for the Town of Brooklyn.
5A.8.2 - Private Roads created within a Conservation Subdivision shall be maintained by a Homeowner’s Association, in a form acceptable to the Commission, which shall, at the Commission’s discretion, be subject to review by the Town Counsel prior to filing of approved plan.
5A.8.2.1 - A note shall be placed on the final Conservation Subdivision plan, and in the deed to the property stating: “This subdivision is serviced by a private road (and/or common driveway) that is intended to remain private in perpetuity. The Town of Brooklyn will provide no maintenance, repair or school bus service along this private road (and/or common driveway). ”
5A.8.3 - Appropriate Certificates of Incorporation, by-laws, rules and regulations of any association or corporation of the lot owners within the proposed Conservation Subdivision shall be provided.
5A.8.4 - Appropriate easements shall be provided for travel, utilities, snow storage,
PAGE 28
maintenance, storm water drainage and to accommodate any hammerhead turnaround and associated snow shelf. All private lanes shall be identified on the subdivision plans.
5A.8.5 - A right-of-way of 50’ shall be required.
5A.8.6 – Private Roads shall not exceed 12 % grade
5A.8.7 - Private roads shall not serve as a connecting road between two public streets.
5A.8.8 - All private roads shall be paved with 3” bituminous concrete (1 ½” Class I and 1 ½” Class II) to a minimum width of eighteen (18) feet. Final design is site specific and subject to the recommendation of the Town Engineer.
5A.8.9 - Curbing and formal closed drainage systems are to be held to a minimum, except as provided below.
5A.8.9.1 - Curbing shall be required: where a road is in a cut situation with surrounding land pitching toward the road; at a low point in the road with catch basins to collect storm water runoff; and where a closed drainage system is required.
5A.8.9.2 - Curbing is not required; where the land generally has flat slopes; where the road is in a fill situation and sheet flow away from the road is advantageous; and where no closed drainage system is required.
5A.8.9.3 - A closed drainage system is required where drainage structures (e.g. catch basins) are necessitated by site conditions and subdivision design. The cross slope from center crown to gutter shall be no less than 3/8” /foot.
5A.8.10- All dead-end private roads shall terminate in a cul-de-sac with an outside radius of travel way of fifty (50) feet. If a center island is proposed, the width of the travel way around the island shall be at least twenty (20) feet.
5A.8.11 - Location of private roads: Where at all possible, a buffer shall be maintained between the Town right-of-way and the subdivision houses to screen the development from the Town road in order to maintain the appearance of a single family residential driveway, rather than a multi-lot subdivision. A buffer of 100’consisting of mixed deciduous and/or evergreen trees is desired.
Amended 1-5-11
Effective 1-26-11
PAGE 29
SECTION 6- EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLANS
6.0 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan: Erosion and Sediment Control Plans shall be provided to control erosion and reduce sedimentation as set forth in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control (1985), as amended. (See Plan Review Worksheet available in the Planning and Zoning Office of the Town of Brooklyn). A subdivision or resubdivision involving construction of streets, drainage and other improvements, substantial or critical areas that may be subject to excavation, grading, deposit or removal of earth or stone materials or otherwise involves a disturbed area of one half (1/2) acre or more is required to have a certified SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATON CTONROL PLAN in effect prior to, during and upon completion of construction, development and grading.
As a minimum, drawings shall be drafted according to the standards of Section 5 and shall include but not be limited to the following;
6.1 Information and requirements. A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the dangers from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology. Mapped information as required below shall be shown separately or as part of the subdivision plan and street profile plan. Said plan shall contain but not be limited to:
6.1.1 A narrative describing the development of the project, time schedule for:
a. All major construction activities indicating their anticipated start and
completion;
b. Creating and stabilizing disturbed areas:
c. Grading operations:
d. Applying erosion and sediment control measures and facilities on the land.
6.1.2 A narrative describing a detailed construction sequence shall be provided if the dates of development are not known.
6.1.3 Design criteria, construction details, detailed installation/application procedures and maintenance programs;
a. soil erosion and sediment control measures:
6.1.4 A site plan to reveal:
b. existing topography;
c. in disturbed areas, existing and proposed topography, contours shall be shown at two (2) foot intervals based upon a field survey:
d. proposed site alteration and disturbed areas including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas concerning erosion and sediment control measures and facilities.
6.1.5 If lots are to be developed by individual property owners, a more detailed erosion and sedimentation control plan may be submitted to the Zoning Officer to include but not limited to the Zoning Officer to include but not limited to the following information:
a. floor elevations for proposed house;
b. proposed driveway grading;
c. location/elevation for septic systems;
d. footing drain outlet location and elevation;
e. any other proposed drainage measures.
PAGE 30
6.2 Minimum acceptable standards:
6.2.1 Plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be developed in accordance with these regulations using the principles as outlined in Chapter 3 and 4 of the Connecticut Guidelines of Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall result in a development that: minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction is stabilized and protected from erosion and when completed; and does not cause off-site erosion and/or sedimentation.
6.2.2 The minimum standards for individual measures are those in the Connecticut Guidelines of Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended. The Commission may grant exceptions when requested by the Applicant if technically sound reasons are presented.
6.2.3 The appropriate method from Chapter 9 of the Connecticut Guidelines of Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended, shall be used in determining peak flow rates and volumes of runoff unless an alternative method is approved by the Commission.
6.3 Issuance or denial of certificate. The Commission shall either certify that the soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with the requirements and objectives of this regulation or deny certification when the development proposal does not comply with these regulations.
6.3.1 Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as extending the time limits for the approval of any Application under Chapters 124, 125a or 126 of the General Statutes.
6.4 Conditions relating to soil erosion and sediment control.
6.4.1 Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as scheduled according to the certified plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission may require a performance guarantee as set forth is Section 4.41 of these Regulations to ensure completion of erosion and sediment control measures.
6.4.2 All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure the compliance of the certified plan.
6.5 Inspection: Inspection by the Commission or its authorized agent during development shall ensure compliance with the certified plan and that control measures and facilities are property performed, installed and maintained.
6.5.1 The Commission or its agent may require progress reports and verification that control measures and facilities have been performed or installed in accordance with the certified Control Plan and are being operated and maintained.
6.5.2 The Commission or its agent may issue a cease and desist order if soil erosion and sediment control measures are not being carried out as required by the Regulations and any certified Control Plan. The Commission or its agent may order in writing the remedying of any condition found to be contrary to these Regulations or the certified Control Plan.
PAGE 31
SECTION 7- SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS/FLOODWAYS
7.0 Special Flood Hazard Areas/Floodways: when the subdivision includes land in a special flood hazard area of regulated floodway, reasonably safe from damage and shall conform to the Brooklyn Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance and to the following:
7.1 The lots and such improvements shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the special flood hazard area and shall be capable of use without danger from flooding or flood related damages.
7.2 All utilities and facilities, such as sanitary sewer systems, water supply systems and electric and gas systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
7.3 The storm drainage required under Section 10.11 shall be designed to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
7.4 Streets shall be of such elevation or shall be suitably protected so as to allow reasonable emergency access during flood conditions.
PAGE 32
Section 8 Open Space
8.0 All subdivisions or resubdivisions approved under these Regulations shall preserve Open Space in perpetuity where in the opinion of the Commission such land may be used for one or more of the following purposes:
8.0.1 Provides parks, playgrounds or other outdoor recreation areas and facilities;
8.0.2 Protects natural streams, ponds or surface or subsurface water supply, and watershed protection;
8.0.3 Conserves soils, wetlands, swamps, vernal pools or marshes;
8.0.4 Protects natural drainage systems or serves to assure protection from flooding;
8.0.5 Preserves open spaces along existing road frontages;
8.0.6 Preserves sites or areas of scenic beauty, or of historic or archaeological interest;
8.0.7 Conserves forests, field meadows, stands of unique or scenic trees, wildlife habitats, agricultural and other natural resources;
8.0.8 Supplements existing Open Space, greenways, Open Space corridors and recreation areas;
8.0.9 Meets recreation needs of present and projected population;
8.0.10 Preserves ridges, ravines, ledge outcroppings, hilltops, scenic vistas, stone walls and other unusual physical features;
8.0.11 Furthers the findings, goals, and policies contained in the Town of Brooklyn’s Plan of Conservation and Development or other Town approved land use plans.
8.1 Open Space may be located within all subdivisions or resubdivisions in a specific location as determined by the Commission where such Open Space will best further the purpose of the Open Space. The Commission, as part of its determination, may take into consideration:
8.1.1 If any particular location may be adjacent to existing or proposed Open Space or other property owned by the Town, a land trust or other similar entity; or
8.1.2 In evaluating a potential Open Space dedication, the Commission shall have the right to consider all land within the property to be subdivided, and, with the applicant's consent, any other nearby tract owned, controlled or optioned by the applicant. Subject to the criteria established in this regulation, all applicant proposed locations for Open Space dedications shall be considered by the Commission.
8.2 The Commission may require review of all proposed Open Space by the Recreation Commission, the Conservation Commission or a land trust, which could be the Open Space recipient prior to subdivision or resubdivision approval. If no comment is received by the Commission from any entity to which a referral has been made, it shall be assumed by the Commission that said entity has no comment regarding the matter so
PAGE 33
referred.
8.3 The minimum required area of Open Space shall be fifteen (15) percent of the total area of the land to be subdivided unless such land is intended to be developed as a Conservation Subdivision which shall require a minimum of forty (40) percent Open Space set-aside. Such Open Space shall be of such size and configuration as deemed appropriate by the Commission so that the Open Space will achieve the purpose intended as noted in Section 8.0 of this Article and serves the increased density of population resulting from the subdivision or resubdivision and serves to achieve the goals and objectives of the Plan of Conservation and Development.
8.4 Open Space Standards
8.4.1 Where Open Space is required by the Commission, the land to be dedicated to meet Town requirements may include wetlands or watercourses as defined in the Connecticut General Statutes, and slopes over twenty five (25) percent, but the Commission has the right to require that the percentage of the dedicated land within these wetland, watercourse and steep slope categories is not greater than the percentage of wetlands, watercourses and slopes over twenty five (25) percent within the property to be subdivided and, as applicable, within previous subdivision sections where dedications were not made.
For example, consider a tract to be subdivided with 40% of the land to be divided consisting of wetlands, watercourses and slopes over 25 percent, and 60% of the land to be subdivided without these limitations. The Commission shall have the right to require 60% of Open Space without any limitations and to allow 40% of the Open Space to include wetlands, watercourses or slopes over 25 percent.
8.4.2 Such Open Space shall have access from a public street, with such access at least 20 feet wide and having a maximum grade of 12%, or shall abut existing Open Space having such access, unless specifically waived by the Commission due to the unique characteristics of the Open Space or subdivision or resubdivision.
8.4.3 Any land to be dedicated as Open Space (except Open Space set aside for parks, playgrounds or other outdoor recreational facilities) shall be left in its natural state by the applicant, except for improvements as may be required by the Commission, and shall not be graded, cleared, disturbed, or used as a repository for stumps, brush, earth, building materials, or debris. Open Space for parks, playgrounds or other outdoor recreational areas and facilities shall be provided in a condition suitable for the purpose intended at the expense of the applicant. The Commission may require such Open Space area to be graded by the applicant to properly dispose of surface water, that it be covered with a minimum of 4” of loam, seeded with appropriate perennial grass, and that all brush and debris be removed. Such improvement of Open Spaces will not be required until the subdivision or resubdivision is substantially completed, provided a suitable bond is provided.
PAGE 34
8.5 The Open Space shall be dedicated by any of the following methods listed in this Section, as determined by the Commission; and, the Town shall consider any such dedication as satisfying the Open Space requirements of this Regulation and of Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Permanent dedication of each such area of Open Space shall be accomplished by:
8.5.1 creation of a Conservation Easement in favor of the Town of Brooklyn;
8.5.2 creation of a Conservation Easement in favor of the Town of Brooklyn reserving specific agricultural rights and uses by the Town, as approved by the Commission;
8.5.3 conveyance of fee simple ownership to a Tax-Exempt Organization approved by the Commission;
8.5.4 creation of a Conservation Easement in favor of a Tax-Exempt Organization approved by the Commission;
8.5.5 conveyance of fee simple ownership to a Connecticut non-stock corporation of which all owners of land within the subdivision or resubdivision are members, along with a conservation easement over the entire Open Space area; or
8.5.6 any other method which accomplishes permanent dedication in accordance with the requirements set forth in this Section.
The Commission may require dedication of Open Space by methods listed in 8.5.1, 8.5.2, or 8.5.5 of this subsection; and the Commission may require dedication by methods listed in 8.5.3, 8.5.4 or 8.5.6 with the consent of the applicant. Any such dedication, regardless of the method used, shall be completed prior to the endorsement and filing of the final subdivision or resubdivision plans in the office of the Town Clerk. Any conveyance of an interest in the dedicated Open Space shall convey to the grantee good and marketable title to the premises, and unless otherwise specified by the Commission, shall be free of all encumbrances or title defects.
8.6 When any dedication of Open Space is made, the deed, declaration, or other instrument transferring interest in the property shall be in a form acceptable to the Town, and shall provide, at a minimum:
8.6.1 That all such covenants or restrictions shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of all present and future owners of the land within the subdivision or resubdivision;
8.6.2 That such covenants or restrictions may be enforced by each present and future owner of land within the subdivision or resubdivision and also by the Town by appropriate action in court for damages or for affirmative or negative equitable relief; and
8.6.3 That the rights and duties created by such covenants or restrictions shall not in any way be modified or amended without the prior written approval of the Commission.
8.7 If Open Space is to be dedicated to an entity other than the Town, the applicant shall provide written evidence, satisfactory to the Commission, prior to commission action,
PAGE 35
from the entity proposed to own the Open Space, stating that it is willing to accept ownership of and responsibility for the preservation and maintenance of the Open Space in perpetuity for the purpose and in a manner consistent with the objectives of these Regulations.
8.8 The Commission shall approve any transfer of title of interest to any successor entity.
8.9 All corners of the Open Space or Conservation Easement shall be permanently marked by iron pins or monuments as required for all other parcels as required by these Regulations. The Commission may require the applicant to post identification plaques, provided by the Town, on trees, fences or posts, each one-hundred (100) feet along the edge of the Open Space as visual identification of these areas to future residents.
8.10 A transmittal letter shall be submitted including the following: properly executed legal documents, including warranty deeds for any title transfers, shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Section and shall be submitted with the final subdivision or resubdivision map to be endorsed and filed. All warranty deeds shall be accompanied by a certificate of title, prepared by an attorney admitted to the bar of the State of Connecticut, certifying that such conveyance passes good title to the described property or property interest, and that it is free and clear of any defect or encumbrances, or that any such encumbrance has been subordinated to the conveyance. All documents must be acceptable to the Commission and its attorney, and shall refer to the subdivision or resubdivision maps by title. All warranty deeds for dedication of land to the Town shall be held in escrow by the Town subject to the Town meeting to be recorded on the Town Land Records upon acceptance by the Town. In the event that acceptance is rejected by the Town, the deed shall be returned and the applicant shall return to the Commission for determination of an alternative means of preserving the Open Space. In no case, shall the acceptance of any deed by the Commission or an employee of the Town prior to the Town Meeting be deemed as acceptance of the Open Space by the Town.
8.11 As set forth in Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Commission may authorize the applicant to pay a fee to the Town, or pay a fee to the Town and transfer land to the Town in lieu of the full requirement to provide Open Space as set forth above. Such authorization may be granted by the Commission if and when it determines in its sole discretion, that conditions such as subdivision or resubdivision size, population densities, existing Open Space in the neighborhood, topography, soils or other characteristics are such that on-site Open Space is not as desirable as a fee-in-lieu of Open Space.
8.11.1 Such fee or combination of fee and the fair market value of land transferred shall be equal to not more than ten percent (10%) of the fair market value of the land to be subdivided prior to the approval of the subdivision or resubdivision. The fair market value shall be determined by the appraiser jointly selected by the Commission and the applicant, with the cost of all fees and expenses born by the applicant.
8.11.2 The applicant may elect to submit a fraction of such payment, the numerator of which is one and the denominator of which is the number of approved building lots in the subdivision or resubdivision, no later than the time of the sale of each approved building lot; and a notation describing this requirement shall be placed on the final subdivision or resubdivision map filed in the Town Clerk’s office. If this option is chosen, the applicant shall submit a bond or other security acceptable to the Town, equal to the full amount of fee required, prior to the
PAGE 36
filing of the subdivision or resubdivision maps in the Town Clerk’s office. Any required fees shall be paid to the Town prior to the release of this bond. The Commission may also choose other acceptable security such as a mortgage or lien on the land to be subdivided. This mortgage or lien shall secure the amount
8.11.3 All fees paid under this Section shall be deposited in the Town's Open Space Acquisition Fund.
8.12 To employ the fee-in-lieu of Open Space option, the following procedure shall be used:
8.12.1 The applicant shall submit a narrative to the Commission setting forth his desire to utilize the provisions of this section;
8.12.2 The Commission shall determine whether to accept the applicant’s proposal, or to accept a different combination of land transfer and fee, or to require an Open Space dedication only;
8.12.3 The Commission and applicant shall jointly select a Connecticut certified appraiser to submit a report. Steps 8.13.1 through 8.13.3 may be accomplished at the application acceptance portion of the process;
8.12.4 The applicant shall submit the appraisal during the formal application review process.
8.14 The Commission shall require Open Space in all subdivisions or resubdivisions or shall require a fee-in-lieu of Open Space for all subdivision or resubdivisions. No waivers of this requirement shall be granted except in the following instances as specifically required by Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes:
8.14.1 Where the transfer of all land in a subdivision or resubdivision of less than five (5) lots is to a parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle, or first cousin of the property owner for no consideration. Such intended transfer shall be evidenced by covenants, restrictions, contracts, or other legally binding documents as the Commission may approve, which documents will be filed in the Land Records along with the Subdivision or resubdivision Plan. If the Commission determines, subsequent to the approval of such subdivision or resubdivision, that such transfers were intended to be temporary, and for the sole purpose of evading the requirements of this Section, the Commission may, following a public hearing with notice by certified mail to the violator, void, in whole or in part, any such subdivision or resubdivision approval, and may cause notice thereof to be filed in the Land Records.
8.14.2 Where the subdivision or resubdivision is to contain affordable housing, and defined in Section 8-39a of the Connecticut General Statutes, equal to twenty percent (20%) or more of the total housing to be constructed in such subdivision or resubdivision. Such restrictions for affordable housing shall be evidenced by such documents as required by Section 8-30g of the Connecticut General Statutes, and such restrictions shall run with the lots affected thereby in perpetuity. If, subsequent to approval of the Subdivision or resubdivision, the lots designated for affordable housing shall not be sold for that purpose, the Commission may, following a public hearing with notice by certified mail to the
PAGE 37
violator, void, in whole or in part, any such subdivision or resubdivision approval, and may cause notice thereof to be filed in the Land Records. (Effective 4/2/10)
PAGE 38
SECTION 9- SOLAR ACCESS
9.0 The subdivider shall establish in the Application that in the preparation of the final subdivision plan the Applicant has considered the use of passive solar energy techniques which would not significantly increase the cost of the housing to the buyer after considering tax credits, subsidies, and exemptions.
9.1 Passive solar techniques and site design techniques which maximize solar heat gain, minimize heat loss and provide thermal storage within a building during the heating season and minimize heat gain and provide for natural cooling during the cooling season shall be considered. These techniques include:
9.1.1 House orientation and siting, so that the building is sited as close to the north lot line as possible to increase yard space for better owner control of shading.
9.1.2 Lot layout, so that the maximum number of building lots are placed on the south slopes.
9.1.3 Landscaping, by showing the location of any new trees with their mature height including canopy, and the planning of landscaping to facilitate the use of solar collectors and otherwise increase solar heat gain or shade protection as appropriate.
PAGE 39
SECTION 10- DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
10.0 Subdivisions shall be designed to conform to the current Brooklyn Plan of Development adopted by the Commission for the Town and lands around the subdivision, particularly in regard to streets, drainage and reservation of land for open space. Proposed subdivisions and all street, drainage and other improvements required by these Regulations shall also be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards thereinafter specified and in accordance with any Town road, driveways or drainage ordinances.
10.1 Supervision and Inspection: Construction of all required improvements shall be carried out to the specifications and under the supervision of the Planning and Zoning Commission or its authorized agent in accordance with procedures provided in the Town of Brooklyn Public Improvement Specifications Ordinance. All such required construction shall be subject to inspection by the Commission or their authorized agents. The Commission or appointed representative shall have free access to the construction work at all times and shall be authorized to take material, samples, cores and tests as deemed necessary to determine compliance with the Regulations. The Commission may require the Applicant, at the Applicant’s expense, to have such tests made and certified by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut.
10.2 Building Lots: Proposed building lots shall be of such shape, size, location topography and character so that buildings can be constructed reasonably so that they can be occupied and used for building purposes without danger to the health and safety of the occupants and the public. Any lot which is found to be unsuitable for occupancy and building by reason of water or flooding conditions, unsuitable soil, topography, ledge rock, shallow depth bedrock, or other conditions shall be combined with another lot of lots that are suitable, which may result in a reduction of the total number of lots. No lot so designated by the Commission shall be considered for approval until a grading plan meeting the requirements of Section 5.9 has been submitted. Proposed building lots shall be designed and arranged to make best use of the natural terrain, avoiding unnecessary regarding, and to preserve substantial trees, woods and inland wetlands.
10.2.1 Lot Size: Each lot shall conform to the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Brooklyn.
10.2.2 Frontage: Each lot shall have frontage on approved town road as required by the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Brooklyn.
10.2.3 Lot Numbers: When feasible, lots intended for separate ownership shall be numbered beginning with the number “1” and shall continue consecutively throughout the entire subdivision. Adjoining sections of the same subdivision having the same title shall not duplicate numbers. Lots shall conform to street numbers in conformance with the Town of Brooklyn Street Numbering ordinance.
10.2.4 Lot lines and Shape: Insofar as practical, the side lot lines of all lots shall be at right angles to the street on which the lot faces or shall be radial to the street line.
10.2.5 Interior Lots: All interior lots must meet the requirements of the Brooklyn Zoning Regulations.
10.2.6 Lot Grading: Lots shall be graded to prevent ponding of water on the lot after construction of streets, drainage and buildings are completed. Where filling of lots for final grading is required, compatible fill, and topsoil as required for lawn or plant growth, shall be used. Tree stumps, log other decomposable material or
PAGE 40
building debris shall not be used as fill material. When rocks or boulders are used for fill, they shall be located only in areas of the lot where they shall not adversely affect foundations, septic systems, drainage facilities or underground utilities and shall be so deposited that, in the opinion of the Town Engineer of his duly designated representative, voids likely to cause undue declivity will not be created.
10.3 Street Design and Construction: Streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Public Improvement Specifications Ordinance as amended and the following additional standards:
10.3.1 Classifications: All streets within or abutting the subdivision shall be classified as follows:
a. Local Streets: A street or road used primarily for access to abutting property. Streets in this classification shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Public Improvement Specifications Ordinance as amended for local streets.
b. Collector Street: A street or road which carried traffic from local streets to primary streets and arterial highways, including the principal entrances to developments and streets for circulation within such developments. Streets in this classification shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Public Improvement Specifications Ordinance as amended for thoroughfares.
c. Primary Street: A street or road used primarily for heavy volumes of traffic or high vehicle speeds (or arterial highways). Streets in this classification shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Public Improvement Specifications Ordinance as amended for streets.
10.4 Street Planning: Proposed streets and rights-of-way shall be planned in such a manner as to provide safe and convenient access to proposed lots, with due consideration for accomplishing an attractive layout and development of the land in the subdivision and in the neighborhood.
10.4.1 Streets should in general follow the contour of the land and shall have a location and grade which preserves the natural features in the subdivision and which enhances property values in the neighborhood.
10.4.2 Proposed local streets and rights-of-way shall be planned to discourage through traffic but also to provide a safe and convenient system for prospective traffic in the neighborhood around the subdivision and shall be planned to provide for continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas and for projection on adjoining properties when subdivided.
10.4.3 Town Collector roads shall be planned where necessary to coordinate with the Plan of Development for the Town and neighborhood, and where necessary as a feeder street to a neighborhood.
PAGE 41
10.5 Street Lines: Street lines n each side of a proposed street shall be parallel or shall be concentric arcs, except at intersections and turnarounds designed in accordance with the Public Improvement Specifications Ordinance. No street right-of-way shall be widened beyond the minimum width specified in the Public Improvement Specifications Ordinance for the purpose of securing additional street frontage for proposed lots.
10.6 Existing Streets: Proposed subdivisions abutting an existing Town street shall provide for proper widening of the right-of-way of such street to the width appropriate for the classification give such street in accordance with the Town Plan of Development.
In order to determine the effect of the proposed subdivision on public safety and welfare, the Commission may require the applicant to demonstrate that:
1. The road alignment, width and grades will be in harmony with existing and proposed roads and the Plan of Development of the Town, especially in regard to safe intersections with such roads.
2. The road construction will be sufficient to carry safely and conveniently public service and emergency vehicles and potential future traffic computed on the basis of projected population of the proposed subdivision and will not significantly increase the Town’s obligation for road upgrading, maintenance and repair which results from the development of the subdivision.
3. Storm drainage systems will be sufficient to carry increased storm drainage created by the proposed subdivision and associated access road improvements; and the increased storm drainage will not significantly increase the Town’s obligation for storm drainage systems on existing roads or other public or private lands.
10.6.1 Improved Roads: Drainage and other improvements made necessary by the subdivision shall be constructed in the existing Town street as required under Section 1.4 Public Improvements Required on Existing Streets in the Public Improvement Specifications Ordinance.
10.6.2 Unimproved Roads: Public Improvements required for unimproved roads shall be in accordance with the Public Improvement Specifications Ordinance.
10.7 Access: Each street shall connect with the existing Town Road or State Highway or a street in a subdivision approved by the Commission or with a proposed street in the subdivision connecting with an existing town Road or State Highway or a street in a subdivision approved by the Commission. Streets shall be designed to establish building lots at or above the grade of the street, wherever possible.
10.8 Intersections: The following standards shall apply to street intersections:
10.8.1 except where impractical because of topography or other conditions, all streets shall intersect so that for a distance of at least 100 feet the street is at right angles to the street it intersects; two streets intersecting another street on opposite sides shall intersect at the same point or be off-set from one another by at least 125 feet, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees;
PAGE 42
10.8.2 no more than two streets shall intersect at one point. Intersections shall be spaced not less than 300 feet apart.
10.8.3 At street intersections, property line corners shall be rounded by arc having a minimum radius of 30 feet.
10.9 Street Names: Streets shall bear names which do not duplicate or closely approximate in spelling or sound existing street names in the Town of Brooklyn. Streets which extend or are in alignment with existing streets shall bear the same name as the existing street. All street names shall be subject to the approval of the Commission.
10.10 Storm Drainage Design and Construction: Storm drainage shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Public Improvement Specifications Ordinance.
10.11 Storm Drainage Design and Construction: Storm drainage shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Public Improvement Specifications Ordinance and the following additional standards.
10.11.1 Pipe and Ditches: Sufficient pipe and ditches shall be installed within the subdivision to carry existing water courses, other than rivers and wide streams, and to drain the proposed streets and streets which may reasonably be expected to be constructed at some future date on adjoining property for water flow which would normally drain across the area of the proposed subdivision. If in its judgment there will be no substantial danger from soil erosion or danger to the public health and safety, the Commission may permit the continuance of exiting water courses in their established courses and may permit the discharge of storm water in open ditches.
10.11.2 Relocation of Major Water Courses: Relocation of major water courses will be permitted only where, in the opinion of the Commission, such relocation improves the flow pattern of the stream or improves the layout of the proposed subdivision without adversely affecting the stream. Ditches and open water courses should not be located in the portion of the lot customarily used for front and side yards, within the area of the lot described by the applicable setback lines or in the subsurface sewage disposal and/or water supply systems. Approval of watercourse relocation by the Conservation and Inland Wetland Commission is necessary but may be denied by the Planning and Zoning Commission due to the impact to drainage and erosion and sedimentation control.
10.11.3 Buried Pipes: All storm water from the street drainage system shall be carried in an adequately buried pipe within a distance of 150 feet from a curb line of exiting or proposed streets. All ditches and storm drainage piping shall be constructed in accordance with the Public Improvement Specifications Ordinance and shall be sufficient to carry properly the designed storm water flow rates expected to enter the ditch or pipe from the proposed subdivision and other properties on the watershed which, when fully developed, can be expected to drain across the area of the proposed subdivision.
PAGE 43
10.11.4 Discharge: The discharge of all storm water from the subdivision shall be into suitable Town drains, ditches or other Town drainage facilities with adequate capacity to carry the additional water. Where the discharge shall be into private property adjoining the proposed subdivision, proper easements and discharge rights shall be secured by the Applicant from the property owner before approval of the record subdivision map and acceptance of the drainage plan.
10.11.5 Water Diversion: No storm water shall be diverted from one watershed to another without a State permit.
10.11.6 Water Channel Lines: Building lines may be required along any stream or river for the purpose of preventing encroachment upon and constriction of the natural water channel by buildings, filling operations, or other facilities and construction. When required, a note shall be placed on the record subdivision map explaining the building lines and stating the restrictions against encroachment upon the channel.
10.11.7 A settling basin may be required by the Town Engineer if it is deemed necessary to prevent silting of streams, wetlands, or other areas contiguous to the drainage outfall and/or to reduce the rate of runoff to pre-construction conditions. The name and phone number of the individual responsible for maintenance shall be submitted prior to construction activities taking place. All storm sewer outlets within easements on private property shall be piped at least 100 feet beyond the street line unless otherwise directed by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
10.12 Easements: Easements for access to and use of land, or other necessary rights or restrictions as to use of land, outside of a street right-of-way, shall be provided as required or approved by the Commission and shall be shown on the Record Subdivision Map with adequate survey information, so that the land subject to easement may be accurately located by field survey. Easements may be required in the following types of cases as applicable to the particular subdivision:
10.12.1 For access to bridges and culverts by construction and maintenance equipment which easements shall be not less than 20 feet wide;
10.12.2 For storm water pipes, and water mains and sanitary sewers and appurtenances, if nay, which easements shall be not less than 20 feet wide;
10.12.3 For use and access to storm water detention basins, retention basins and fie ponds shall be not less than 20 feet wide;
10.12.4 For identification of points or areas of storm drainage spillage rights from streets when storm drainage conduits are not to be installed;
10.12.5 Temporary construction easements for grading and other construction work in the front 25 feet of each lot along a proposed street;
10.12.6 Sight-line easements across corners of lots at all street intersections to assure safe line of signs on the street and to authorize the owner of the abutting
property (ies) to remove obstructions to regarding within the easement area;
PAGE 44
10.12.7 Easements at least 10 feet in width for pedestrian ways to open spaces, parks, playgrounds, schools and other public or semi-public places where the street
system does not conform to a convenient pattern of pedestrian circulations; and
10.12.8 For bikeways or horse riding trails as part of a plan and program for a neighborhood.
10.13 Easements for Pipe Systems: Easements may also be required for storm water pipes and facilities that may need to be installed in the future to serve undeveloped land within the watershed that normally drains across the area of the proposed subdivision; easements may also be required where natural prescriptive drainage rights must be altered by land subdivision.
10.13.1 Easements for Pipe Systems: Easements may also be required for storm water pipes and facilities that may need to be installed in the future to serve undeveloped land within the watershed that normally drains across the area of the proposed subdivision; easements may also be required where natural prescriptive drainage rights must be altered by land subdivision.
10.14 Driveways: Safe driveway entrances with adequate sight lines for safe vehicle entry onto a street shall be required.
10.14.1 Driveways to individual lots or interior lots shall be so located, designed and constructed so as to prevent erosion, prevent excessive road drainage down driveways or excessive driveway drainage onto the traveled way.
10.14.2 Construction of driveway drainage facilities shall be completed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or Town acceptance of the roads, whichever comes first.
10.14.3 Driveway entrances onto heavily traveled roads are discouraged and wherever possible should be laid out and designed to enter onto lightly traveled roads.
10.14.4 Driveways to all lots shall be constructed to provide adequate year-round access for emergency vehicles.
10.14.5 Where topography and/or driveway length dictates, the Commission may require slopes not exceeding 12% and all-weather passable surfaces not less than ten (10) feet wide.
10.14.6 Driveways shall be paved to the same specifications as the adjoining road to the boundary line of the lot or 20’ from the edge of the road pavements, whichever is greater.
10.15 Monuments and pins: Monuments shall be provided on both street right-of-way lines at all angle points and points of curvature and tangent. At least two monuments shall be provided for each 800 feet of street. Monuments shall be made of concrete and shall be not less than five (5) inches square by 30 inches length with a suitable marked top. Each monument shall be set in place, after all street construction is completed, with the marked point set on the point of reference. Lot corners shall be marked with iron pins,
PAGE 45
or with concrete monuments. Such lot markers shall be installed prior to the conveyance of lots in a subdivision or prior to the issuance of zoning permits, whichever is first.
10.16 Special Structures: Bridges, box culverts, deep manholes, dikes and other special structures shall be designed in accordance with good engineering practices acceptable to the Commission or its designated agent.
10.17 Street and Traffic Signs: Street name signs of approved construction shall be installed at all street intersections in locations approved by the Board of Selectmen.
10.17.1 Such signs shall be of a design and material approved by the Board of Selectmen.
10.17.2 Traffic signs as required by the Board of Selectmen of regulation size, shape, and material shall be installed prior to Town acceptance of subdivision roads.
10.18 Street Trees: Street Trees shall be planted forty (40) to fifty (50) feet apart on both sides of any street, subject to variations made necessary by driveways, street corners and walks, and shall be located within ten (10) feet of the edge of the pavement.
10.18.1 Trees to be planted shall be of three (3) inch caliper or larger, shall be planted, protected and maintained using good horticultural practices, and shall have a minimum height of ten (10) feet.
10.18.2 The species of trees shall be of a type designated by the Commission.
10.18.3 Where the trees may interfere with utility poles and wires, the Commission may permit the location of required trees within the front ten (10) feet of the proposed lots.
10.18.4 Existing trees along the proposed street which conform to these requirements may be substituted for new trees at the discretion of the Commission.
10.18.5 Where the existing street trees have aged to the point of deteriorating, new street trees shall be planted in-between the existing trees and it may be required to trim the existing trees to permit growth of the new trees.
10.19 Fire Ponds; Where deemed necessary by the Commission and the Town Fire Marshal, fire ponds of adequate depth and capacity shall be provided in appropriate locations, registered and approved by the fire department.
10.20. Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be provided in a proposed subdivision for pedestrian access
to neighborhoods, schools, parks, shopping areas and transit stops. Sidewalks should also provide mid block access to these types of generators. All sidewalks shall comply with the requirements of Brooklyn Public Improvements Ordinance
PAGE 46
10.20.1 A waiver of this regulation may be granted by a majority vote of the
Commission members present, where it determines that sidewalks will not
benefit the subdivision or the surrounding properties if:
The subdivision is of such size that sidewalks are not deemed necessary
The subdivision is in a location where sidewalks would not be considered
beneficial
Approved - Sept 6, 2006
Effective – Sept 29, 2006
10.21. Maintenance Requirements: The subdivider shall maintain all improvements and provide
for snow removal on streets, if required, until acceptance of said improvements by the
Town of Brooklyn.
10.22 Streetlights: Street lights shall be installed at all intersections of new roads and where proposed roads intersect with existing roads. On existing roads the commission may require street lights where the safety of access onto the road from driveways near existing intersections.
10.23 Buffers for subdivisions adjacent to Agricultural, Commercial, Industrial uses, or along highways where noise and fumes are expected shall be installed in accordance with the Zoning Regulations.
PAGE 47
SECTION 11- WATER SUPPLY AND SANITARY REQUIREMENTS
11.0 It is the responsibility of the Applicant to supply sufficient evidence to the Commission to prove that water supply and each soil absorption sewage disposal facility can be installed to function properly and not cause a pollution problem and be in conformance with the Connecticut Public Health Code or its successor regulations.
11.1 Where on-site sewage disposal systems are proposed, the subdivision plan shall be accompanied by a Sanitary Report Prepared by a professional engineer. The report shall demonstrate the feasibility for subsurface disposal of septic tank effluent. The report shall deal with the entire tract, discussing the following points:
11.1.1 General nature and development of surrounding area shown on map with explanatory text.
11.1.2 Topography and natural drainage pattern, including references to Soil Conservation Service soils map with specific references to on-site sewage disposal limitations.
11.1.3 Sub-surface conditions as shown by sub-surface investigation, including soil absorption characteristics, ground water level conditions, ledge rock and general nature of soil.
11.1.4 General description of type of development contemplated, noting type of dwelling units and structures, number of families per structure and number of bedrooms per dwelling unit.
11.1.5 Detailed description of proposed sewage disposal facilities, indicating systems sized for various ground conditions, materials to be used, general layout of pattern to be used.
11.1.6 Special precautions that may be necessary to provide proper functioning of the proposed disposal system
11.1.7 Flood heights of any steams, brooks, rivers, lakes or ponds on or near the subdivision, Flood heights shall be based upon a 100-year frequency storm.
11.2 The Sanitary Report shall contain test results and engineering evaluation of test results based on an extensive subsurface investigation. The tests shall be witnessed by the Northeast District Department of Health (NDDH).
11.2.1 The evaluation shall include a determination whether the soil is suitable for the absorption of septic tank effluent, and if so, how much area is required. The soil must have an acceptable percolation rate, without interference from ground water or impervious strata below the level of the absorption system which would prevent the disposal of effluent.
11.2.2 The technical standard used in the evaluation shall be is accordance with commonly accepted standards and procedures with particular reference to the Sanitary
PAGE 48
Code of the State of Connecticut. Unless those standards are satisfied, the area is unsuitable for subsurface sewage disposal systems in a subdivision.
11.2.3 Subsurface explorations are necessary to determine subsurface formations in the area. Percolation rates shall be figured on the basis of the test data obtained after the soil has had an opportunity to become saturated, and has had an opportunity to swell. Percolation tests shall be taken at the probable level of the proposed disposal system. A minimum depth of thirty-six (36) inches shall the required for the percolation test holes. Any other tests shall be made to a depth at least three (3) feet below the probable elevation of the disposal facilities. The same care taken in selecting the location of the percolation test holes shall be employed on the location of any other tests. A minimum depth of six (6) feet will be required for these other tests.
11.3 The Sanitary Report shall contain a statement by the engineer that, in his/her professional opinion, each lot for proposed development is suitable for the installation of and size described in the report. Any reservations or special conditions considered necessary by the engineer shall be set forth in the Sanitary Report.
11.4 The Sanitary Report shall be a well written, comprehensive and documented study, meeting all of the above requirements and submitted to the NDDH for their review. If, in the opinion of the NDDH, the sanitary report is incomplete as to the required information, additional information sufficient to correct the deficiencies of the report may be required.
11.5 The Commission will only accept soil tests conducted at time periods designated as acceptable by NDDH and under supervision of NDDH. Applicants should be aware that NDDH may suspend all soil testing during certain times or seasons of the year.
11.6 Water Supply Report. Every Application for approval of subdivision must include a report addressing the manner in which the properties are to be provided with domestic water supply.
11.6.1 When a subdivision is not to be served by a public water supply, a report from NDDH shall be obtained and submitted by the applicant certifying that the land to be subdivided and the subdivision plans are satisfactory for the installation of private water supply.
11.6.2 A Hydrological Report shall be submitted including the methodology used to compute pipe sizes and drainage volumes. In addition, calculations and the basis used to evaluate potential impact on aquifer recharge and ground water quality shall be provided.
11.6.3 Development should not be proposed in a manner or density to cause degradation of the ground water quality below drinking water standards based upon the normally expected waste water dilution potential of the proposed individual subdivision lots.
11.6.4 Whenever possible, subdivision development will be planned to enhance or maintain levels of ground water recharge to the aquifer.
PAGE 49
11.7 Potable Water. A potable, adequate, and dependable supply shall be provided for every lot. Test wells may be required in areas identified as areas of groundwater contamination or where previous land uses may cause well water problems. The requirements of Section 11.6 may be waived when the developer of the subdivision can demonstrate that the requirements of Section 11l.7 have been met and a drilled well, community water supply or public water supply is in place for each lot.
11.8 Wells drilled in accordance with 11.7 shall comply with the following:
11.8.1 topographic and geological conditions shall be satisfactory for the purpose of proving a potable water supply;
11.8.2 each well can be designed, located and constructed in accordance with the standards and requirements of the Connecticut Department of Health.
PAGE 50
SECTION 12- ENFORCEMNT, SEPARABILITY AND AMENDMENTS
12.1 The Chairman, a member of the Commission or the Commission’s appointed representative is hereby designated as the enforcement officer of these Regulations.
12.2 These Regulations may be amended, changed or repealed in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
12.3 Invalidity of one provision shall not invalidate any other provision.
12.4 Appeals may be made in accordance with Section 8-28 and 8-30 of Chapter 126 of the Connecticut State Statutes as amended.
12.5 Performance and maintenance guarantees: Where authorized by its Regulations, the Commission may require a subdivider to file with the Town of Brooklyn a performance or maintenance guarantee and sufficient security secured by bond, letter of credit or other form. Said guarantee and security shall satisfy the following requirements.
12.5.1 The guarantee and the security must be of a type in a form approved by the Town Counsel.
12.5.2 The amount of the security must be sufficient to protect the Town of Brooklyn from undue fiscal burden in completing the improvements improved in the plan and maps of the Subdivision and shall be determined by the Commission upon recommendation of the Town Engineer.
12.6 Waivers may be granted by the Commission upon written request by the Applicant and by a three-quarters vote of all the members of the Commission in the following cases:
12.6.1 Where a proposed subdivision involves establishment of lots fronting on an existing street, the Commission may vote to waive the required submission of all or part of the Subdivision Plan Requirements, Section 5.
12.6.2 The Commission may waive the required submission of all or part of the Subdivision Plan Requirements, Section 5 in connection with any resubdivision.
12.6.3 As set forth is Section 11.8.
12.6.4 The Commission shall state its reasons for granting the waiver and these reasons will be clearly stated in the meeting’s minutes.
12.7 Whenever access to the subdivision can be achieved only by crossing land in another municipality, the Applicant shall demonstrate that an access road is adequately improved or that a performance bond has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to assure the construction of the access road.
PAGE 51
SECTION 13- EFFECTIVE DATE AND REPEAL
13.0 The Regulations, and any amendments or changes hereto, shall be in full force ad effect from the date established by the Commission in accordance with the General Statues of the State of Connecticut.
13.1 The “SUBDIVSION REGUALTIONS OF THE TOWN OF BROOKLY, CONNECTICUT” made effective by the Planning and Zoning Commission on July 1, 1967 and all amendments thereto, are repealed coincident with the effective date of these Regulations.
13.2 The repeal of the above Regulations and all amendments thereto shall not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired, or any liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, prior to the time such repeal took effect, but the same may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if such repeal had not been effected.
PAGE 52
HYDROLOGY REPORT
Purpose:
The purpose of requiring a Hydrology Report includes, but is not limited to, protecting the public health from the contamination of existing and potential public and private water supplies and to protect the general welfare by preserving limited water supplies for present and future use.
Definitions:
“Aquifer” means a geologic formation, group of formations or part of a formation which contains sufficient saturated permeable material to yield significant quantities of potable groundwater to pubic or private wells.
“Aquifer, Bedrock” means a geologic formation, group of formations or part of a formation which contains sufficient fractures to yield significant quantities of potable ground water to public or private wells.
“Groundwater” means all the water beneath the surface of the ground.
“Impervious” means impenetrable by water.
“Leachable wastes” means waste materials, including solid wastes, sewage, sludge and agricultural wastes, that are capable of releasing water-borne contaminates to the surrounding environment.
“Recharge Area” means any area of porous, permeable geologic deposits, especially, but not exclusively, deposits of stratified sand and gravel. Through which water from any source drains into an aquifer, and includes any wetland or body of surface water surrounded by or adjacent to such area, together with the watershed of any wetland, watercourse of body of surface water adjacent to such area.
Hydrology Report:
The Hydrology Report shall be prepared using the best available geological and engineering practices and shall include, be not limited to, the following areas of study and report:
1. Site Location
2. Geological Conditions
3. Depth of Watertable
4. Groundwater Gradation and Flow Duration
5. Rate of Flow
6. Private Well Pump Test:
a. location of screen and test point
b. type of screen
c. pump rate
d. vertical extent of influence
e. field porosity
f. recharge rate
g. zone of contribution
PAGE 53
Conclusion:
Per sections 11.8, 11.6.2, 11.6.3, 11.6.4
Certification:
They Hydrology Report shall be certified by a Geologist or Civil Engineer with a significant practice or more than 5 years experience in investigating and reporting on ground water hydrology.
The Hydrology Report (including all maps) shall be signed and certified.
PAGE 54
MATERIALS FOR USE IN IMROVING EROSION AND SEDIMENT
CONTROL PLAN IMPLEMENTATION
October 1988
PLAN REVIEW WORKSHEET
WORKSHEETS
The Connecticut Council on Soil and Water Conservation developed a worksheet to facilitate preparation and review of erosion and sediment control plans. The attached worksheet follows the “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook”.
The worksheet is comprehensive. It should be considered a guide and not all items will be required on all plans. Plan reviewers should be careful to require only information that is applicable to the subject plan. It will help plan the preparer and assure that all needed information is included in the plan.
It is recommended that the worksheet be supplied to all individuals who prepare or review plans. Thus, all parties will use the same guidelines in preparing a complete plan.
PAGE 55
1.10
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION TOWN OF BROOKLYN
CONNECTICUT
Received Date ______ _
Application # SD _______________ _
Check # ________ _
APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISON/RESUBDIVISION
Name of Applicant Mailing Address
Applicants Interest in the Property
Property Owner Mailing Address
Name of Engineer/Surveyor Address
Contact Person
Fax ____________ _
Name of Attorney Address
Phone
Fax
Subdivision__ Re subdivision _______ _
Property location
Map # Lot # __ _
Number of Proposed Lots
Sewage Disposal: Private
Acres to be Divided ___________ _
oad Proposed ________ _
,t required by Section 11.6.2
Storm ____________ _
.2.3 Sanitary Report___ 4.2.5, 3 copies of plans ________ _
. ec ion from the Inland Wetlands Com. & the Conservation Com. trol Plans
venience and Necessity other Agencies
The owner and applicant hereby grant the Brooklyn Planning and Zoning Commission, the Board of Selectman, Authorized Agents of the Planning and Zoning Commission or Board of Selectman, permission to enter the property to which the application is requested for the purpose of inspection and enforcement of the Zoning regulations and the Subdivision regulations of the Town of Brooklyn
Applicant: _______________________________________________________ Date ________ _
Owner: ________________________________________________________ Date ________ _
*Note: All consulting fees shall be paid by the applicant

October 2013
Town of Brooklyn
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013
Contents
Section
Title
Page
1
Title and Authority
1
2
Definitions
3
3
Inventory of Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
9
4
Permitted and Non-regulated Uses
12
5
Activities Regulated by the State
16
6
Regulated Activities to be Licensed
18
7
Application Requirements
20
8
Application Procedures
27
9
Public Hearings
30
10
Considerations for Decisions
33
11
Decision Process and Permit
38
12
Action by Duly Authorized Agent
43
13
Bond and Insurance
46
14
Enforcement
48
15
Amendments
50
16
Appeals
54
17
Conflict and Severance
56
18
Other Permits
58
19
Application Fees
60
20
Effective Date of Regulations
62
Appendix A
Definition of Agriculture
64
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013
Appendix B
Connecticut General Statute section 8-7d
65
Appendix C
Town of Brooklyn, Ordinance Establishing Land Use Application Fees
68
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 1
Section 1
Title and Authority
1.1. The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an indispensable and irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the state have been endowed. The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential to an adequate supply of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion; to the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to the existence of many forms of animal, aquatic and plant life. Many inland wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are in danger of destruction because of unregulated use by reason of the deposition, filling or removal of material, the diversion or obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures and other uses, all of which have despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such unregulated activity has had, and will continue to have, a significant, adverse impact on the environment and ecology of the state of Connecticut and has and will continue to imperil the quality of the environment thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and recreational values and benefits of the state for its citizens now and forever more. The preservation and protection of the wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary, undesirable and unregulated uses, disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the state. It is, therefore, the purpose of these regulations to protect the citizens of the state by making provisions for the protection, preservation, maintenance and use of the inland wetlands and watercourses by minimizing their disturbance and pollution; maintaining and improving water quality in accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state or local authority; preventing damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; protecting the quality of wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic, aesthetic, recreational and other public and private uses and values; and protecting the state's potable fresh water supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, misuse and mismanagement by providing an orderly process to balance the need for the economic growth of the state and the use of its land with the need to protect its environment and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people of the state, the safety of such natural resources for their benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and enjoyment of generations yet unborn.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 2
1.2. These regulations shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of Brooklyn."
1.3 The Brooklyn Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Brooklyn was established in accordance with an ordinance adopted 1971, and shall implement the purposes and provisions of these regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act in the Town of Brooklyn.
1.4 These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance with the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and these regulations.
1.5 The Commission shall enforce the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and shall issue, issue with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny permits for all regulated activities in the Town of Brooklyn pursuant to sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 3
Section 2
Definitions
2.1 As used in these regulations:
"Act" means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, sections 22a-36 through 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
“Agriculture” shall be consistent with the definition as noted in section 1-1(q) of the Connecticut General Statutes. (see “farming”)
"Bogs" are watercourses distinguished by evergreen trees and shrubs underlain by peat deposits, poor or very poor drainage, and highly acidic conditions.
"Clear-cutting" means the harvest of timber in a fashion which removes all trees down to a two inch diameter at breast height.
"Commission" means the Brooklyn Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Brooklyn.
"Commissioner of Environmental Protection" means the commissioner of the State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
"Continual flow" means a flow of water which persists for an extended period of time; this flow may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low flow period of the annual hydrological cycle, June through September, but it recurs in prolonged succession.
“Date of Receipt” (petition, application, request or appeal) means the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission, immediately following the day of submission to the Commission or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal or thirty-five (35) days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
"Deposit" includes, but shall not be limited to fill, grade, dump, place, discharge, or emit.
"Discharge" means emission of any water, substance, or material into waters of the state whether or not such substance causes pollution.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 4
"Essential to the farming operation" means that the proposed activity is necessary and indispensable to sustain farming activities on the farm.
"Farming" shall be consistent with the definition as noted in section 1-1(q) of the Connecticut General Statutes. (see “Agriculture”)
“Feasible” means able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound engineering principles.
“License” means the whole or any part of any permit, certificate of approval or similar form of permission which may be required of any person by the provisions of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive.
"Management practice" means a practice, procedure, activity, structure, or facility designed to prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage or to maintain or enhance existing environmental quality. Such management practices include, but are not limited to: erosion and sedimentation controls; restrictions on land use or development; construction setbacks from wetlands or watercourses; proper disposal of waste materials; procedures for equipment maintenance to prevent fuel spillage; construction methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of wetlands and watercourses; procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows; confining construction that must take place in watercourses to times when water flows are low and fish and wildlife will not be adversely affected.
"Marshes" are watercourses that are distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs and the dominance of soft-stemmed herbaceous plants. The water table in marshes is at or above the ground surface throughout the year and areas of open water six inches or more in depth are common, but seasonal water table fluctuations are encountered.
"Material" means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including but not limited to soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, mud, debris, sand, refuse or waste.
“Mean high water mark” means the average high elevation reached by a watercourse.
"Municipality" means the Town of Brooklyn.
"Nurseries" means places where plants are grown for sale, transplanting, or experimentation.
"Permit" see “license”
"Permittee" means the person to whom a license has been issued.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 5
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, company, organization, or legal entity of any kind, including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
"Pollution" means harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering unclean or impure of any waters of the state by reason of any waste or other materials discharged or deposited therein by any public or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or indirectly to come in contact with any waters. This includes, but is not limited to, erosion and sedimentation resulting from any filling, land clearing or excavation activity.
“Prudent” means economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social benefits to be derived from the proposed regulated activity provided cost may be considered in deciding what is prudent and further provided a mere showing of expense will not necessarily mean an alternative is imprudent.
"Regulated activity" means any operation within or use of a wetland or watercourse involving removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction, alteration or pollution, of such wetlands or watercourses, but shall not include the specified activities in section 4 of these regulations. Any clearing, grubbing filling, grading, paving, excavating, constructing, depositing or removing of material and/or discharging of storm water or collected or concentrated drainage on land within the Upland Review Area, which activities may have a substantial impact on an inland wetland or watercourse, is a Regulated Activity, even if no activity actually occurs within the wetland or watercourse boundary.
Upland Review Area is defined as that area that is the greater area of land within:
1) A radius of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet measured horizontally from each point on the boundary of any wetland; or
2) A radius of one hundred seventy-five (175) feet measured horizontally from each point on the mean high water mark of any continuous watercourse.
After the Commission has examined a proposed activity in regard to its potential impacts or effects on the inland wetlands or watercourses, the Commission may rule that any proposed activity located within such Upland Review Area or in any non-wetland or non-watercourse area beyond the boundary of the Upland Review Area is likely to have a substantial impact or affect wetlands or watercourses and is therefore deemed a regulated activity in accordance with this Regulation.
"Remove" includes, but shall not be limited to drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge, suck, bulldoze, dragline or blast.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 6
"Rendering unclean or impure" means any alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of any waters of the state, including, but not limited to, change in odor, color, turbidity or taste.
"Significant impact" means any activity, including, but not limited to, the following activities which may have a major effect:
1. Any activity involving deposition or removal of material which will or may have a substantial effect on the wetland or watercourse or on wetlands or watercourses outside the area for which the activity is proposed.
2. Any activity which substantially changes the natural channel or may inhibit the natural dynamics of a watercourse system.
3. Any activity which substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland wetland or watercourse to: support aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats; prevent flooding; supply water; assimilate waste; facilitate drainage; provide recreation or open space; or perform other functions.
4. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause substantial turbidity, siltation or sedimentation in a wetland or watercourse.
5. Any activity which causes substantial diminution of flow of a natural watercourse or groundwater levels of the wetland or watercourse.
6. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause pollution of a wetland or watercourse.
7. Any activity which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse areas or such areas having demonstrable scientific or educational value.
"Soil scientist" means an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set by the federal Office of Personnel Management.
"Swamps" are watercourses that are distinguished by the dominance of wetland trees and shrubs.
"Submerged Lands" means those lands which are inundated by water on a seasonal or more frequent basis.
"Town" means the Town of Brooklyn.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 7
“Upland Review Area” means non-wetland or non-watercourse areas where activities are likely to impact or affect wetlands or continuous watercourses
"Waste" means sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid, or radioactive, which may pollute or tend to pollute any of the wetlands and watercourses of the Town.
"Watercourses" means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs, and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the Town or any portion thereof not regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes. Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: (a) evidence of scour or deposits of recent alluvium or detritus, (b) the presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer than a particular storm incident, and (c) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation.
"Wetlands" means land, including submerged land as defined in this section, not regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial and floodplain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as it may be amended from time to time, of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated sites which possess an aquic (saturated) soil moisture regime as defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 8
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 9
Section 3
Inventory of Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses
3.1 The map of wetlands and watercourses entitled "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, Brooklyn, Connecticut" delineates the general location and boundaries of inland wetlands and the general location of watercourses. Copies of this map are available for inspection at the office of the Town Clerk or the Commission. In all cases, the precise location of wetlands and watercourses shall be determined by the actual character of the land, the distribution of wetland soil types and location of watercourses. The Commission may use aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils maps, site inspection observations, or other information in determining the location of the boundaries of wetlands and watercourses.
3.2 Any person may petition the Commission for an amendment to the map. All petitions for a map change shall be submitted in writing and shall include all relevant facts and circumstances which support the change. The petitioner shall bear the burden of proof regarding the proposed map amendment. Such proof may include, but not be limited to aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource mapping or other available information. The Commission may require such person to provide an accurate delineation of regulated areas in accordance with section 15 of these regulations.
3.3 The Commission shall maintain a current inventory of regulated areas within the town. The Commission may amend its map as more accurate information becomes available.
3.4 All map amendments are subject to the public hearing process outlined in section 15 of these regulations.
3.5 Upland review areas are established for all wetlands and watercourses within the Town of Brooklyn. These review areas shall extend a distance of one-hundred twenty-five (125) feet on either side of each wetland or intermittent watercourse and shall be measured from the ordinary high water mark and shall extend one-hundred seventy-five (175) feet from the ordinary high water mark of each continuous watercourse.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 10
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 11
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 12
Section 4
Permitted Uses as of Right &
Non-Regulated Uses
4.1 The following operations and uses shall be permitted in inland wetlands and watercourses, as of right:
a. Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops and farm ponds of three acres or less essential to the farming operation, and activities conducted by, or under the authority of, the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection for the purposes of wetland or watercourse restoration or enhancement or mosquito control. The provisions of this subdivision shall not be construed to include road construction or the erection of buildings not directly related to the farming operation, relocation of watercourses with continual flow, filling or reclamation of wetlands or watercourses with continual flow, clear cutting of timber except for the expansion of agricultural crop land, the mining of top soil, peat, sand, gravel or similar material from wetlands or watercourses for the purposes of sale;
b. A residential home (A)for which a building permit has been issued or (B)on a subdivision lot, provided the permit has been issued or the subdivision has been approved by a municipal planning, zoning or planning and zoning commission as of the effective date of promulgation of the municipal regulations pursuant to subsection (b) of section 22a-42a, or as of July 1, 1974, which ever is earlier, and further provided no residential home shall be permitted as of right pursuant to this subdivision unless the permit was obtained on or before July 1, 1987; boat anchorage or mooring;
c. boat anchorage or mooring;
d. Uses incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property, such property defined as equal to or smaller than the largest minimum residential lot site permitted anywhere in the municipality provided that in any town where there are no zoning regulations establishing minimum residential lot sites, the largest minimum lot site shall be two acres. Such incidental uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and landscaping, but shall not include removal or deposition of significant amounts of material from or onto a wetland or watercourse, or diversion or alteration of a watercourse;
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 13
e. Construction and operation, by water companies as defined by section 16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes or by municipal water supply systems as provided for in chapter 102 of the Connecticut General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs and other facilities necessary to the impounding, storage and withdrawal of water in connection with public water supplies except as provided in sections 22a-401and 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes and;
f. Maintenance relating to any drainage pipe which existed before the effective date of any municipal regulations adopted pursuant to section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes or July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, provided such pipe is on property which is zoned as residential but which does not contain hydrophytic vegetation. For purposes of this subdivision, “maintenance” means the removal of accumulated leaves, soil, and other debris whether by hand or machine, while the pipe remains in place.
g. Withdrawals of water for fire emergency purposes.
4.2 The following operations and uses shall be permitted, as non-regulated uses in wetlands and watercourses, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse by removal or deposition of material, alteration or obstruction of water flow or pollution of the wetland or watercourse:
a. Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish and wildlife; and
b. Outdoor recreation including play and sporting areas, golf courses, field trials, nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin diving, camping, boating, water skiing, trapping, hunting, fishing and shellfishing where otherwise legally permitted and regulated.
c. The installation of a dry hydrant by or under the authority of a municipal fire department provided such dry hydrant is only used for firefighting purposes and there is no alternative access to a public water supply. For purposes of this section, “dry hydrant” means a non-pressurized pipe system that; (A) is readily accessible to fire department apparatus from proximate public road, (b) provides for the withdrawal of water by suction to such fire department apparatus, and (c) is permanently installed into an existing lake, pond or stream that is a dependable source of water.
4.3 All activities in wetlands or watercourses involving filling, excavating, dredging, clear cutting, clearing, or grading or any other alteration or use of a wetland or watercourse not specifically permitted by this section and otherwise defined as a regulated activity by these regulations shall require a permit from the Commission in
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 14
accordance with section 6 of these regulations, or for certain regulated activities located outside of wetlands and watercourses from the duly authorized agent in accordance with section 12 of these regulations.
4.4 To carry out the purposes of this section, any person proposing a permitted operation and use or a non-regulated operation and use shall, prior to commencement of such operation and use, notify the Commission on a form provided by it, and provide the Commission with sufficient information to enable it to properly determine that the proposed operation and use is a permitted or non-regulated use of a wetland or watercourse. The Commission shall rule that the proposed operation and use or portion of it is a permitted or non-regulated operation and use or that the proposed operation and use is a regulated activity and a permit is required.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 15
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Section 5
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 16
Activities Regulated Exclusively
by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection
5.1 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over regulated activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses, undertaken by any department, Commission or instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except any local or regional board of education, pursuant to sections 22a-39 or 22a-45a of the Connecticut General Statues.
5.2 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over tidal wetlands designated and regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
5.3 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over activities authorized under a dam repair or removal order issued by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under section 22a-402 of the Connecticut General Statutes or a permit issued by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under sections 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Any person receiving such dam repair or removal order or permit shall not be required to obtain a permit from a municipal wetlands Commission for any action necessary to comply with said dam order or to carry out the activities authorized by said permit.
5.4 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the discharge of fill or dredged materials into the wetlands and watercourses of the state pursuant to section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, for activities regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 17
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 18
Section 6
Regulated Activities
to be Licensed
6.1 No person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first obtaining a permit for such activity from the Brooklyn Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Brooklyn.
6.2 Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a regulated activity without the prior authorization of the Commission, or violating any other provision of these regulations, shall be subject to the enforcement proceedings and penalties prescribed in section 14 of these regulations and any other remedies as provided by law.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 19
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 20
Section 7
Application Requirements
7.1 Any person intending on undertaking any activity that may be a “regulated activity” as defined in these regulations shall apply for a permit on a prescribed form, which application shall be filed with all information as required by these regulations to be deemed a complete application. In the alternative, a person may request Action by Duly Authorized Agent that the conduct of such activity would result in no greater than a minimal impact on any wetland or watercourse and therefore, the designated wetlands agent shall be authorized to act in accordance with CGS 22a-42a.(c)(2), subject to the limitations of this regulation. The party requesting the determination shall provide adequate information to the wetlands agent to allow for a determination. The designated agent is not authorized to act under CGS 22a-42a.(c)(2) until and unless the chairman of the wetlands agency has conducted a pre-application review to confirm that no agency review or action is required and has made a determination in writing that the agent shall be authorized to so act with respect to the specific request presented. The agent shall not be authorized to act if there is any change to the proposal after the chairman has made a determination. In the event of any change, the matter shall be referred back to the chairman for further review and action. In the event that the Chairman is unavailable to conduct the pre-application review and determination as provided herein, the Chairman may designate another member of the agency to act in the Chairman’s place, with the same authority as provided to the Chairman.
7.2 If an application to the Town of Brooklyn Planning and Zoning Commission for subdivision or resubdivision of land involves land containing a wetland or watercourse, the applicant shall, in accordance with Section 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26, as applicable, of the Connecticut General Statutes, submit an application for a permit to the Commission in accordance with this section, no later than the day the application is filed with such planning and zoning commission.
7.3 The application shall contain such information as is necessary for a fair and informed determination thereon by the Commission.
7.4 A prospective applicant may request the Commission to determine whether or not a proposed activity involves a significant impact activity.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 21
7.5 All applications shall include the following information in writing or on maps or drawings:
a. The applicant’s name, home and business mailing addresses and telephone numbers; if the applicant is a Limited Liability Corporation or a Corporation the managing member’s or responsible corporate officer’s name, address, and telephone number;
b. The owner’s name, mailing address and telephone number and written consent of the land owner if the applicant is not the owner of the land upon which the subject activity is proposed;
c. The applicant’s interest in the land;
d. The geographical location of the land which is the subject of the proposed activity and a description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the inland wetlands and watercourses, the area(s) (in acres or square feet) of wetlands or watercourses to be disturbed, soil type(s), and wetland vegetation;
e. The purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion and sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for the proposed regulated activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
f. Alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses and why the alternative as set forth in the application was chosen; all such alternatives shall be diagramed on a site plan or drawing;
g. A site plan showing the proposed activity and existing and proposed conditions in relation to wetlands and watercourses and identifying any further activities associated with, or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses;
h. Names and mailing addresses of adjacent land owners;
i. Statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the information provided in the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit through deception or through inaccurate or misleading information;
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 22
j. Authorization for the members and agents of the Commission to inspect the subject land, at reasonable times, during the pendency of an application and for the life of the permit;
k. A completed DEP reporting form; the Commission shall revise or correct the information provided by the applicant and submit the form to the Commissioner of Environmental Protection in accordance with section 22a-39-14 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
l. Any other information the Commission deems necessary to the understanding of what the applicant is proposing; and
m. Submission of the appropriate filing fee based on the Town of Brooklyn, Ordinance Establishing Land Use Fees and section 19 of these regulations.
7.6 At the discretion of the Commission or its agent, or when the proposed activity involves a significant impact, additional information, based on the nature and anticipated effects of the activity, including but not limited to the following , is required:
a. Site plans for the proposed activity and the land which will be affected thereby which show existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse boundaries, land contours, boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and uses of wetlands and watercourses, and other pertinent features of the land and the proposed activity, prepared by a professional engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed by the state, or by such other qualified person;
b. Engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the proposed activity including any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic modifications to watercourses and the proposed erosion and sedimentation control plan;
c. Mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National Cooperative Soil Survey of the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service; the wetlands shall be delineated in the field by a soil scientist and the soil scientist’s field delineation shall be depicted on the site plans;
d. A description of the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved with the application and the effects of the proposed activity on these communities and wetland functions;
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 23
e. A description of how the applicant will change, diminish, or enhance the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved in the application and each alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses, and a description of why each alternative considered was deemed neither feasible nor prudent;
f. Analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material; and
g. Management practices and other measures designed to mitigate the impact of the proposed activity.
7.7 The applicant shall certify whether:
a. Any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. Traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. Sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and impact the sewage or drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or,
d. Water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
7.8 Five copies of all application materials shall be submitted to comprise a complete application unless an applicant is otherwise directed, in writing, by the Commission.
7.9 Any application to renew or amend an existing permit shall be filed with the Commission in accordance with section 8 of these regulations at least sixty-five (65) days prior to the expiration date of the permit. Any application to renew or amend such an existing permit shall contain the information required under section 7 of these regulations provided:
a. The application may incorporate the documentation and record of the prior application;
b. The application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of filing and the schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit;
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 24
c. The application shall state the reason why the authorized activity was not initiated or
d. Completed within the time specified in the permit;
e. The application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved with or affecting wetlands or watercourses or use of the land for which the permit was issued; and
f. The Commission may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept an untimely application to renew such permit if the authorized activity is ongoing and allow the continuation of work beyond the expiration date if, in its judgment, the permit is likely to be renewed and the public interest or environment will be best served by not interrupting the activity.
7.10 Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon request of the permit holder unless the Commission finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances which requires a new permit application or an enforcement action has been undertaken with regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was issued provided no permit issued shall be valid for more than ten years, and further provided that any permit issued prior to July 1, 2011 that did not expire prior to May 9, 2011 shall be valid for no more than fourteen years.
7.11 For any permit application involving property subject to a conservation restriction or
preservation restriction, the following shall apply:
a. For purposes of this section, "conservation restriction" means a limitation, whether or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described therein, including, but not limited to, the state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking such land whose purpose is to retain land or water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic or open condition or in agricultural, farming, forest or open space use.
b. For purposes of this section, "preservation restriction" means a limitation, whether or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of land, including, but not limited to, the state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking of such land whose purpose is to preserve historically significant structures or sites.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 25
c. No person shall file a permit application, other than for interior work in an existing building or for exterior work on an existing building that does not expand or alter the footprint of such existing building, relating to property that is subject to a conservation restriction or a preservation restriction unless the applicant provides proof that the applicant has provided written notice of such application, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the party holding such restriction, including, but not limited to, any state agency that holds such restriction not later than sixty days prior to the filling of the permit application.
d. In lieu of such notice pursuant to subsection 7.11c, the applicant may submit a letter from the holder of such restriction or from the holder’s authorized agent, verifying that the application is in compliance with the terms of the restriction.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 26
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 27
Section 8
Application Procedures
8.1 All petitions, applications, requests, or appeals shall be submitted to the Brooklyn Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Brooklyn.
8.2 The Commission shall, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes section 8-7d(f), notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in which:
a. Any portion of the property affected by a decision of the Commission is within five hundred feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or
d. Water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, appeal, request, or plan.
8.3 When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon an inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within the watershed of a water company as defined in section 25-32a, the applicant shall provide written notice of the application to the water company and the Commissioner of Public Health in a format prescribed by said Commissioner, provided such water company has filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershed on the land records of the municipality in which the application is made and with the inland wetlands Commission of such municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of the date of the application. The water company, through a representative,
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 28
may appear and be heard at any hearing on the application. Documentation of such notice shall be provided to the Commission.
8.4 The date of receipt of a petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission, immediately following the day of submission to the Commission or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal or thirty-five days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
8.5 At any time during the review period, the applicant shall provide such additional information as the Commission may reasonably require. Requests for such additional information shall not stay the time limitations as set forth in subsection 11.2 of these regulations.
8.6 All applications shall be open for public inspection.
8.7 Incomplete applications may be denied.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 29
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 30
Section 9
Public Hearings
9.1 The Brooklyn Inland Wetlands Commission shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless the inland wetlands Commission determines that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, a petition signed by at least twenty-five persons who are eighteen years of age or older and who reside in the municipality in which the regulated activity is proposed, requesting a hearing is filed with the inland wetlands Commission not later than fourteen days after the date of receipt of such application, or the inland wetlands Commission finds that a public hearing regarding such application would be in the public interest. The inland wetlands Commission may issue a permit without a public hearing provided no petition provided for in this section is filed with the inland wetlands Commission on or before the fourteenth day after the date of receipt of the application. Such hearing shall be held no later than sixty-five days after the receipt of such application. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard.
9.2 Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days and not fewer than ten days, and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in each town where the affected wetland and watercourse is located.
9.3 Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by the applicant to the owner(s) of record of abutting land fifteen days before the date set for the hearing and by posting a sign on the land that is the subject of the hearing. For such notice:
a. Proof of mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing – which shall be provided to the Commission not less than seven (7) days prior to the date set for the hearing, and
b. The person who owns land shall be the owner indicated on the property tax map or on the last-completed grand list as of the date such notice is mailed.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 31
c. Signs, shall be installed by the applicant, securely fastened or staked, be clearly visible from each public roadway abutting the land subject the hearing and be maintained as such until such hearing has concluded. Failure of the applicant to comply with this requirement may be grounds for denial of the application with consideration being given to cases where weather conditions or acts of vandalism have destroyed a properly posted sign.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 32
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 33
Section 10
Considerations for Decision
10.1 The Commission may consider the following in making its decision on an application:
a. The application and its supporting documentation
b. Reports from other agencies and commissions including but not limited to the Town of Brooklyn:
I. Conservation Commission
II. Planning, Zoning, or Planning and Zoning Commissions
III. Building Official
IV. Health Officer
c. The Commission may also consider comments on any application from the Windham County Soil and Water Conservation District, the Northeastern Connecticut Council of Governments; agencies in adjacent municipalities which may be affected by the proposed activity, or other technical agencies or organizations which may undertake additional studies or investigations.
d. Non-receipt of comments from state agencies and commissions listed in subdivision 10.1b and c above within the prescribed time shall neither delay nor prejudice the decision of the Commission.
e. For an application for which a public hearing is held, public comments, evidence and testimony.
10.2 Criteria for Decision. In carrying out the purposes and policies of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, including matters relating to regulating, licensing and enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Commission shall take into consideration all relevant facts and circumstances, including but not limited to:
a. The environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses;
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 34
b. The applicant’s purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the proposed regulated activity which alternatives would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses;
c. The relationship between the short term and long term impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity of such wetlands or watercourses.
d. Irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which would be caused by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such activity would foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such resources, and any mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for such activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
e. The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health or the reasonable use of property which is caused or threatened by the proposed regulated activity; and
f. Impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside the area for which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands and watercourses.
10.3 In the case of an application which received a public hearing pursuant to a finding by the Commission that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, a permit shall not be issued unless the Commission finds on the basis of the record that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. In making this finding the Commission shall consider the facts and circumstances set forth in subsection 10.2 of this section. The finding and the reasons therefore shall be stated on the record in writing.
10.4 In the case of an application which is denied on the basis of a finding that there may be feasible and prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated activity which have less adverse impact on wetlands or watercourses, the Commission shall propose on the record in writing the types of alternatives which the applicant may investigate provided this subsection shall not be construed to shift the burden from the applicant to prove that he is entitled to the permit or to present alternatives to the proposed regulated activity.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 35
10.5 For purposes of this section, (1) “wetlands and watercourses” includes aquatic, plant or animal life, and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and (2) “habitats” means areas or environments in which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs.
10.6 The Commission shall not deny or condition an application for a regulated activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact or effect on aquatic, plant, or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the physical characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses.
10.7 In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Commission shall base its decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the hearing record shall not be considered by the Commission in its decision.
10.8 In the case of an application where the applicant has provided written notice pursuant to sub section 7.11c of these regulations, the holder of the restriction mayprovide proof to the inland wetlands agency that granting of the permit application will violate the terms of the restriction. Upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such restriction, the inland wetlands agency shall not grant the permit approval.
10.9 In the case of an application where the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of subsections 7.:11c or 7.:11d of these regulations, (1) the party holding the conservation or preservation restriction, other than a state agency that holds such restriction may, not later than fifteen days after receipt of actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with the inland wetlands agency, subject to the rules and regulations of such agency relating to appeals. The inland wetlands agency shall reverse the permit approval upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such restriction. ; or (2)the state agency that holds such restriction may, not later than thirty days after receipt of actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with the inland wetlands agency, subject to the rules and regulations of such agency relating to appeals. The inland wetlands agency shall immediately reverse such permit approval if the commissioner of the state agency that holds such restriction certifies that the land use authorized in such permit violates the terms of such conservation or preservation restriction.
10.10 Nothing in subsections 7.11c or 7.11d of these regulations shall be construed to prohibit the filling of a permit application or to require such written notice when the activity that is the subject of such permit application will occur on apportion of property that is not restricted under the terms of such conservation or preservation restriction.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 36
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 37
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 38
Section 11
Decision Process and Permit
11.1 The Commission, or its duly authorized agent acting pursuant to Section 12 of these regulations, may, in accordance with Section 10 of these regulations, grant the application as filed or grant it upon other terms, conditions, limitations or modifications of the regulated activity designed to carry out the purposes and policies of the Act, or deny the application. Such terms may include any reasonable measures which would mitigate the impacts of the regulated activity and which would (a) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (b) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (c) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources. Such terms may include restrictions as to the time of year in which a regulated activity may be conducted, provided the Agency, or its agent, determines that such restrictions are necessary to carry out the policy of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45 inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes.
11.2 No later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of an application, the Commission may hold a public hearing on such application. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days of its commencement. Action shall be taken on applications within thirty-five (35) days after completion of a public hearing. In the absence of a public hearing, action shall be taken on applications within sixty-five (65) days from the date of receipt of the application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days, or may withdraw the application. The failure of the Commission to act within any time period specified in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the application. An application deemed incomplete by the Commission shall be withdrawn by the applicant or denied by the Commission.
11.3 The Commission shall state upon its record the reasons and bases for its decision.
11.4 The Commission shall notify the applicant and any person entitled to such notice of its decision within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the Commission shall cause notice of its order in the issuance or denial of the permit, to be published in a newspaper having general
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 39
circulation in the town wherein the inland wetland or watercourse lies. In any case in which such notice is not published within such fifteen day period, the applicant may provide for the publication of such notice within ten days thereafter.
11.5 If an activity authorized by an inland wetland permit also involves an activity which requires a zoning or subdivision approval, special zoning permit, or variance or special exception, under sections 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statues, the Commission shall file a copy of the decision and report on the application with the Town of Brooklyn Planning and Zoning Commission within fifteen days of the date of the decision thereon.
11.6 Any permit issued by the Commission for the development of land for which an approval is required under chapter 124, 124b, 126 or 126a of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be valid until the approval granted under such chapter expires or for ten years, whichever is earlier. Any permit issued by the Commission for any activity for which an approval is not required under chapter 124, 124b, 126 or 126a shall be valid for not less than two years and not more than five years.
a. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 11.6 of these regulations, any permit issued by the Agency prior to July 1, 2011 that was in effect and did not expire prior to May 9, 2011 shall be valid for a period not less than nine years after the date of such approval.
11.7 No permit issued by the Commission shall be assigned or transferred without the written permission of the Commission.
11.8 If a bond or insurance is required in accordance with section 13 of these regulations, the Commission may withhold issuing the permit until such bond or insurance is provided.
11.9 General provisions in the issuance of all permits:
a. The Commission has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the permit may be modified, suspended or revoked.
b. All permits issued by the Commission are subject to and do not derogate any present or future rights or powers of the Commission or the Town of Brooklyn, and convey no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 40
c. If the activity authorized by the Commission’s permit also involves an activity which requires zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, variance or special exception under sections 8.3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, no work pursuant to the wetland permit may begin until such approval is obtained.
d. In constructing the authorized activities, the permittee shall implement such management practices consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit as needed to control storm water discharges and to prevent erosion and sedimentation and to otherwise prevent pollution of wetlands and watercourses.
e. Permits are not transferable without the prior written consent of the Commission.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 41
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 42
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 43
Section 12
Action by Duly Authorized Agent
12 .1 The Commission delegates to its duly authorized agent the authority to approve or extend a license for an activity that is not located in a wetland or watercourse in accordance with CGS 22a-42a.(c)(2), subject to the limitations of this regulation, when such agent finds that the conduct of such activity would result in no greater than a minimal impact on any wetland or watercourse. The designated agent is not authorized to act under CGS 22a-42a.(c)(2) until and unless the chairman of the wetlands agency has conducted a pre-application review to confirm that no agency review or action is required and has made a determination in writing that the agent shall be authorized to so act with respect to the specific request presented. Requests for such approval shall be made on a form provided by the Commission and shall contain the information listed under Section 7.5 of these regulations and any other information the agent may reasonably require. The agent shall not be authorized to act if there is any change to the proposal after the chairman has made a determination. In the event of any change, the matter shall be referred back to the chairman for further review and action. In the event that the Chairman is unavailable to conduct the pre-application review and determination as provided herein, the Chairman may designate another member of the agency to act in the Chairman’s place, with the same authority as provided to the Chairman. Notwithstanding the provisions for receipt and processing applications prescribed in Sections 8, 9 and 11 of these regulations, such agent may approve or extend such an activity at any time.
12.2 Any person receiving such approval from such agent shall, within ten days of the date of such approval, publish, at the applicant’s expense, notice of the approval in a newspaper having a general circulation in the town wherein the activity is located or will have an effect. Such approval shall not be considered in effect until proof of publication has been received by the duly authorized agent and the appeal period has expired. Any person may appeal such decision of such agent to the Commission within fifteen days after the publication date of the notice and the Commission shall consider such appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting provided such meeting is no earlier than three business days after receipt by such Commission or its agent of such appeal. Any person may appear and be heard at the meeting held by the Commission to consider the subject appeal. The Commission shall, at its discretion,
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 44
sustain, alter, or reject the decision of its agent or require an application for a permit in accordance with Section 7 of these regulations.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 45
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 46
Section 13
Bond and Insurance
13.1 The Commission may require as a permit condition the filing of a bond with such surety in such amount and in a form approved by the Commission.
13.2 The bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with the provisions of these regulations and the terms, conditions, and limitations established in the permit.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 47
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 48
Section 14
Enforcement
14.1 The Commission may appoint an agent or agents to act in its behalf with the authority to issue notices of violation or cease and desist orders and carry out other actions or investigations necessary for the enforcement of these regulations. In carrying out the purposes of this section, the Commission or its duly authorized agent shall take into consideration the criteria for decision under section 10.2 of these regulations.
14.2 The Commission or its agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours of all regulated activities for which permits have been issued with the consent of the property owner or the authorized agent of the owner during the life of the permit.
14.3 In the case in which a permit has not been issued or a permit has expired, the Commission or its agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours with the consent of the property owner or the authorized agent of the property owner.
14.4 If the Commission or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining any activity, facility or condition which is in violation of the Act or these regulations, the Commission or its duly authorized agent may:
a. Issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to immediately cease such activity or to correct such facility or condition. Within ten (10) calendar days of the issuance of such order the Commission shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order should not remain in effect. The Commission shall consider the facts presented at the hearing and within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing notify the person by certified mail that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. The Commission shall publish notice of its decision in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality. The original order shall be effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the Commission affirms, revises or withdraws the order. The issuance of an order pursuant to this subsection shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to section 22a-44(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 49
b. Issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition, stating the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the Commission, and prescribing the necessary action and steps to correct the violation including, without limitation, halting work in wetlands or watercourses. The Commission may request that the individual appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide a written reply to the notice or file an application for the necessary permit. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result in issuance of the order provided in section 14.3.a or other enforcement proceedings as provided by law.
14.5 The Commission may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the permittee has not complied with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work as set forth in the application including application plans. Prior to revoking or suspending any permit, the Commission shall issue notice to the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct which warrants the intended action. The Commission shall hold a hearing to provide the permittee an opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its permit and any and all requirements for retention of the permit. The permittee shall be notified of the Commission’s decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a permit by certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The Commission shall publish notice of the suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 50
Section 15
Amendments
15.1 These regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map for the Town of Brooklyn may be amended, from time to time, by the Commission in accordance with changes in the Connecticut General Statutes or regulations of the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection or as new information regarding soils and inland wetlands and watercourses become available.
15.2 An application filed with the Commission which is in conformance with the applicable inland wetlands regulations as of the date of the receipt of such application shall not be required thereafter to comply with any change in inland wetland regulations, including changes to setbacks and buffers, taking effect on or after the date of such receipt and any appeal from the decision of such Commission with respect to such application shall not be dismissed by the Superior Court on the grounds that such a change has taken effect on or after the date of such receipt. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply (1) to the establishment, amendment, or change of boundaries of inland wetlands or watercourses or (2) to any change in regulations necessary to make such regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act as of the date of such receipt.
15.3 These regulations and the Town of Brooklyn Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map shall be amended in the manner specified in section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The Commission shall provide the Commissioner of Environmental Protection with a copy of any proposed regulations and notice of the public hearing to consider any proposed regulations or amendments thereto, except map amendments, at least thirty-five days before the public hearing on their adoption.
15.4 Petitions requesting changes or amendments to the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, Brooklyn, Connecticut, shall contain at least the following information:
a. The petitioner's name, mailing address and telephone number;
b. The address, or location, of the land affected by the petition;
c. The petitioner's interest in the land affected by the petition
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 51
d. Map(s) showing the geographic location of the land affected by the petition and the existing and the proposed wetland(s) and watercourse(s) boundaries on such land in accurate detail together with the documentation supporting such proposed boundary locations; and
e. The reasons for the requested action.
15.5 Any person who submits a petition to amend the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, Brooklyn, Connecticut, shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments. Such proof may include, but is not limited to, professional interpretation of aerial photography and remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils mapping, or other information acceptable to the Commission. If such person is the owner, developer, or contract purchaser of the land which is the subject of the petition, or if such person is representing the interests of such an owner, developer or purchaser, in addition to the information required in subsection 15.4, the petition shall include:
a. The name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner(s) of such land and owner(s) agent or other representative;
b. The names and mailing addresses of the owners of abutting land;
c. Documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on said land. Such documentation shall at a minimum include the report of the soil scientist documenting the location of wetland soils on the land and a map of the said land indicating the flag locations set by the soil scientist and defining the boundaries of wetland soil types; and
d. Map(s) showing any proposed development of the land in relation to existing and proposed wetland and watercourse boundaries.
15.6 Watercourses shall be delineated by a soil scientist, geologist, ecologist, or other qualified individual.
15.7 A public hearing shall be held on petitions to amend the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the municipality where the land that is the subject of the hearing is located at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days, nor less than ten days, and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing. All materials including maps and documents relating to the petition shall be open for public inspection.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 52
15.8 The Commission shall hold a public hearing on a petition to amend the regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map within sixty-five days after receipt of such petition. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five days after commencement. The Commission shall act upon the changes requested in such petition within sixty-five days after completion of such hearing. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The petitioner may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five days, or may withdraw such petition. Failure of the Commission to act within any time period specified in this subsection or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the petition.
15.9 The Commission shall make its decision and state, in writing, the reasons why the change in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map was made.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 53
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 54
Section 16
Appeals
16.1 Appeal on actions of the Commission shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section 22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
16.2 Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Commission and the Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 55
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 56
Section 17
Conflict and Severance
17.1 If there is a conflict among the provisions of these regulations, the provision which imposes the most stringent standards for the use of wetlands and watercourses shall govern. The invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, section, part, subsection, subdivision, or provision of these regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
17.2 If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the provisions of the Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 57
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 58
Section 18
Other Permits
18.1 Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirements for the applicant to obtain any other assents, permits, or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of Brooklyn, the State of Connecticut or the Government of the United States including any approval required by the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Obtaining such assents, permits, or licenses is the sole responsibility of the applicant.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 59
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 60
Section 19
Fees
19.1 All fees required by the Town of Brooklyn, Ordinance Establishing Land Use Fees, approved 5/3/10, these regulations shall be submitted to the Commission by certified check or money order payable to the Town of Brooklyn at the time the application is filed with the Commission.
19.2 No application shall be granted or approved by the Commission unless the correct application fee is paid in full.
19.3 The base application fee is not refundable.
19.4 All fees applicable under these Regulations are set forth in the Town Ordinance entitled “An Ordinance Establishing Land Use Fees’ as the same may be amended from time to time.
19.5 The Inland Wetlands Commission may charge an Additional Fee sufficient to cover the cost of reviewing and acting on complex applications. Such fee may include, but not be limited to, the cost of retaining experts to analyze, review, and report on issues requiring such experts. The Commission or the duly authorized agent shall estimate the Additional Fee which shall be paid pursuant to The Town of Brooklyn, Ordinance establishing Land Use Fees within 10 days of the applicant’s receipt or notice of such estimate. Any portion of the Additional Fee in excess of the actual cost shall be refunded to the applicant.
19.6 Boards, commissions, councils, and departments of the Town of Brooklyn are exempt from all fee requirements.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 61
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 62
Section 20
Effective Date of Regulations
20.1 These regulations are effective upon filing in the Office of the Town Clerk and publication of a notice of such filing in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of Brooklyn.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 63
Page Left Blank Intentionally
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 64
Appendix A
Definition of Agriculture
Connecticut General Statute section 1-1(q)
Except as otherwise specifically defined, the words “agriculture” and “farming” shall include cultivation of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural or horticultural commodity, including the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management of livestock, including horses, bees, poultry, fur-bearing animals and wildlife, and the raising or harvesting of oysters, clams, mussels, other molluscan shellfish or fish; the operation, management, conservation, improvement or maintenance of a farm and its buildings, tools and equipment, or salvaging timber or cleared land of brush or other debris left by storm, as an incident to such farming operations; the production or harvesting of maple syrup or maple sugar, or any agricultural commodity, including lumber, as an incident to ordinary farming operations or the harvesting of mushrooms, the hatching of poultry, or the construction, operation or maintenance of ditches, canals, reservoirs or waterways used exclusively for farming purposes; handling, planting, drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing, grading, storing or delivering to storage or to market, or to a carrier for transportation to market, or for direct sale any agricultural or horticultural commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or, in the case of fruits and vegetables, as an incident to the preparation of such fruits or vegetables for market or for direct sale. The term “farm” includes farm buildings, and accessory buildings thereto, nurseries, orchards, ranges, greenhouses, hoophouses and other temporary structures or other structures used primarily for the raising and, as an incident to ordinary farming operations, the sale of agricultural or horticultural commodities. The term “aquaculture” means the farming of the waters of the state and tidal wetlands and the production of protein food, including fish, oysters, clams, mussels and other mulluscan shellfish, on leased, franchised and public underwater farm lands. Nothing herein shall restrict the power of a local zoning authority under chapter 124.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 65
Appendix B
Connecticut General Statute section 8-7d
Sec. 8-7d. Hearings and decisions. Time limits. Day of receipt. Notice to adjoining municipality. Public notice registry. (a) In all matters wherein a formal petition, application, request or appeal must be submitted to a zoning commission, planning and zoning commission or zoning board of appeals under this chapter, a planning commission under chapter 126 or an inland wetlands agency under chapter 440 or an aquifer protection agency under chapter 446i and a hearing is required or otherwise held on such petition, application, request or appeal, such hearing shall commence within sixty-five days after receipt of such petition, application, request or appeal and shall be completed within thirty-five days after such hearing commences, unless a shorter period of time is required under this chapter, chapter 126, chapter 440 or chapter 446i. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in such municipality where the land that is the subject of the hearing is located at least twice, at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days or less than ten days and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing. In addition to such notice, such commission, board or agency may, by regulation, provide for additional notice. Such regulations shall include provisions that the notice be mailed to persons who own land that is adjacent to the land that is the subject of the hearing or be provided by posting a sign on the land that is the subject of the hearing, or both. For purposes of such additional notice, (1) proof of mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing, and (2) the person who owns land shall be the owner indicated on the property tax map or on the last-completed grand list as of the date such notice is mailed. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or by attorney. All decisions on such matters shall be rendered not later than sixty-five days after completion of such hearing, unless a shorter period of time is required under this chapter, chapter 126, chapter 440 or chapter 446i. The petitioner or applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five days, or may withdraw such petition, application, request or appeal. (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, whenever the approval of a site plan is the only requirement to be met or remaining to be met under the zoning regulations for any building, use or structure, a decision on an application for approval of such site plan shall be rendered not later than sixty-five days after receipt of such site plan. Whenever a decision is to be made on an application for subdivision approval under chapter 126 on which no hearing is held, such decision shall be rendered not later than sixty-five days after receipt of such application. Whenever a decision is to be made on an inland wetlands and watercourses application under chapter 440 on which no hearing is held, such decision shall be rendered not later than sixty-five days after receipt of such application. Whenever a decision is to be made on an aquifer protection area application under chapter 446i on which
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 66
no hearing is held, such decision shall be rendered not later than sixty-five days after receipt of such application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such period, provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed sixty-five days or may withdraw such plan or application. (c) For purposes of subsection (a) or (b) of this section and section 7-246a, the date of receipt of a petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of such commission, board or agency, immediately following the day of submission to such commission, board or agency or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal or thirty-five days after such submission, whichever is sooner. If the commission, board or agency does not maintain an office with regular office hours, the office of the clerk of the municipality shall act as the agent of such commission, board or agency for the receipt of any petition, application, request or appeal. (d) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any action initiated by any zoning commission, planning commission or planning and zoning commission regarding adoption or change of any zoning regulation or boundary or any subdivision regulation. (e) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if an application involves an activity regulated pursuant to sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, and the time for a decision by a zoning commission or planning and zoning commission established pursuant to this section would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth day after a decision by the inland wetlands agency, the time period for a decision shall be extended to thirty-five days after the decision of such agency. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to apply to any extension consented to by an applicant or petitioner. (f) The zoning commission, planning commission, zoning and planning commission, zoning board of appeals, inland wetlands agency or aquifer protection agency shall notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in which: (1) Any portion of the property affected by a decision of such commission, board or agency is within five hundred feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; (2) a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site; (3) a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or (4) water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, request or plan. Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, appeal, request or plan. (g) (1) Any zoning commission, planning commission or planning and zoning commission initiating any action regarding adoption or change of any zoning regulation or boundary or
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 67
any subdivision regulation or regarding the preparation or amendment of the plan of conservation and development shall provide notice of such action in accordance with this subsection in addition to any other notice required under any provision of the general statutes. (2) A zoning commission, planning commission or planning and zoning commission shall establish a public notice registry of landowners, electors and nonprofit organizations qualified as tax-exempt organizations under the provisions of Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or any subsequent corresponding internal revenue code of the United States, as from time to time amended, requesting notice under this subsection. Each municipality shall notify residents of such registry and the process for registering for notice under this subsection. The zoning commission, planning commission or planning and zoning commission shall place on such registry the names and addresses of any such landowner, elector or organization upon written request of such landowner, elector or organization. A landowner, elector or organization may request such notice be sent by mail or by electronic mail. The name and address of a landowner, elector or organization who requests to be placed on the public notice registry shall remain on such registry for a period of three years after the establishment of such registry. Thereafter any land owner, elector or organization may request to be placed on such registry for additional periods of three years. (3) Any notice under this subsection shall be mailed to all landowners, electors and organizations in the public notice registry not later than seven days prior to the commencement of the public hearing on such action, if feasible. Such notice may be mailed by electronic mail if the zoning commission, planning commission or planning and zoning commission or the municipality has an electronic mail service provider. (4) No zoning commission, planning commission or planning and zoning commission shall be civilly liable to any landowner, elector or nonprofit organization requesting notice under this subsection with respect to any act done or omitted in good faith or through a bona fide error that occurred despite reasonable procedures maintained by the zoning commission, planning commission or planning and zoning commission to prevent such errors in complying with the provisions of this section.
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 68
Appendix C
Town of Brooklyn, Ordinance Establishing Land Use Application Fees
(Approved 5/3/10)
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish a reasonable and equitable Schedule of Fees, pursuant to Section 8-1c and 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes, to defray the administrative costs and any additional costs, including professional consulting fees, incurred by the Planning & Zoning Commission, Inland Wetlands Agency and Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Brooklyn (each a “Land Use Agency”) for the processing and subsequent monitoring of Land Use Applications.
The term “Land Use Application” shall mean an application for (1) any permit(s) or approval(s) required by any Land Use Agency Regulations for the use of any land, building or structure; (2) proposed amendments to such regulations or the zoning map; (3) a request for a zoning variance; (4) an appeal of a decision of the Zoning Enforcement Officer or (5) a certificate of location approval and or appropriateness pursuant to Section 14-67 and/or Section 14-321 of the Connecticut General Statutes, submitted by any person, organization or corporation (the Applicant).
The term “Staff” shall mean any employee or appointee of the Town of Brooklyn or employees of the Northeast Connecticut Council of Governments “NECCOG” who, as part of his or her duties, render advice or assistance to any Land Use Agency. “Planning Staff shall be the Zoning enforcement Officer, Town Planner or Employees of NECCOG.
The Base Fees established hereby are based on a reasonable estimate of the direct and indirect costs for time spent by Staff in reviewing and evaluating each type of Land Use Application and, except as noted, the cost of any public hearing. The Base Fee plus the estimated costs for advertising and required legal notices shall be paid at the time the Land Use Application is filed.
In addition to the Base Fees set forth herein, a Land Use Agency may require the Applicant to pay an “Additional Fee” to defray other costs and expenses incurred by the Land Use Agency. Such Additional Fee shall be assessed to the Applicant when the Planning Staff and/or the Land Use Agency determines that there is a need for the assistance of one or more third party consultants for review, evaluation or processing the Land Use Application (Consultation Services). Consultants may be engaged to render engineering, architectural, environmental and planning services including traffic studies. Consultation Services may include, but not be limited to, consultation with Town Staff or the Town Attorney, discussions with the Applicant or its agents, rendering such information and research that the Land Use Agency may request, the preparation of written findings and recommendations, written or oral testimony at any
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 69
public hearing and post-approval inspections to ascertain that all terms and conditions of any permit have been met.
The Additional Fee shall be equal to the reasonable cost incurred by the Land Use Agency for such Consultation Services.
Upon the determination by the Town Staff and/or Land use Agency that Consultation Services are necessary the Town Staff shall provide to the Land Use Agency, for its approval, a reasonable estimate of the cost based on the nature and the extent of the Consultation Services deemed necessary. Such determination shall be made as soon as practicable after the receipt] [filing] of the Land Use Application by the Land Use Agency and, upon approval by the Land Use Agency, the Applicant shall be billed an Additional Fee in an amount equal to 125% of such estimate. Such Additional Fee shall be due and payable ten (10) days after receipt.
Upon receipt of an Additional Fee from the Applicant, the Land Use Agency shall create an Application specific account and shall document the amount of the Additional Fee and all payments made for Consultation Services. The Land Use Agency shall render periodic accounting to the Applicant. Any balance remaining after the Land Use Application has been acted upon shall be refunded to the Applicant, provided there has been a determination by the Staff that all terms and conditions of the permit have been met.
Upon the failure of the Applicant to pay such Additional Fee when due, the Land Use Application shall be deemed to be incomplete and may be denied by the Land Use Agency for that reason with or without prejudice. No Land Use Application shall be approved until the Base Fee, the Additional Fee, if any, and costs of advertising and legal notices have been paid in full.
No fees shall be required for any Land Use Application submitted by the Town of Brooklyn or any of its municipal agencies.
In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Sec. 8-1c upon its effective date the fee structure set forth in this ordinance shall supersede any fee schedule adopted by any Land Use Agency. If any provision or fee imposed by this Ordinance is, for any reason, found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidation shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance and the fees imposed.
The Board of Selectmen, acting pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes Sec. 7-157(a), may, by ordinance, amend the schedule of Base Fees from time to time after consultation with the Land Use Agency (ies).
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 70
Base Land Use Application Fees
ZONING FEES
TEXT AMMENDMENT TO REGULATIONS $250
ZONING MAP CHANGE $250
HOME OCCUPATION $ 50
SPECIAL PERMIT $100 plus Site Plan Review
SITE PLAN REVIEW
2500SQ. FT. OR LESS $300
OVER 2500 SQ. FT. $300 Plus $15 per each additional 1000 sq. ft.
SITE PLAN REVIEW (multi family/active adult or $300 PLUS $20 per elderly)unit
AMENDMENT TO SITE PLAN AFTER SUBMISSION$ 150
SPECIAL PERMIT (SAND AND GRAVEL) $ 250 +
< 1000 CU YDS $ 200
1000 TO 20,000 cu yds $ 300
21,000 TO 50,000 cu yds $ 750
51,000 TO 100,000 cu yds $ 2500
> 100,000 cu yds $ 5000
ANNUAL SAND & GRAVEL RENEWAL $ 100
ZONING PERMITS
NEW RESIDENTIAL DWELLING $ 200
RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY USES/ADDITIONS $ 50
ADDITION/MODIFICATION OF A
NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDING $75
NEW COMMERCIAL BULDING $ 250
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 71
CHANGE OF USE IN EXISTING COMMERCIAL
BUILDING $75
SIGN PERMIT $20
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
BASIC APPLICATION $250
SUBDIVISION PLAN REVIEW $250 PER LOT
ENGINEERING REVIEW FOR NEW ROAD(S)
AND DRAINAGE*
INSPECTION AND SUPERVISION OF ROAD
CONSTRUCTION AND UTILITIES*
TEXT AMENDMENT TO SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS $250
*Included in Plan Review Fee but may be subject to the payment of Additional Fees as set forth in this ordinance.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
ALL APPLICATIONS $250
WETLANDS
NON REGULATED USE (APPLICATION FEE) $150
REGULATED USES:
RESIDENTIAL (SINGLE LOT) $150
SUBDIVISION APPLICATION $150 plus $150 per lot within the regulated area
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL $200
Town of Brooklyn, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
October 2013 72
ADDITIONAL FEE BASED ON TOTAL
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE INCLUDED IN
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL APPLICATION:
< 20,000 SQ FT $ 400
21,000 – 50,000 SQ FT $ 800
> 51,000 SQ FT $1200
SIGNIFICANT ACTIVITY FEE (public hearing)$ 250 + other fees
All fees payable pursuant to this ordinance are non refundable.
In addition to any other remedies permitted by law, any Land Use Application submitted after work has started on a project shall be subject to a surcharge of $500.
IN ADDITION TO THE FEES SET FORTH ABOVE PAYABLE TO THE TOWN OF BROOKLYN, EACH APPLICATION IS SUBJECT TO AN ADDITIONAL CHARGE PAYABLE TO THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT, WHICH, AS OF THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS ORDINANCE, IS $60.
Land Use application fees ordinance
Approved at town meeting 5/3/2010
Published in newspaper 5/12/2010
Effective date 5/27/2010