Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-5-2009]
§ 1-1. Enactment.
The compilation of the ordinances of the Town of Clinton, codified and
consolidated into chapters and sections in the form attached hereto and
made a part hereof, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 580, is hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Town of
Clinton, Connecticut," hereinafter called the "Code." All provisions
contained in the compilation provided for herein and known as the "Code of
the Town of Clinton" shall be in force and effect on and after the effective
date of this ordinance.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code
by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date
from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are
hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Town.
§ 1-3. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Town of Clinton of a general
and permanent nature in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance
which are inconsistent with any provisions of the Code are hereby repealed
from and after the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-4. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this ordinance
or any ordinance appearing in the Code or included in this Code through
supplementation, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances,
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof or
the application thereof to other persons and circumstances but shall be
confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article,
or part thereof and the persons and circumstances directly involved in the
controversy in which judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 1-5. Copy of Code on file; publication.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk of the
Town of Clinton and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public, and upon adoption by the Board of Selectmen, such copy shall be
certified to by the Town Clerk of the Town of Clinton, and such certified copy
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
shall remain on file in the office of said Town Clerk to be made available
to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code
is in effect. The enactment and publication of this ordinance, coupled with
the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall
be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-6. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
ordinances in the Code, or any new ordinances, when enacted or adopted
in such form as to indicate the intention that they be a part thereof, shall
be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the
Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions, deletions,
amendments, or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments, or supplements to the Code shall be enacted or adopted,
they shall thereafter be incorporated into said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-7. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the Code required to be filed in the Town Clerk's office for use by the
public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to
the enactment of this ordinance in such form as to indicate the intention
that they be a part of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be
included therein by temporary attachment of copies of such changes until
such changes are incorporated as supplements to said Code book.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Town Clerk or an authorized agent thereof upon the payment of a fee
set by the Town. The Town Clerk may also arrange for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or who
alters or tampers with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will
cause the legislation of the Town to be misrepresented thereby, or who
violates any other provision of this ordinance, shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine of $250.
§ 1-10. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
§ 1-5 CLINTON CODE § 1-10
1:4
Chapter 6
AGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 24.
Housing Authority — See Ch. 72.
Housing Partnership — See Ch. 76.
Regional organizations — See Ch. 135.
Youth and Family Services Bureau — See Ch.
173.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:5

ARTICLE I
Aquifer Protection Agency
[Adopted 5-5-2004]
§ 6-1. Designation and membership.
A. In accordance with the provisions of C.G.S. § 22a-354a et seq., the
Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby designated as the Aquifer
Protection Agency (hereinafter the "Agency") of the Town of Clinton.
(The staff of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve as the staff
of the Agency.)
B. Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve coexisting
terms on the Agency. The membership requirements of the Agency shall
be the same as those of the Planning and Zoning Commission, including
but not limited to the number of members, terms, method of selection
and removal of members, and filling of vacancies.1
C. At least one member of the Agency or staff of the Agency shall complete
the course in technical training formulated by the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection of the State of Connecticut pursuant to C.G.S.
§ 22a-354v.
§ 6-2. Regulations to be adopted.
The Agency shall adopt regulations in accordance with C.G.S. § 22a-354p
and R.C.S.A. § 22a-354i-3. Said regulations shall provide for:
A. The manner in which boundaries of aquifer protection areas shall be
established and amended or changed.
B. Procedures for the regulation of activity within the area.
C. The form for an application to conduct regulated activities within the
area.
D. Notice and publication requirements.
E. Criteria and procedures for the review of applications.
F. Administration and enforcement.
§ 6-3. Inventory of land use.
A. In order to carry out the purposes of the Aquifer Protection Program, the
Agency will conduct an inventory of land use within the area to assess
potential contamination sources.
B. Not later than three months after approval by the Commissioner of
the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection of Level B
mapping of aquifers, the Agency will inventory land uses overlying the
mapped zone of contribution and recharge areas of such aquifers in
accordance with guidelines established by the Commissioner pursuant
to C.G.S. § 22a-354f. Such inventory shall be completed not more than
one year after authorization of the Agency (C.G.S. § 22a-354e).
1. Editor's Note: See Ch. 24, Art. II, Planning and Zoning Commission.
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-3
1:7
Chapter 24
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agencies — See Ch. 6.
Housing Authority — See Ch. 72.
Housing Partnership — See Ch. 76.
Regional organizations — See Ch. 135.
Youth and Family Services Bureau — See Ch.
173.
Historic District Commission — See Ch. 320,
Art. I.
Tree Committee — See Ch. 484.
§ 6-3 CLINTON CODE § 6-3
1:8
ARTICLE I
Board of Finance
[Adopted 8-28-1950]
§ 24-1. Board established. [Amended 8-5-2009]
The Town of Clinton does hereby establish a Board of Finance in accordance
with C.G.S. § 7-340.
§ 24-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-1
1:9

ARTICLE II
Planning and Zoning Commission
[Adopted 3-28-1964; amended 12-27-1967; 8-5-2009]
§ 24-2. Commission created.
The Town of Clinton hereby creates a Planning Commission and designates
the Planning Commission as its Planning and Zoning Commission. The
membership, terms of office and powers and duties of the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall be as prescribed in the Town Charter.
§ 24-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-2
1:11

ARTICLE III
Park and Recreation Commission
[Adopted 5-27-1964]
§ 24-3. Authority; creation; membership.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148, the Town of Clinton hereby creates a Park and
Recreation Commission which shall consist of seven members who shall be
electors and taxpayers of said Town, shall hold no salaried municipal office,
and who shall serve without compensation. Not more than four of such
members shall be of the same political party.
§ 24-4. Appointment; term of office; vacancies.
Within 10 days after the effective date of this ordinance, the Board of
Selectmen shall appoint four members to serve on said Commission for a
term of four years and three members to serve for a term of two years, and
biennially thereafter members of said Commission shall be appointed by
said Board to serve for a four-year term. Any vacancy on such Commission
shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 24-5. Officers; minutes and records. [Amended 8-5-2009]
The Commission shall elect a Chairman and a Secretary from among its
members and shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of its
business. Such Commission shall cause to be prepared and filed with the
Town Clerk a copy of the minutes and records of each meeting held within
seven days after the date of such meeting.
§ 24-6. Powers and duties.
For the purpose of promoting the health, general welfare and comfort of the
community, and of providing adequate entertainment and recreation, such
Commission shall establish, maintain, and improve parks, playgrounds, play
fields, recreation areas, bathing beaches and public gardens on land owned
or controlled by the Town and suitable for such purposes and shall conduct
and provide for recreational activities as, in its judgment, will best serve the
interest of the community. The management, care and supervision of such
facilities shall be in charge of such Commission. The Town may appropriate
money, acquire by gift or devise real property or any interest therein, or
allocate land to which it holds title for the purposes of such Commission.
The Commission may accept, receive or solicit money, supplies, equipment
or other personal property and may accept gifts or bequests necessary or
incidental to its purposes.
§ 24-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-7
1:13
§ 24-7. Director of Parks and Recreation and other personnel.
[Amended 8-5-2009]
The Commission shall recommend to the Board of Selectmen some suitable
person properly qualified in training and experience as Director of Parks
and Recreation. The Commission shall have the power to employ such other
personnel as the Commission deems necessary to perform its functions.
The compensation of such personnel shall be fixed by the Commission and
subject to appropriations duly made therefor.
§ 24-8. Establishment of charges or fees.
The Commission shall have the authority to establish reasonable charges
or fees for the use of facilities under its control. No such charges or fees
shall become effective or be established until after a public hearing held in
relation thereto at which hearing Townspeople shall have an opportunity to
be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published
in the form of a legal advertisement appearing in a newspaper having a
circulation in the Town of Clinton at least three days prior to such hearing.
§ 24-9. Contracts and agreements.
The Commission shall have the authority to enter into such contracts and
agreements as may be necessary or proper to carry out its purposes and
objectives.
§ 24-10. Maintenance of recreational facilities.
The Commission shall prepare in budget form an itemized estimate of the
cost of maintenance of recreational facilities for the ensuing year and shall
submit such estimate to the Board of Finance not later than one month
preceding the annual budget meeting of the Town or at such time as the
Board of Finance may direct. The funds so appropriated may be expended
by and in the discretion of the Commission. Such Commission shall prepare
an annual report for inclusion in the Annual Town Report which shall
provide a summary showing the total cost of maintenance of recreational
facilities, the amount received from other sources, and the net cost to the
Town of the maintenance of recreational facilities.
§ 24-7 CLINTON CODE § 24-10
1:14
ARTICLE IV
Board for Admission of Electors
[Adopted 1-20-1970]
§ 24-11. Composition of Board.
The Board for Admission of Electors in the Town of Clinton shall hereafter
consist of the Town Clerk and the Registrars of Voters, instead of the
Town Clerk and Selectmen as heretofore, as provided by C.G.S. § 9-15a, as
amended.
§ 24-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-11
1:15

ARTICLE V
Inland Wetlands and Conservation Commission
[Adopted 5-6-1974]
§ 24-12. Establishment. [Amended 11-27-1990]
In order to carry out and effectuate the purposes and policies of the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Act of the State of Connecticut pursuant to
Public Act No. 155 of the 1972 Session of the General Assembly,2 there
is hereby created a commission of the Town of Clinton ("Town") to be
known as the "Clinton Inland Wetlands Commission" ("Commission") and an
Inland Wetlands Commission Panel of Alternates ("alternates"). The Town
of Clinton Inland Wetlands Commission is hereby further established as the
Town of Clinton Conservation Commission. It shall be vested with all of the
powers and duties authorized by C.G.S. § 7-131a.
§ 24-13. Organization.
A. Organization of Commission. The Commission shall consist of seven
members, who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen. Of the
seven members first appointed, the term of three such members shall
expire on the first Monday of January in 1976 and the term of the
remaining four members shall expire on the first Monday of January in
1978. All subsequent appointments shall be for a term of four years,
except that an appointment to fill an unexpired term shall be for the
duration of said unexpired term only.
B. Organization of Panel of Alternates. The Panel of Alternates shall consist
of three members, who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
Of the three members first appointed, the term of one such member
shall expire on the first Monday of January in 1976 and the term of the
remaining two members shall expire on the first Monday of January in
1978. All subsequent appointments shall apply as in Subsection A above,
and all members shall be electors of the Town of Clinton.
§ 24-14. Officers; compensation and removal of members.
At its first meeting, which shall be held within a period of 30 days after
the appointment of the members to the first Commission, and at its first
meeting on or after the first Monday in January in each year thereafter, the
Commission shall elect from its members a Chairman, Vice Chairman and
Secretary and such other officers as deemed appropriate. All members shall
serve without compensation, except for reasonable expenses, and may be
removed by the Board of Selectmen for cause.
§ 24-15. Powers and duties.
A. The Commission shall serve as the sole agent of the Town of Clinton for
the licensing of regulated activities as such term is defined in the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Act of the State of Connecticut.
2. Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 22a-36.
§ 24-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-15
1:17
B. The Commission shall be vested with all powers authorized by the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Act of the State of Connecticut, as amended,
and in particular shall promulgate such regulations, in conformity with
the regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection of the State of Connecticut, as are necessary to protect the
inland wetlands and watercourses within the territorial limits of the
Town of Clinton. The Commission shall provide through regulation the
manner in which the boundaries of inland wetland areas and
watercourses in the Town of Clinton shall be established, amended,
or changed and shall follow the procedures as set forth in the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Act of the State of Connecticut. Such
regulations shall specifically provide for an enforcement officer and
shall require coordination with other Town commissions regulating
conservation and planning.
C. In carrying out its licensing activities, the Commission shall follow the
standards and procedures set forth in the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Act of the State of Connecticut.
§ 24-15 CLINTON CODE § 24-15
1:18
ARTICLE VI
Economic Development Commission
[Adopted 9-9-1975]
§ 24-16. Authority.
The Town of Clinton accepts the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-136, as amended,
and hereby establishes an Economic Development Commission for the
promotion and development of the economic resources of the Town of
Clinton.
§ 24-17. Membership; compensation.
Said Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be electors
of the Town of Clinton and who shall not hold any salaried municipal
office. The members shall serve without compensation, except that such
members shall be reimbursed for their necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their official duties.
§ 24-18. Appointment.
The members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen in accordance with the Town Charter.
§ 24-19. Terms of office.
After the effective date of this article, one member shall be appointed for
a term ending on the first Monday of January 1976, two members shall
be appointed for a term ending on the first Monday of January 1977, two
members shall be appointed for a term ending on the first Monday of
January 1978 and two members shall be appointed for a term ending on the
first Monday of January 1979. All other terms shall be for a period of four
years beginning on the first Monday of January. All members shall serve
until a replacement is appointed.
§ 24-20. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall perform the duties prescribed for such commissions
by C.G.S. § 7-136. The Commission is designated as the development agency
for the Town of Clinton with all the powers and duties of such agencies
under Chapter 132 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 24-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-20
1:19

ARTICLE VII
Water Pollution Control Commission
[Adopted 3-8-1983]
§ 24-21. Commission created.
The Town of Clinton hereby creates a Water Pollution Control Commission,
to be known as the "Clinton Water Pollution Control Commission," and
designates said Commission as the Water Pollution Control Authority for the
Town of Clinton with all the powers, purposes and objectives set forth in
Chapter 103 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended to date.
§ 24-22. Membership; terms of office. [Amended 8-5-2009]
The Clinton Water Pollution Control Commission shall be made up of seven
members ("Commissioners") each of whom shall be an elector of the Town
of Clinton appointed for a term of three years by the Board of Selectmen in
accordance with the Town Charter.
§ 24-23. Officers and employees.
The Commission shall, at its first meeting, to be held not later than April
15, 1983, and at each annual meeting held during the first 15 days of
April in each succeeding year, elect from among its number a Chairperson
and shall appoint a Clerk who may be, but need not be, a Commissioner.
The Commission may employ legal counsel, professional engineers, and
such other persons as it shall deem necessary to carry out its purposes
and objectives and shall prescribe and define their duties. The Commission
shall, not less frequently than annually, determine the compensation, if any,
to be paid to the Clerk and all other professional assistants and employees
of the Commission. The Clerk shall keep a complete record of the
proceedings of the Commission and shall be the custodian of such books,
records and documents and shall give such notice of its meetings to the
Town Clerk and file with the Town Clerk such record of its proceedings as
may be required by law. The Commission's records shall be open for public
inspection at all reasonable hours.
§ 24-24. Meetings.
The first meeting of the Commission shall be called by the First Selectman
and thereafter meetings of the Commission shall be called by the
Chairperson or by any two Commissioners. Notice of the call of any meeting
of the Commission shall be effective as to its members if all Commissioners
shall have received such notice not less than 36 hours prior to the date of
such meeting.
§ 24-25. Records; annual report; budget.
The Commission shall maintain proper accounting and financial records and
shall make an annual report to the Board of Selectmen. The Commission
§ 24-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-25
1:21
shall prepare annually a budget of estimated revenues and expenditures for
the ensuing fiscal year.
§ 24-26. Removal of members.
A Commissioner may be removed for inefficiency or neglect of duty or
misconduct in office by the Board of Selectmen after hearing conforming to
recognized standards of due process of law, including, without limitation,
an opportunity to review the charges made against such Commissioner not
less than 10 days prior to the date on which said charges shall be subject to
such a hearing.
§ 24-27. Water pollution control plan.
The Commission shall prepare and periodically update a water pollution
control plan for the Town of Clinton in the manner provided by C.G.S.
§ 7-246. Such periodic updating shall be accomplished not less frequently
than every five years after the completion of the initial plan, and in addition
to the filing requirements of said statute the Commission shall file a copy of
said plan and any periodic update with the Town Clerk.
§ 24-25 CLINTON CODE § 24-27
1:22
ARTICLE VIII
Harbor Management Commission
[Adopted 10-26-1988]
§ 24-28. Purposes.
The Town of Clinton wishes to protect its marine historic resources and
sensitive natural resource areas found along its harbor and in near-shore
coastal waters; to provide greater opportunities for water-based
recreational activities; to maintain and enhance navigational facilities for
the benefit of all harbor users; and to allocate land and water resources in
an economically and environmentally sound manner.
§ 24-29. Authority; Commission created.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 444A of the Connecticut
General Statutes (§§ 22a-113k through 22a-113t), as amended, there is
hereby created a Harbor Management Commission with all of the powers
and duties specified in said Chapter 444A for the Town of Clinton.
§ 24-30. Membership; compensation.
A. The Harbor Management Commission shall consist of seven members
who must be electors of the Town of Clinton. The provisions of C.G.S.
§ 9-167a shall apply. These members shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen.
B. The First Selectman, or such other Selectman as he may appoint, and
the Harbormaster shall serve as ex officio members of the Commission,
without vote.
C. A member of the Harbor Management Commission shall not receive
compensation for service but may be reimbursed for any necessary
expenses, but such provision shall not apply to the First Selectman, or
such Selectman as he has appointed, and the Harbormaster.
§ 24-31. Terms of office.
A. Within 15 days after the effective date of this article, the Board of
Selectmen shall appoint four members to serve for a term ending on the
first Monday of January 1990 and three members to serve for a term
ending on the first Monday of January 1992. Thereafter, the terms of
members shall run for four years. Members shall continue to serve until
their successors are appointed and duly qualified.
B. If a member resigns or is removed for any reason before his or her term
expires, a replacement shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen to
complete that term.
§ 24-32. Officers and committees.
Upon the appointment of a Commission under this article, the Commission
shall hold an organizational meeting at which it shall elect a Chairperson
and Secretary and such other officers as it may desire to serve until the
following January. During the month of January and annually thereafter,
§ 24-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-32
1:23
the Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Secretary and such other
officers as it may desire for a one-year term and until their successors are
duly qualified. The Commission can form subcommittees to address specific
duties of the Commission.
§ 24-33. Jurisdiction.
The Harbor Management Commission shall have jurisdiction within the area
located in or contiguous to all tidal waters which are within the territorial
limits of the Town of Clinton and are below the mean high-water line,
bounded by the projection of the boundary line of neighboring towns.
§ 24-34. Powers, duties and responsibilities.
A. The purpose of the Harbor Management Commission shall be to prepare
a harbor management plan for the harbor in accordance with C.G.S.
§§ 22a-113m through 22a-113o. The Commission may hire staff and
consultants for the preparation of a plan and to assist with any
subsequent powers, duties and responsibilities, subject to the
appropriation of funds for this purpose by the Town of Clinton.
B. Upon adoption of the plan the Commission shall provide for the annual
review of the harbor management plan and shall make any additions
and/or modifications to the plan that may be deemed appropriate subject
to the process set forth in C.G.S. §§ 22a-113m through 22a-113o or other
subsequent harbor management legislation enacted by the General
Assembly.
C. In addition, the Commission shall have and may exercise the following
powers, duties and responsibilities:
(1) To supervise the use of the navigable waters of the Town of Clinton
and the mooring, docking, landing and other facilities appurtenant
to navigation, to the extent of the Town's authority therein;
(2) To recommend to the Board of Selectmen rules and fees relating
to the use of Town mooring, docking, landing, and other facilities
appurtenant to navigation;
(3) To recommend to the Board of Selectmen ordinances which
implement the harbor management plan, which may specify fines for
violations of those ordinances, in accordance with C.G.S. § 22a-113n;
(4) To assist the Harbormaster and/or the Dock Master in the
assignment of any moorings and in the management of mooring and
anchorage areas within his jurisdiction;
(5) To prepare an operating budget for the Commission for submission
to the Board of Selectmen and Board of Finance, in accordance with
the Town Charter;
(6) To assist in the coordination of all public and private agencies,
commissions and other organizations which have interest or
jurisdiction within the harbor area;
(7) To review for consistency with the harbor management plan any
public notice of an application for a local, state or federal permit
for an activity taking place within the Commission's jurisdiction as
described in this article and to respond with recommendations to the
regulating agencies;
§ 24-32 CLINTON CODE § 24-34
1:24
(8) To conduct or cause to be conducted studies of the conditions and
operations in and adjacent to Clinton waters and to present to the
Board of Selectmen proposals for the harbor's efficient operation;
and
(9) To request, when appropriate, a general permit from the United
States Army Corps of Engineers and/or delegation of state
enforcement authority pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-2a.
§ 24-35. Referral of proposals submitted to other municipal
agencies.
A. Pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-113p, the Harbor Management Commission
shall review and make recommendations, consistent with the adopted
harbor management plan, on any proposal affecting the real property
on, in or contiguous to the harbor submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, Water Pollution Control Authority,
or Shellfish Commission. The Harbor Management Commission shall be
notified in writing of any such proposal at least 35 days prior to the
commencement of the hearing thereon or, where no hearing is held, at
least 35 days prior to the taking of any final action on the proposal.
Such primary reviewing agency shall send a copy of the proposal or
application to the Commission upon request of the Commission.
B. The primary reviewing agency authorized to act on the proposal shall
consider the recommendations of the Harbor Management Commission.
A two-thirds vote of all the members of said agency having authority
to act on the proposal shall be required to approve a proposal which
has not received a favorable recommendation from the Commission,
provided that the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to alter
the authority of the agency having primary jurisdiction over the proposal
to deny, modify or condition the proposal. Failure of the Commission to
submit a recommendation on or before the date of the hearing or action
on such a proposal shall be deemed an approval.
§ 24-36. Applicability. [Added 8-9-1995]
The provisions of this article, as amended, shall be applicable and shall
govern the use of harbor waters and facilities under the jurisdiction of the
Town of Clinton Harbor Management Commission.
§ 24-37. Regulations. [Added 8-9-1995]
The Town of Clinton has, pursuant to an ordinance adopting a certain
harbor management plan titled "The Management Plan for Clinton Harbor,"
adopted certain regulations governing the use of harbor waters and
facilities. All new regulations, and any amendments to such regulations
previously adopted, shall be adopted by ordinance. The Harbor
Management Commission shall have the authority to propose regulations
governing the use of harbor waters and facilities in accordance with C.G.S.
§ 22a-113m of the Harbor Management Act. Said regulations shall be
reviewed by all appropriate jurisdictions prior to their being forwarded to
§ 24-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-37
1:25
the Board of Selectmen, which shall consider and act upon said proposals
as ordinances in the manner set forth in the Town Charter.
§ 24-38. Authority of Harbormaster and Commission. [Added
8-9-1995]
The Harbormaster or duly designated Deputy Harbormaster shall have
the authority to carry out harbor management directives and enforce all
provisions of the harbor management plan, including the authority to issue
citations by way of warnings and impose fines for violations pursuant to
§ 24-39 of this article. The Harbor Management Commission shall be
responsible for the administration of the harbor management plan and
may review and make recommendations to the appropriate jurisdictional
entities regarding all applications for permits or approvals for all floats,
structures, and other marine facilities within harbors under its jurisdiction
in accordance with C.G.S. § 22a-113p of the Harbor Management Act. The
Harbor Management Commission shall also submit recommendations to the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and the United States Army
Corps of Engineers as well.
§ 24-39. Penalties for offenses. [Added 8-9-1995; amended
8-5-2009]
Any violation of this article or any regulations in the harbor management
plan or any subsequent regulations adopted by ordinance shall be a
municipal infraction and is punishable by a fine not to exceed $100 which
shall be imposed for each violation hereunder as provided under C.G.S.
§ 7-148(c)(10); provided, however, that the violator has first been issued a
written warning for said violation. Each day of violation shall be considered
a separate offense and subject to separate citations. A fine not to exceed
$100 shall be imposed for each offense. Nothing in this section shall
preclude the imposition by other jurisdictional authorities of a greater
penalty as provided for under federal statutes or the laws of the State of
Connecticut.
§ 24-40. Harbor Management Fund. [Added 8-9-1995; amended
8-5-2009]
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-133t, a Harbor Management Fund is hereby
created to receive for deposit moneys for harbor management purposes as
set forth in said statute.
§ 24-41. Water Use Plan Maps. [Added 8-9-1995]
Proposed uses, structures, and activities within the harbor shall be
consistent with the adopted Water Use Plan Maps. The Water Use Plan
Maps may be amended by the Harbor Management Commission in
accordance with the procedure for harbor management plan modifications
in the Connecticut Harbor Management Act, C.G.S. § 22a-113m.
§ 24-37 CLINTON CODE § 24-41
1:26
ARTICLE IX
Open Space Advisory Committee
[Adopted 3-21-2001]
§ 24-42. Establishment; purposes.
An Open Space Advisory Committee is hereby established. The Open Space
Advisory Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to all Town agencies,
including but not limited to the Board of Selectmen, Planning and Zoning
Commission, and Inland Wetlands and Conservation Commission. The
Committee shall study the Town's open space needs and make
recommendations concerning the same.
§ 24-43. Membership; terms of office; officers.
The Committee shall consist of eight members, to be appointed by the Board
of Selectmen. The initial terms of office shall be four persons appointed to
terms ending June 30, 2002, and four persons appointed to terms ending
June 30, 2003. Terms shall then be for two years each. Any vacancy shall
be filled by the Board of Selectmen. The Committee shall select its own
Chairman and Secretary.
§ 24-44. Compensation; records.
The members of the Committee shall not receive any compensation for their
services. All records of the Committee shall be filed with the Town Clerk and
open to public inspection in accordance with applicable state statutes.
§ 24-45. Powers and duties.
The Committee shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To consult with and provide advice to the Board of Selectmen, Planning
and Zoning Commission, Inland Wetlands and Conservation Commission
and any other relevant Town board or commission and members of the
public concerning current open space areas and the need for future open
space areas, including proposed locations for the same.
B. To provide all Town agencies a report, at least annually, briefly
summarizing the activities and open space needs of the Town.
C. To assist in the application for any grants that may be available to the
Town of Clinton for open space acquisition and maintenance.
§ 24-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-45
1:27

ARTICLE X
Flood and Erosion Control Board
[Adopted 7-31-2002]
§ 24-46. Selectmen to act as Board; adoption of statutory
provisions.
The Board of Selectmen is hereby appointed the Municipal Flood and
Erosion Control Board for the Town of Clinton, Connecticut, pursuant to
C.G.S. § 25-84 and is hereby authorized to exercise in that capacity the
powers granted under C.G.S. §§ 25-84 through 25-94, and the Town of
Clinton hereby expressly adopts the provisions of said statutes.
§ 24-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-46
1:29

ARTICLE XI
Design Review Board
[Adopted 1-11-20123]
§ 24-47. History.
Pursuant to the provision of § 5-5 of the Charter of the Town of Clinton, the
Design Advisory Board was established by ordinance January 19, 2000, the
name changed to the Design Review Board (DRB) by the 2002 Charter, and
on April 21, 2004, modifications were made to the original ordinance. This
article provides the authority necessary to enable the DRB to be designated
the Village District Consultant and act as the Architectural Review Board
under Connecticut General Statutes (C.G.S.) § 8-2j, Village districts. It shall
supersede the preceding ordinances.
§ 24-48. Purpose.
The purpose of the Design Review Board is to:
A. Provide an advisory group that will evaluate applications that are
required to go before the Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning
Board of Appeals from an architectural and aesthetic perspective, which
involve site, building and sign development or redevelopment and
construction, with the goal of preserving the quality of our heritage and
environment;
B. Work with owners, builders and developers to foster the improvement of
the Town's appearance seeking to avoid both excessive uniformity and
excessive variety in architectural styles and, instead, strive to promote
harmony between the various elements and surroundings in order to
preserve and enhance property values;
C. Develop guidance materials that will assist applicants in understanding
what design features, materials and components are considered to be
acceptable for developments in the Town;
D. Draft general design standards applicable to all zones and specific
design standards for each zone for which there are such requirements in
the Zoning Regulations, to be recommended to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for its action;
E. Submit to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its action proposals
for zoning regulations governing signs, plans, new building construction
and building renovations, in order to further the DRB's goal of improving
the appearance and aesthetic quality of the Town. Such proposed
regulations may require that applications be evaluated in terms of
overall quality, ability to harmonize with the surroundings and
attainment of the goals of the design standards in the Zoning
Regulations.
3. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. XI, Design Advisory Board,
adopted 3-3-2004.
§ 24-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-49
1:31
§ 24-49. Scope.
All permit and regulation recommendations of the Design Review Board
shall be advisory. The Board's review shall pertain to all applications in
Village Districts established pursuant to C.G.S. § 8-2j, as may be amended,
Business, Industrial, Marine and the Village Zones, excluding the Liberty
Green Historic District as described in documents on file in the office of the
Town Clerk. The Board shall be designated as the Village District Consultant
and perform the function of Architectural Review Board for the Town with
regards to all Village Districts. With respect to applications in zones in
which they have been adopted, the Design Review Board shall take into
consideration the specific design criteria and standards set forth in the
Clinton Zoning Regulations.
§ 24-50. Members.
The Design Review Board shall consist of five members and two alternates,
appointed in accordance with the Town Charter, Chapter 2, § 2-3, with due
consideration given to candidates nominated by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission are eligible
for membership on the Design Review Board. There shall be no more than
two members from the Planning and Zoning Commission. Three of said
members and one of said alternate members shall be appointed for an initial
term of two years, and one of said alternate members shall be appointed
for an initial term of one year. Following the expiration of the initial terms
in office, all subsequent appointments shall be for terms of three years.
Any vacancy on the Board shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen for the
unexpired portion of the term.
§ 24-51. Qualifications.
A. In appointing members of the Design Review Board, the Board of
Selectmen shall seek and appoint a mix of knowledgeable experts and
laymen. The experts shall have knowledge of such fields as architecture,
urban planning, landscape architecture, site planning, professional
engineering, graphic design, interior design and other related fields. The
laymen shall be drawn from individuals demonstrating a high level of
interest and commitment to the work of the Board. All members shall be
electors of Clinton. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint to the Board
at least one member who is an architect, landscape architect or planner
who is a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners.
B. If at any time there is not a member on the Board who is an architect,
landscape architect or planner who is a member of the American
Institute of Certified Planners, the DRB shall be provided with access
to a budget for professional services from which it shall pay for the
services of an architect, or architectural firm, landscape architect, or
planner who is a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners,
to review all applications for Village districts, whom the DBA shall be
authorized to designate as its Village District Consultant under C.G.S.
§ 8-2j.
§ 24-49 CLINTON CODE § 24-52
1:32
§ 24-52. Reviews, evaluations, and recommendations.
The Planning and Zoning Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall submit any matter within the scope of the Design Review Board for
review, evaluation and recommendation to the developer by the Board. The
above Board and Commission shall also have the option of directing any
matter to the Design Review Board for a preliminary review, evaluation
and recommendation to the developer prior to their consideration. Owners,
developers and builders are encouraged as early as possible to seek advice
from the Design Review Board separate from any direction by the Planning
and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals.
A. No review of an application by the Design Review Board shall affect the
timeliness of decision for any application by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals. Therefore, the review is to be
conducted within the first month after the official receipt of a Planning
and Zoning application; within 21 days of submission of a Zoning Board
of Appeals application; and when submitted to the Design Review Board
for a preliminary review prior to application to the Commission or Board,
within 35 days of receipt, whichever occurs first. These time frames
should assure that the Board will submit its review before the first
meeting at which the Commission, or Board, might render its decision
on an application. Failure of the Board to report within the specified
time shall not alter or delay any other time limit imposed by the zoning
regulations.
B. As the Design Review Board's role is advisory, its report to the Planning
and Zoning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals shall state the
reasons behind and cite the specific regulations under which the
evaluation and recommendations, which it has made, are based. No
recommendation shall be made which is contrary to any specific
standards or design criteria as set forth in the Clinton Zoning
Regulations. Reports of the Design Review Board shall be entered into
the public hearing record, or, if there is no public hearing, the report
shall be entered into the record, and considered by the Planning and
Zoning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals in making its decision.
If the Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals
grants or denies an application under C.G.S. § 8-2j, Village districts, it
shall state upon the record the reasons for its decision. If it denies an
application, the reason for the denial shall cite the specific regulations
under which the application was denied. No approval of the Commission
or Board shall be effective until a copy thereof, certified by the
Commission or Board, containing the name of the owner of record, a
description of the premises to which it relates and specifying the reason
for its decision, is recorded in the land records of the Town. The Town
Clerk shall index the same in the grantor's index under the name of thethen
record owner, and the record owner shall pay for such recording.
§ 24-53. Meeting schedule.
There shall be two meetings of the Design Review Board scheduled each
month. Meetings may be canceled if there is no project to review.
§ 24-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-53
1:33

ARTICLE XII
Shellfish Commission
[Adopted 9-5-2007]
§ 24-54. Statutory authority; appointment; qualifications.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 26-257a, as amended, and § 7-5 of the Charter, the
Town of Clinton has authorized the creation of the Shellfish Commission,
the members of which are appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The
Commission consists of five members who must be electors and residents
of the Town of Clinton. Insofar as practical, members appointed will be
representative of all groups interested in the management, protection and
regulation of all shellfisheries and shellfish grounds lying within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Clinton.
§ 24-55. Terms of office; compensation.
The terms of office of the members of the Shellfish Commission are two
years in accordance with § 7-5 of the Charter of the Town of Clinton.
Members of the Commission serve without compensation but are entitled
to reimbursement for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of
official duties.
§ 24-56. Powers and duties.
The Shellfish Commission shall be charged with the duty and purpose of
managing and being in charge of all of the shellfisheries and shellfish
grounds lying within the Town of Clinton not granted to others and not
under the jurisdiction of the Commissioner of Agriculture, including all
rivers, inland waters and flats adjacent to all beaches and waters within the
limits and bounds of the municipality of the Town of Clinton.
A. The powers and duties of the Shellfish Commission shall be exercised
and performed as herein provided and as authorized by the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut. In addition, the Clinton Shellfish
Commission may issue licenses for the taking of shellfish within its
jurisdiction and fix the fees and may designate the quantities of shellfish
to be taken, the sizes of such shellfish and the methods of taking
shellfish. The Commission may specify the seasons and hours of taking
shellfish and may prohibit the taking of shellfish from certain designated
areas for periods of time. The Shellfish Commission shall further have
the power to create a shellfish management plan and may issue
reasonable rules and regulations to further the protection and
propagation of the shellfish under its control and the grounds in its
jurisdiction. All fees and moneys collected by the Commission pursuant
to this article and pursuant to the Connecticut General Statutes shall be
paid to the Commission and used by the Commission for the protection
and propagation of shellfish under its control and the further
management of the shellfish grounds.
B. The Commission shall have the power to direct the shellfish wardens as
enforcement officers to supervise the beds and enforce the regulations
§ 24-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-56
1:35
issued by the Commission and those of the State of Connecticut. The
Commission may further set penalties for violation of its regulations
subject to the restrictions therein as provided in C.G.S. § 26-257a, as
amended. The Commission members shall also be sworn in as special
shellfish constables for the same term and shall also have such powers
and duties as are specified in C.G.S. § 26-277, as amended.
§ 24-57. Reports.
The Shellfish Commission shall from time to time, but not less often than
annually, make a report to the Town relative to the work of the Commission
and shall submit such other reports as may be requested from time to time
by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 24-56 CLINTON CODE § 24-57
1:36
ARTICLE XIII
Fair Rent Commission
[Adopted 6-17-2009]
§ 24-58. Creation; membership; compensation; officers.
A. The Town of Clinton hereby creates a Fair Rent Commission with full
powers and authority as set forth in C.G.S. § 7-148b.
B. The Commission shall be composed of five members appointed by the
Board of Selectmen as follows: two members to serve for a term of four
years, two members to serve for a term of three years, and one member
to serve for a term of two years. Upon the expiration of each member's
term, members shall thereafter be appointed by the Board of Selectmen
to terms of four years. Members shall be electors of the Town and not
more than three shall be of the same political party, as required by C.G.S.
§ 9-167a.
C. Members of the Commission will serve without compensation but shall
be reimbursed by action of the Board of Selectmen, for reasonable
expenses incurred.
D. At its first meeting the Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman. The Commission shall also select a clerk for the purpose of
filing agendas, minutes and distributing correspondence.
§ 24-59. Powers.
The Commission shall have all of the powers, duties and obligations set
forth in C.G.S. §§ 7-148b through 7-148f, as the same may be amended from
time to time.
§ 24-60. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any order of the Commission may appeal to the
Superior Court for the Judicial District of Middlesex in accordance with
C.G.S. § 7-148e.
§ 24-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-60
1:37
Chapter 45
ELECTIONS
§ 45-1. Date of biennial municipal election.
The Town of Clinton hereby designates the date of the biennial municipal
election to be held in 1969 as the Tuesday after the first Monday of
November in that year and the date of each biennial municipal election to
be held thereafter as the Tuesday after the first Monday of November in the
odd-numbered years following, as provided in C.G.S. § 9-164 of the General
Statutes, as amended.
Chapter 51
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 51-1. Declaration of policy and purpose.
Public office is a public trust. The trust of the public is essential for
government to function effectively. In recognition of these principles,
herewith is established a Code of Ethics for all Town officials, officers
and employees. The purpose of this code is to establish suitable ethical
standards for all such officials, officers and employees by prohibiting acts
not in the best interests of the Town of Clinton.
§ 51-2. Applicability; distribution of copies.
A. This code shall apply to all Town officials, officers and employees, the
Board of Education and its employees, whether elected and/or
appointed, paid or unpaid. "Town official, officer or employee" means an
individual whether elected or appointed, whether paid or unpaid, full or
part time, including members of the Board of Education, its employees
and members of boards, commissions and committees in the service of
the Town of Clinton.
B. All of the above shall be referred to hereinafter as "persons governed by
this code."
C. This chapter shall not be applicable if it conflicts in whole or in part with
any labor agreement, employment contract or state statute.
D. The Board of Selectmen shall cause a copy of this chapter to be
distributed to every official and employee with 60 days after enactment
of this chapter. Each employee and officer shall be furnished a copy
before entering the duties of office or employment and sign a statement
that he or she has received a copy of this chapter.
§ 51-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 24-60 CLINTON CODE § 51-3
1:38
BUSINESS — Any entity through which activity for profit or not for profit
is conducted, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership,
proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization, or selfemployed
individual.
COMPLAINANT — Any person who signed a complaint under penalties of
false statement as defined in C.G.S. § 53A-156 alleging a violation of this
code.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — Information, whether transmitted orally
or in writing, which is obtained by reason of the public position or office
held, that is not, at the time of transmission, a matter of public record.
CONFIDENTIAL INVESTIGATION — The examination, prior to the finding
of probable cause, of both written and oral evidence, that is not to be
disclosed to any third party by anyone connected with the investigation,
except upon the written request of the respondent.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — A monetary or pecuniary benefit received by a
Town official/employee as a result of a contract, transaction, zoning decision
or other matter which is, or may be, the subject of an official act or action
by or with the Town of Clinton. Exceptions being for such contracts or
transactions which by their terms and by the substance of their provisions
confer the opportunity and right to realize the accrual of similar benefits to
all persons and/or property similarly situated.
GIFT — Anything of economic value, including services in excess of $100 in
a calendar year. A gift does not include:
A political contribution, reported as required by law, or a donation
or payment as described in C.G.S. § 9-601a(b)(9) or (11). [Amended
8-5-2009]
A.
A commercially reasonable loan made on terms not more favorable than
loans made in the ordinary course of business.
B.
A gift received from a member of a person's immediate family or
fiancee.
C.
Goods or services which are provided to the municipality and facilitate
government actions or functions.
D.
E. A certificate, plaque or other ceremonial award.
A rebate or discount on the price of anything of value made in the
ordinary course of business, without regard to that person's status.
F.
Printed or recorded information germane to government action or
functions.
G.
An honorary degree bestowed upon a public official or public employee
by a public or private university.
H.
§ 51-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-3
1:39
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Spouse, child, parent, grandchild, brother, sister,
grandparent, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law,
sister-in-law, brother-in-law or partner in a civil union.
ON THE RECORD — In writing, signed and dated, or a directive to the
secretary taking the minutes of a meeting to note in the minutes of the
meeting a special disclosure or statement.
PERSONAL BENEFICIAL INTEREST — Any interest, other than financial
or pecuniary, which would affect the action of the official or employee,
except if that interest is based solely on the responsibility of his/her Town
office or employment. Membership in or affiliation with a social, fraternal,
charitable, service, educational, religious, governmental or similar
nonprofit organization is not deemed to automatically create a presumption
of personal interest unless the official or employee is also an employee of
the organization.
PROBABLE CAUSE — Defined by determining whether the facts would
warrant a reasonable person to believe that a Town official, officer or
employee violated this code; the belief should be more than a mere
suspicion, but less than proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
RESPONDENT — Any person accused of violating this code.
§ 51-4. Conflict of interest.
A. Persons governed by this code shall not engage in or participate in any
business or transaction, nor have a financial or pecuniary interest, direct
or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that
person's or persons' official duties in the public interest or would tend to
impair that person's or persons' independent judgment or action in the
performance of that person's or persons' official duties.
B. Persons governed by this code shall not be financially interested or have
any personal beneficial interest, financial or pecuniary, in any contract
or purchase order for any supplies, materials, equipment or contractual
services furnished to or used by the board, agency or commission of
which that person or persons is or are a member(s), or of which that
person or persons is or are an employee(s).
C. A Town official, officer or employee shall refrain from voting upon or
otherwise participating in any matter on behalf of the municipality if
he/she, or a member of his/her immediate family, has a financial or
personal pecuniary interest in the transaction or contract, including but
A meal provided at an event or business meeting and/or the registration
or entrance fee to attend such an event, in which the public official or
public employee participates in his official capacity.
I.
J. A meal provided in the home by a Clinton resident.
Gift giving occasions recognized by the public, including religious
holidays or religious events, birthdays, the birth or adoption of a child,
and weddings, provided that the total value of such gifts for each event
shall not exceed $100.
K.
§ 51-3 CLINTON CODE § 51-4
1:40
not limited to the sale of real estate, materials, supplies or services to
the municipality.
D. Persons governed by this code shall not accept or receive any money,
rebate or gifts, or any promise, obligation, or contract for future reward
or compensation, directly or indirectly, from any person or business to
which any contract or purchase order may be awarded by the Town of
Clinton or any of its boards, agencies or commissions.
E. Persons governed by this code who have a financial or personal or
pecuniary interest in any transactions or contract with the Town,
including but not limited to the sale of real estate, materials, supplies
or services to the Town, on which that person or persons may be called
upon to act in that person's or persons' official capacity, shall not vote
or otherwise participate in the transaction on behalf of the Town. That
person (or persons) shall declare on the record that the person (or
persons) has (or have) a conflict of interest.
F. Persons governed by this code shall not request or permit the use of
Town-owned vehicles, equipment, facilities, materials, or property for
personal convenience or profit, except when such is available to the
public generally or provided as a matter of municipal policy for the use
of such Town official/employee in the interest of the Town. [Amended
8-5-2009]
§ 51-5. Former public officials or employees.
A. No former Town official or employee shall represent private interests in
dealings with the board or agency with which he was associated for a
period of one year after termination of service with the Town.
B. No former Town official or employee shall disclose or use confidential
information acquired in the course of and by reason of his official duties
for financial gain for himself or others.
C. No former Town official or employee who participated substantially in
the negotiation or award of a Town contract obligating the Town to pay
an amount of $25,000 or more or who supervised the negotiation or
award of such a contract shall accept employment with a party to the
contract other than the Town for a period of one year after such contract
is signed.
§ 51-6. Board of Ethics.
A. There shall be a Board of Ethics consisting of five regular members. The
members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen to serve five-year
terms in accordance with §§ 2-3 and 7-8 of the Town of Clinton Charter.
The terms are to be staggered and no member shall serve more than two
consecutive terms. Any member having served two consecutive terms
shall be ineligible for reappointment to the Board for a period of two
years.
B. All members shall be electors of the municipality. No member shall
hold or campaign for any public office, be a member of a political
Town committee or serve as a member of any other municipal agency,
commission or board. A person will not be disqualified from serving on
§ 51-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-6
1:41
the Board if he/she has a member of his/her immediate family employed
by the Town or the Clinton Board of Education. [Amended 8-5-2009]
C. The Board shall elect a Chairperson who shall preside at meetings of the
Board, a Vice Chairperson to preside in the absence of the Chairperson
and a Secretary. The Board will meet on a quarterly basis. Three
members shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of the Board shall
be required for action of the Board except as otherwise specifically
provided for herein. Members will serve without compensation except
for authorized expenses in conjunction with their duties.
§ 51-7. Complaint procedure; advisory opinions.
A. General.
(1) The discussions of the Board held in executive session are
confidential. All other minutes of the Board are public information
and will be made available to the public through the Town Clerk's
office.
(2) The Board will use the Town Attorney and clerical staff will be
provided.
B. Complaints.
(1) The Board of Ethics shall receive complaints of any alleged violation
of the Code of Ethics.
(2) The Board shall have the power and duty to investigate and hear
complaints concerning allegations of violations of this code.
(3) Complaints of violation of the Code of Ethics relate to unethical
behavior concerning any official, officer, or employee of the Town of
Clinton.
(4) The complaint may be made by any person in writing and signed
under penalty of false statement.
(5) Included in this complaint shall be the name of the person accused
(respondent) and also specific acts alleged to constitute the violation
of § 51-4 of this code and when they occurred. It shall also state
whether or not these allegations have been presented to other
administrative or judicial authorities.
(6) All information supplied to or received from the Board during
evaluation or investigation shall remain confidential, as specified by
provisions of C.G.S. § 1-82a, in relation to operations of a board of
ethics, unless the Board makes a finding of probable cause for a
hearing or unless the respondent requests in writing that the entire
record and any hearings be open to the public.
C. Evaluation and acknowledgment.
(1) Upon receipt of the complaint, the Board will send it to Town
Counsel to determine whether the complaint is complete and in
proper form. Town Counsel shall have 15 calendar days to determine
if the complaint is in proper form. If the complaint is not in proper
form or if the Board determines that the allegations, even if true,
would not constitute a violation of this code then the Board shall duly
notify the complainant of this and the reasons therefor by registered
or certified mail. Allegations applicable to other administrative or
judicial authority will be referred to the proper authority.
§ 51-6 CLINTON CODE § 51-7
1:42
(2) If the Board determines that the complaint is in proper form and
the allegations if true would constitute a violation of this code,
then the Board shall, not later than five business days after said
determination, provide a copy of the complaint by registered or
certified mail to all respondents against whom such complaint is
filed and shall provide notice of the receipt of such complaint to the
complainant. The respondent(s) shall have 10 business days from
receipt to submit any response to the Board.
(3) Confidential investigation.
(a) The Board shall make or cause an investigation to be made
sufficient to decide whether there is probable cause to believe
a violation of this code has occurred. The investigation shall be
conducted within 60 calendar days of receipt of complaint.
(b) In the conduct of its investigation, the Board shall have the
power to hold hearings, administer oaths, examine witnesses,
receive oral and documentary evidence, subpoena witnesses,
and to require the production for examination by the Board of
any books and papers as permitted by law which are relevant in
any manner under investigation or in question.
(c) During the investigation, the respondent(s) shall have the right
to appear and be heard and offer any information which may
tend to clear the respondent of probable cause to believe that
the respondent has violated any provision of the Code of Ethics.
(d) This investigation shall be confidential pursuant to C.G.S.
§ 1-82a.
D. No probable cause. If the Board finds no probable cause it shall within
five business days advise the complainant and the respondent of its
finding and a summary of the reasons. The complaint and the record of
investigation shall remain confidential.
E. Probable cause.
(1) If the Board finds probable cause by the concurring vote of four
out of five voting members, it shall, within three business days
after the termination of its investigation and its decision, advise the
complainant and the respondent of its findings and a summary of the
reasons therefor.
(2) If there is found such probable cause, the Board shall make public
its finding within five business days after the termination of its
investigation and decision thereon and the entire record of the
investigation shall become public.
(3) The Board may grant a postponement of the release of said record
for a period not to exceed 14 days to allow for negotiations for the
resolution of the matter by stipulation, agreed settlement, or consent
order and/or as provided for in C.G.S. § 4-177 as referenced in C.G.S.
§ 1-82a(e).
(4) It shall also, unless resolved as stated above, set a date for a hearing
on a complaint. It shall give notice of that date to the complainant
and respondent. Such date shall be not less than 15 calendar days
following notice nor more than 30 calendar days after the finding of
probable cause.
§ 51-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-7
1:43
F. Hearings.
(1) All hearings shall be opened to the public and recorded.
(2) Hearings shall not be subject to rules of court, except the rights of
an accused to confront and cross-examine his/her accuser, of every
witness or party to be represented by an attorney at law of his/
her choice, and of every witness to decline to answer questions in
accordance with the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States.
(3) In all other respects hearings shall be conducted by the Board, with
the advice and assistance of the Town Attorney acting through its
Chairperson, in order to facilitate the prompt and fair disposition of
the proceedings.
(4) While conducting a hearing of an alleged violation of this code,
the Board shall have the authority to administer oaths, examine
witnesses, and receive oral and documentary evidence. The Board
shall have the authority to issue subpoenas or subpoenas duces
tecum (in order to produce documentary evidence) enforceable upon
application to the Superior Court for the State of Connecticut and
to compel attendance of persons at hearings and the production
of books, documents, records and papers, pursuant to C.G.S.
§ 7-148(c)(10)(B), subject to the inherent power of the Board to
decline or limit such request where it is merely duplicative or is
unnecessarily burdensome or harassing and not likely to lead to
evidence which will aid the Board in its determination.
G. Finding/sanctions.
(1) No finding of violation of this code shall be made except upon
concurring vote of four out of five members of the Board.
(2) The Chairperson shall render the finding of the Board within 15
calendar days after conclusion of the hearing. A copy of the finding
shall be sent to the complainant, respondent, and the Town of
Clinton.
(3) Upon finding of a violation of any provision of the code, the Board
will refer the matter to the appropriate appointing or supervisory
authority.
(4) The authority affected will report within 30 calendar days of the
receipt of the Board of Ethics ruling to the Board the action taken, if
any. Persons subject to this code found not to be in violation of this
code will be reimbursed by the Town for their reasonable legal fees,
except no legal fees shall be paid for any services rendered before a
finding of probable cause.
H. Advisory opinions.
(1) Any public official, prospective public official or employee may
request the Board of Ethics to issue an advisory ethics opinion
regarding the propriety of a matter or matters to which the person is
or may become a party. Any request for an advisory opinion shall be
in writing by the person making the request. The Board may make
public all or any part of such opinion as it deems desirable and in the
public trust. [Amended 8-5-2009]
§ 51-7 CLINTON CODE § 51-7
1:44
(2) Advisory opinions rendered by the Board shall be deemed to be
final decisions. Any advisory opinion concerning the person who
requested the opinion and who acted in reliance thereon, in good
faith, shall be an absolute defense in any matter brought under the
provisions of this code.
§ 51-8. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any final decision of the Board may appeal such
decision within 30 days of the official posting in accordance with the
provisions of C.G.S. § 4-175 or 4-183. If successful, any and all reasonable
legal fees will be paid by the Town of Clinton.
Chapter 72
HOUSING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Partnership — See Ch. 76.
§ 72-1. Declaration of need for authority.
There is need for a housing authority in the Town of Clinton.
§ 72-2. Powers.
The Housing Authority of the Town of Clinton may transact business and
exercise its powers under the provisions of Chapter 128 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
Chapter 76
HOUSING PARTNERSHIP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 72.
§ 76-1. Creation; membership.
There is hereby created the Town of Clinton Housing Partnership, appointed
by the Board of Selectmen of the Town. The Partnership shall consist of the
following members:
A. The First Selectman, whose Partnership term shall be coincident with
his term as First Selectman.
§ 51-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-1
1:45
B. One representative from each of the following boards and commissions:
Planning and Zoning Commission, Inland Wetlands and Conservation
Commission, Water Pollution Control Commission, Housing Authority
and Economic Development Commission, each representative's term
hereon being coincident with his term on his board/commission.
C. Two representatives of the local business community, whose terms shall
be for two years.
D. Two representatives of the public interest, whose terms shall be for two
years.
E. Two local representatives of local industry, whose terms shall be for two
years.
§ 76-2. Responsibilities.
The Town of Clinton Housing Partnership shall have the following
responsibilities. It shall:
A. Authorize the Town Clerk to submit a copy of this chapter and
documentation of the empanelment to the State of Connecticut
Commissioner of Economic and Community Development; [Amended
8-5-2009]
B. Submit evidence to the Commissioner of Economic and Community
Development of the commitment of local resources to the purposes
and support of the Partnership, consistent with state and local law,
regulation and the Charter; [Amended 8-5-2009]
C. Identify needs and opportunities for affordable housing in the Town of
Clinton by examining:
(1) The availability of state, municipal, and other public and private
land suitable for the development (or redevelopment) of affordable
housing;
(2) The Town Plan of Development and Zoning, Subdivision, Coastal
Area Management, and Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations and determining their impact on the (re)development of
affordable housing in the Town of Clinton; and
(3) Such other issues of the Town which the Partnership feels have a
substantial impact on the availability of affordable housing in the
Town of Clinton;
D. Recommend to the Board of Selectmen for its action, or reference to
any board or commission whose action is required, such regulations,
ordinances or other rules of the Town, or a division thereof, which would
assist in reducing any adverse impact now existing on the availability of
affordable housing in the Town of Clinton;
E. Establish priorities and develop a long-range plan to meet and identify
needs for affordable housing in the Town, consistent with regional
housing needs;
F. Establish such procedures as it deems necessary, consistent with
federal, state and local law and the Charter, for the development of a
written proposal intended to meet and provide for the implementation of
such plan; and
G. Recommend the commencement of an activity, development or project
designed to create additional affordable housing in the Town of Clinton.
§ 76-1 CLINTON CODE § 76-3
1:46
§ 76-3. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall be construed so as not to conflict with any federal, state
or local rule or regulation or the Charter of the Town of Clinton.
Chapter 87
INSURANCE
§ 87-1. Participation in Old Age and Survivors Insurance System.
The Town of Clinton shall apply for membership and participation in the
Old Age and Survivors Insurance System under Title II of the Federal Social
Security Act, as amended, in accordance with Public Act No. 277 of the
1951 Public Acts of the State of Connecticut, as of the first of January
1952, for all its employees with the exception of the employees excluded by
Section 3 of said Public Act No. 277.4
§ 87-2. Agreements.
The Selectmen of the Town of Clinton be and they hereby are authorized
and empowered to execute on behalf and in the name of the Town of Clinton
any and all agreements with the State Employees' Retirement Commission
for the aforesaid purpose, in accordance with and subject to the provisions
of said Public Act No. 277 and subject to the regulations promulgated by the
State Employees' Retirement Commission pursuant to said Public Act, No.
277.
§ 87-3. Deductions from wages.
The Selectmen of the Town of Clinton be and they hereby are authorized
and directed to make deductions from the wages of the employees of said
Town participating in the aforesaid Old Age and Survivors Insurance System
as required by Section 4 of said Public Act No. 277 and to forward the
amount thereof together with the contribution of said Town to the State
Employees' Retirement Commission in the manner and form prescribed by
said regulations.
§ 87-4. Appropriation.
The sum of $750 be and the same hereby is appropriated for the purpose
of the contribution required of the Town of Clinton in connection with the
participation of said Town in the aforesaid Old Age and Survivors Insurance
System, in accordance with said Public Act No. 277.
Chapter 98
JUSTICES OF THE PEACE
4. Editor's Note: See now C.G.S. § 7-245 et seq.
§ 76-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-1
1:47
§ 98-1. Number of Justices; manner of election. [Amended
8-5-2009]
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 9-183a and effective as of the date of the next election,
the number of Justices of the Peace for the Town of Clinton shall be 15, said
Justices to be elected, and vacancies filled, in accordance with state statute.
Chapter 110
LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM
§ 110-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CVFD — The Clinton Volunteer Fire Department.
DEFINED BENEFIT — Monthly contributions after 20 years of service at 65
years of age as described in § 110-3A.
DEFINED CONTRIBUTION — Contribution of $1,000 annually to a 457E
plan as described in § 110-3B.
PARTICIPANTS — Those enrolled in the plan.
THE PLAN — As described in § 110-3 and referenced throughout the
document.
TOWN — The Town of Clinton.
§ 110-2. Eligibility.
Members of CVFD who have completed one year of continuous service
and meet the eligibility requirements set forth in the CVFD Tax Abatement
Ordinance (attached),5 will be enrolled in the plan.
§ 110-3. Plan.
A. Members who elected to enroll in the defined benefit plan in May 2015
will be eligible to receive a benefit of $400 a month, after completing 20
years of service and reaching the age of 65. Each year of service must
comply with the requirements of § 110-2. The benefit will be paid to the
member until he or she is deceased; there are no survivor benefits.
B. Those members not electing to be in the defined benefit plan in May
2015 will be enrolled in a defined contribution (457E) plan.
(1) Members will receive a contribution of $1,000 to this fund for each
year they meet the eligibility requirements of § 110-2, commencing
at the adoption date of this chapter.
(2) Members must have five years of eligibility to be vested in the
defined contribution.
5. Editor's Note: Said ordinance is on file in the Town offices.
§ 98-1 CLINTON CODE § 110-3
1:48
*See § 110-5, Leave of absence/break in service for exceptions.
(3) Members must designate a beneficiary who will take over ownership
of the plan upon the member's death.
(4) Members cannot contribute on their own behalf to this plan.
§ 110-4. Contributions.
The Town will contribute the entire cost of the benefits and will retain an
actuary to annually determine the appropriate amount necessary to fund
the plan.
§ 110-5. Leave of absence/break in service.
A. Leave of absence. A CVFD member who has been an eligible plan
participant may request a leave of absence in accordance with CVFD
bylaws. If granted the member will not lose any past service counting
towards the defined benefit or vesting in the defined contribution. They,
however, do not accumulate time during the leave of absence.
B. Break in service. A CVFD member who is a participant of either plan and
has met the eligibility requirements of § 110-2 in the previous year can
request a break in service. Upon his or her return, he or she will have
his or her prebreak and post-break service aggregated for the purpose
of eligibility and vesting.
*Breaks in service must be approved in accordance with CVFD bylaws.
§ 110-6. Change, suspension or termination.
A. The Town expects to continue the plan indefinitely, but, as future
conditions cannot be foreseen, the Town reserves the right to suspend or
discontinue the contributions and/or terminate the plan at any time. This
must be done by a vote of the Town's legislative body following a public
hearing.
B. At no time, however, may any part of the contributions made by the Town
be used for purposes other than those provided for in the plan.
C. Upon termination or partial termination of the plan or upon suspension
of contributions to the plan, the assets of the plan shall be allocated as
follows:
(1) First. Complete commitment to participants of the defined benefit
already in pay status for that fiscal year.
(2) Second. To participants of the defined benefit not in pay status:
divide any remaining funds amongst them; prorated based on years
of service and contribute that amount to a 457E, which they can
convert via a 1035 rollover.
(3) Third. Participants in the defined contribution will be allowed to
convert assets, if vested, via a 1035 rollover into personal ownership.
(4) Any residual assets of the plan remaining after all of the above
conditions have been met shall be returned to the Town.
§ 110-7. Miscellaneous.
§ 110-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:49
A. Participant rights. All CVFD members participating in the plan are
volunteers in service of the CVFD. This plan in no way shall be construed
as a contract of employment between the Town and any CVFD member.
B. Assignment. The interest of a participant in this plan may not be
assigned, sold, alienated, discounted or pledged as collateral for a loan
or as a security for the performance of an obligation or for any other
purpose whatsoever. No such interest shall be subject to attachment,
garnishment, sequestration or other legal, equitable or other process.
C. Qualified domestic relations order. Distribution to an alternate payee
shall be permitted if such distribution is authorized by a qualified
domestic relations order which will have the meaning as set forth under
IRC section 414.
D. Applicable law. This plan shall be construed in accordance with the laws
of the State of Connecticut, except when such laws are superseded by
federal laws.
E. Important plan dates.
(1) All benefits for Plan A shall be retroactive to July 1, 2016, and based
on member eligibility as of October 31, 2015, statistics.
(2) All benefits for Plan B shall be deposited into the 457E member's
account for year one as soon as the accounts are established.
(3) For all following eligible years, the funds shall be deposited into the
member's accounts by the third week of July of that calendar year.
Chapter 135
REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
§ 110-7 CLINTON CODE § 110-7
1:50
ARTICLE I
Connecticut River Estuary Regional Planning Agency
[Adopted 5-6-1969]
§ 135-1. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The Town of Clinton hereby adopts C.G.S. §§ 8-31a to 8-37a, inclusive, as
amended, relating to regional planning agencies.
§ 135-2. Approval for Town to join Agency.
The joining of the Connecticut River Estuary Regional Planning Agency
by the Town of Clinton is hereby approved, subject to the approval of
an appropriation of the necessary funds by the Board of Finance and
subsequent Town Meeting, if necessary.
§ 135-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-2
1:51

ARTICLE II
Connecticut River Valley Council of Elected Officials
[Adopted 8-2-2000]
§ 135-3. Authorization to form and join Council.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized, pursuant to C.G.S. § 4-124c, to form
and join a regional organization known as the "Connecticut River Valley
Council of Elected Officials" with those powers and for those purposes set
forth in C.G.S. §§ 4-124c through 4-124h, as the same may, from time to
time, be amended.
§ 135-4. Representation.
The representative to the Connecticut River Valley Council of Elected
Officials shall be the chief elected official of the Town of Clinton.
§ 135-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:53
Chapter 140
RETIREMENT
§ 135-4 CLINTON CODE § 135-4
1:54
ARTICLE I
Other Post-Employment Benefits Trust
[Adopted 4-15-2015]
§ 140-1. Authority; establishment of trust.
Pursuant to the authority granted to the Board of Selectmen of the Town
of Clinton (the "Town") by § 5-5 of the Charter of the Town of Clinton (the
"Charter") and Section 7-450(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, there
shall be created and established for the Town of Clinton (the "Town") the
Other Post-Employment Benefits Trust (the "OPEB Trust") to fund certain
retiree benefits pursuant to the terms of previously established plans for
the benefit of certain employees and retirees, their spouses and dependents
(the "OPEB System").
§ 140-2. Establishment of Other Post-Employment Benefits Board.
Immediately upon the enactment of this article, there shall be established
an OPEB Board of Trustees (the "OPEB Board") as provided for in
Connecticut General Statutes § 7-450(b) for the management and
investment of the OPEB Trust. The OPEB Board shall consist of five
members and shall include the First Selectman, the Chairman of the Board
of Finance, the Chairman of the Police Commission, the Chairman of the
Board of Education and one person from the Board of Education who shall
be appointed by the First Selectman. Each member shall serve for terms
coextensive with the terms of their respective positions. Three members
shall constitute a quorum of the OPEB Board. The members of said OPEB
Board shall receive no compensation for service.
§ 140-3. Trust Agreement.
The Town, acting through its Board of Selectmen, and the OPEB Board are
hereby authorized and directed to enter into a Trust Agreement to govern
the administration, management and investment of the OPER Trust and the
assets thereof (the "Trust Agreement"). The Town, acting through its Board
of Selectmen, and the OPEB Board are further authorized to modify, amend,
cancel or terminate the Trust Agreement, as they deem appropriate and in
accordance with applicable law.
§ 140-4. Powers and duties of OPEB Board.
The OPEB Board shall perform the duties set forth in the OPEB Trust
Agreement, as amended from time to time, relating to the management
of the assets held in the OPEB Trust. The Town's Treasurer initially shall
have the care and custody of all funds held in the OPEB Trust and shall
have the power, with the approval of the OPEB Board, to invest such
funds in securities legal for investment for such trust funds. One or more
investment managers and a custodian may be appointed by the OPEB Board
in accordance with the terms of the Trust Agreement.
§ 140-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-5
1:55
§ 140-5. Provisions of OPEB System to govern.
The terms of the OPEB System shall govern the ultimate payment and
disbursement of the funds accumulated in the OPEB Trust. Payments shall
be made from the OPEB Trust only to provide benefits to beneficiaries in
accordance with the terms of the OPEB System. Funds held in the OPEB
Trust may not be used for any purpose other than to:
A. Pay reasonable operating and administrative expenses of the OPEB
Trust;
B. Make payments permitted under applicable Connecticut law;
C. Pay benefits to beneficiaries in accordance with the terms of the OPEB
System; and
D. Make a distribution to a trust or entity whose income is exempt from
federal income taxation under Section 115 of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1986, as amended, as specified by the Town upon the termination of
the Trust Agreement as provided in the Trust Agreement.
§ 140-6. Further actions.
The Town, acting through the First Selectman, or his designee, is hereby
authorized and approved to take any further action that he, in his discretion,
deems necessary or appropriate to effectuate the foregoing article,
including, without limitation, filing and executing appropriate documents
and requests with the Internal Revenue Service.
§ 140-7. When effective.
This article shall become effective 30 days after its publication pursuant to
§ 5-5 of the Charter.
§ 140-5 CLINTON CODE § 140-7
1:56
Chapter 154
TOWN MEETINGS
§ 154-1. Robert's Rules of Order.
The Town of Clinton establishes Robert's Rules of Order as the rule at this
and all succeeding Town meetings.
Chapter 173
YOUTH AND FAMILY SERVICES BUREAU
§ 173-1. Bureau established; authority. [Amended 8-5-2009]
The Town of Clinton hereby creates a Youth and Family Services Bureau,
which is established pursuant to C.G.S. § 10-19m.
§ 173-2. Membership.
The Youth and Family Services Bureau shall have a Board comprised of
10 regular members, all of whom shall be electors of the Town of Clinton,
appointed by the Board of Selectmen, and two youth members (nonvoting)
who must be residents of the Town of Clinton but, as minors, would not be
electors of the Town.
§ 173-3. Terms of office.
Said regular members shall serve as follows: four members shall be
appointed to terms expiring December 31, 1993; four members shall be
appointed to terms expiring December 31, 1992; and two members shall
be appointed to terms expiring December 31, 1991. Thereafter, all regular
members shall be appointed to no more than two consecutive three-year
terms. The youth members shall be appointed to terms expiring December
31, 1991, and shall thereafter be appointed to one-year terms.
§ 173-4. Additional members.
The Bureau's Board shall have the option of including in its membership
up to four additional nonvoting members who shall function in an advisory
capacity only and as such need not be electors or residents of the Town.
§ 173-5. Powers and duties. [Amended 8-5-2009]
Regular (voting) members shall have the following powers and duties in
addition to providing the services described in C.G.S. § 10-19m. They shall:
A. Assess local social services needs and develop a plan of care and service
for Clinton's youth and families.
§ 140-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-5
1:57
B. Recommend to the Board of Selectmen appropriate candidates for the
position of Bureau Director and such staff as may be necessary to
execute the plan of care and service.
C. Provide ongoing oversight and recommendations for the improvement of
the development of youth and the health of family life in Clinton.
D. Report annually to the Town, either directly or through delegation of this
task to the Bureau Director, the work of the Bureau, ongoing problems
of youth and family life in Clinton, and the Bureau's plans and goals for
the coming year.
E. Develop, approve, and submit an annual budget necessary to the
Bureau's functioning.
F. Develop and approve Board bylaws consistent with all applicable
statutes and this chapter.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 190
ALARMS
§ 190-1. Purpose and applicability.
This chapter is intended to regulate the activities and responsibilities of
those people who purchase, lease, or rent alarm systems, devices or
services. It is also intended to improve the reliability of those alarm systems,
devices or services and to ensure that the Police Department will not be
unduly diverted from responding to an actual criminal activity as a result of
responding to false alarms. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
alarms owned and/or operated by the Town of Clinton.
§ 190-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM DEVICE — Any device which, when activated, transmits a signal to
police headquarters, or transmits a signal to a person or business who or
which relays the information to police headquarters, or produces an audible
or visual signal to which the Police Department is expected to respond.
Excluded from this chapter are fire alarms and medical alert alarms.
ALARM USER — The owner or occupant of any premises in which an alarm
is used or provided.
AUTOMATIC DIAL ALARM — A telephone device or attachment that
mechanically or electronically solicits a telephone line to police
headquarters and produces a prerecorded voice message to report a
criminal act or other emergency (excluding fire and/or medical alert)
requiring a police response.
§ 173-5 CLINTON CODE § 190-2
1:58
CENTRAL OR CONTROL STATION — An office to which remote alarm
devices transmit signals, where operators monitor these signals and relay
the information to police headquarters.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of any alarm device or automatic dial
alarm through mechanical failure, improper installation, or negligence of
the user and/or his agent, including any signal or oral communication
transmitted to the Police Department requesting, requiring, or resulting
in the response of the Police Department when in fact there has been
no unauthorized intrusion or attempted unauthorized intrusion into said
premises. Excluded from this definition are those activations caused by
power outages or extreme natural conditions such as trees falling, breaking
lines.
KEY HOLDER — The individual(s) designated by the alarm user to respond
to the premises of the alarm when notified by the Police Department.
§ 190-3. Registration required.
A. Anyone who, on or after the date of adoption of this chapter, installs
or maintains a new or existing alarm device or automatic dial alarm as
defined herein shall register with the Clinton Police Department. Such
registration shall be by completion of a form supplied by the Department
containing the following information:
(1) Location of property;
(2) Name of owner;
(3) Name of occupant, if different than owner;
(4) Name(s) and telephone number(s) of key holder(s) and person(s) to
respond to reset alarm;
(5) Name and type of alarm system; and
(6) Such other information as the Department may reasonably deem
necessary.
B. Any new installation on or after the adoption of this chapter shall be
registered in accordance with this section within 30 days of the date
of said installation. Any user with an alarm device or automatic dial
alarm existing as of the date of this chapter shall register the same
in accordance with this section within six months from the date of the
adoption hereof.
§ 190-4. Control and curtailment of audible signals.
All alarm devices which use an audible bell, horn, or siren shall be equipped
with an automatic shutoff device which will deactivate the audible signal
within 15 minutes. All users of an audible bell, horn, or siren must comply
with this section within one year of this chapter.
§ 190-5. False alarms.
The Clinton Police Department will respond to all reported alarms. Upon
determining that the alarm is false, the responding officer will leave a
copy of the Clinton Police Department alarm report, which shall serve as
a warning, with the user. If the user or his agent is not available, or the
§ 190-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-5
1:59
business or premises is closed and unoccupied, the officer will leave a copy
under the door or in the mailbox. If neither of these can be accomplished,
the notice will be mailed to the user.
§ 190-6. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any alarm user who fails to register in accordance with § 190-3 of this
chapter, or who fails to comply with § 190-4 of this chapter, shall be given
a written notice of violation, and said user shall be subject to a fine in
the amount of $50 payable to the Town of Clinton if the user does not
comply within 10 days of the notice.
B. Fines for false alarms shall be imposed as follows per calendar year:
(1) For the first two false alarms there will be a written warning.
(2) For the third and fourth false alarms: $50.
(3) For the fifth and each subsequent false alarm: $100.
C. Upon receiving the fourth false alarm, the Police Department shall send
a letter to the user requesting that the alarm device be inspected by
a certified contractor and the contractor notify the Chief of Police, in
writing, of his findings. If the alarm has been activated by employee
error, the employer shall retrain the employee and notify the Chief of
Police, in writing, that this has been complied with.
D. Intentionally activating a false alarm shall be a violation of this chapter.
The user may be subject to a fine of $50 or criminal charges, or both.
§ 190-7. Testing.
No alarm device which is designed to transmit a signal directly to the
Police Department shall be worked on, tested or demonstrated without
first calling the Police Department and obtaining permission from the desk
officer. Permission is not required when the signal goes to a central or
control station. An unauthorized test constitutes a false alarm and shall be
subject to the false alarm procedure contained herein.
§ 190-8. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Clinton Police Department. Any person
found to be in violation of any section hereof may appeal such finding to
the Board of Police Commissioners, which shall hear such appeals and may
uphold, modify or revoke any fine imposed hereunder.
Chapter 194
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 390.
Use of Town property — See Ch. 478.
Beach regulations — See Ch. 545.
§ 190-5 CLINTON CODE § 190-8
1:60
ARTICLE I
Sale of Alcoholic Liquor
[Adopted 10-7-1935]
§ 194-1. Vote to permit sale.
At the Annual Town Meeting held on October 7, 1935, a vote taken by ballot
to determine whether the sale of alcoholic liquor should be permitted in the
Town of Clinton showed the following result: all alcoholic liquor: yes, 400;
no, 196.
§ 194-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-1
1:61

ARTICLE II
Sale of Alcoholic Beverages on Sunday
[Adopted 5-13-1936]
§ 194-2. Sale during certain hours permitted.
The sale of all alcoholic beverages with meals on Sunday between the hours
of 12:00 noon and 9:00 p.m. as provided for by Section 730b, as amended
by the Public Acts of 1935,6 shall be permitted in the Town of Clinton.
6. Editor's Note: See now C.G.S. §§ 30-91 and 30-91a.
§ 194-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-2
1:63

ARTICLE III
Loitering or Drinking in Public Areas
[Adopted 9-26-1978; amended in its entirety 11-5-1986]
§ 194-3. Definitions
For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — The same meaning as the term "alcoholic
liquor" in Chapter 545 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
LOITER — Standing around, moving slowly about, spending time idly,
sauntering, delaying, lingering or lagging behind, in such manner as to
hinder or impede or tend to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted
use of property or the operation of any business lawfully conducted by
anyone.
PUBLIC AREA — Any street, sidewalk, parking lot, open area, or building
to which the general public has access for business, entertainment or other
lawful purposes.
§ 194-4. Loitering.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to loiter on or in
any street, sidewalk, park, beach, building or other property owned by
the Town of Clinton.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to loiter on or in
any public area of private property in the Town of Clinton if ordered to
quit said property by the owner thereof or his agent.
§ 194-5. Possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to consume
alcoholic beverages or have any alcoholic beverages of any kind in an
open container in his or her possession on or in any street, sidewalk,
park, beach, building or other property owned by the Town of Clinton,
except when authorized by the Board of Selectmen in accordance with
§ 194-6 of this article. [Amended 8-5-2009]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to consume
alcoholic beverages on or in any public area of private property in the
Town of Clinton if ordered not to consume alcoholic beverages on said
property by the owner thereof or his agent.
§ 194-6. Exceptions for special events.
The Board of Selectmen may make such exception to § 194-4A and 194-5A
for special events as in its discretion is fitting and proper and provided
that written request for such exception is made in writing at least 24 hours
before the scheduled event.
§ 194-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-7
1:65
§ 194-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined not more
than $25 for each offense.
§ 194-7 CLINTON CODE § 194-7
1:66
ARTICLE IV
Possession of Alcohol by Minors
[Adopted 10-29-2003]
§ 194-8. Findings.
The Board of Selectmen finds that the unregulated possession of alcoholic
liquor by persons under the age of 21 is detrimental to the general welfare,
health and safety of the citizens of Clinton and especially its youth.
§ 194-9. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — The same meaning as the same term is defined
in Title 30, Chapter 545, § 30-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended.
HOST — To organize a gathering of two or more persons, or to allow
the premises under one's control to be used with one's knowledge for
a gathering of two or more persons for personal, social or business
interaction.
MINOR — The same meaning as the same term is defined in Title 30, § 30-1
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended from time to time.
§ 194-10. Possession restricted.
No person under the age of 21 shall be in possession of containers of
alcoholic liquor whether opened or unopened within the Town of Clinton
except when accompanied by or in the presence of his or her parent,
guardian, or spouse who has attained the age of 21. This restriction shall
apply to both public and private property.
§ 194-11. Hosting events.
No person shall host an event or gathering which allows the consumption
or dispensing of alcoholic liquor to or by a minor except when accompanied
by or in the presence of his or her parent, guardian or spouse who has
attained the age of 21. This restriction shall apply to both public and private
property.
§ 194-12. Sale or delivery of alcohol to minors.
Except as provided in § 194-11 above, no person shall sell or deliver
alcoholic liquors to any person under the age of 21 within the Town of
Clinton.
§ 194-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-13
1:67
§ 194-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of an
infraction and be subject to a penalty of $100 or community service as
permitted by C.G.S. § 7-148, as amended.
§ 194-14. Enforcement.
The Chief of Police or his designee is charged with enforcing the provisions
of this article.
§ 194-15. Hearing procedure for citations.
The Town of Clinton hereby specifically adopts the provisions of C.G.S.
§ 7-152c, as amended, for the establishment of an appeal and citation
hearing process for considering all appeals under this article.
§ 194-13 CLINTON CODE § 194-15
1:68
Chapter 200
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 390. Beach regulations — See Ch. 545.
§ 194-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-15
1:69

ARTICLE I
Running at Large
[Adopted 10-2-1922]
§ 200-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall allow his chickens, cattle, tigers, or other wild or domestic
birds or animals to roam at large, or to be led by chains or ropes over or
across the Lower Green on East Main Street.
§ 200-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating this article is subject to a fine of $10 and costs.
§ 200-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-2
1:71

ARTICLE II
Dog Control
[Adopted 7-7-2005; amended in its entirety 4-26-2006]
§ 200-3. Dogs roaming on private property.
No owner or keeper of any dog shall allow such dog to roam upon land of
another unless the owner of said land has given the owner or keeper of such
dog permission to have such dog present on said land.
§ 200-4. Dogs on public property.
A. In no event shall any dog be allowed, either leashed or unleashed, on any
beaches, parks, athletic fields and/or playgrounds owned or maintained
by the Town of Clinton or any agency thereof, except in designated areas.
B. Dogs shall be allowed in designated areas on public property other than
beaches, parks, athletic fields and/or playgrounds only if such dog is
properly on a leash of no more than 10 feet in length, held by the owner
or keeper of such dog.
C. Designated areas shall include the Holiday Dock; the Town Dock; the
Town Dock parking areas; the Liberty Green; the small park at Heser's
Pond; the wooded areas at the Indian River Recreation Complex; the
pathway along the Hammock River, behind the Lion's Club Pavilion,
to the Viewing Pavilion at the Town Beach; and any other areas so
designated by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 200-5. Dogs assisting handicapped persons.
A dog which accompanies a handicapped person as an assistant or guide
dog and is properly leashed or on proper restraint shall be allowed on any
public property pursuant to C.G.S. § 46a-64.
§ 200-6. Exemptions.
A. This article shall not apply if the dog is on its owner's or keeper's
property, or where the owner or keeper has the permission of the private
property owner.
B. This article shall not apply if the dog is owned by the Town of Clinton or
State of Connecticut and is used for law enforcement purposes.
§ 200-7. Removal of dog feces.
The owner or keeper of a dog which has deposited feces upon any public
property or private property without the permission of the owner of such
property shall immediately remove such feces, or cause it to be removed,
and dispose of it in a sanitary manner. A person will be considered to have
disposed of the feces in a sanitary manner if such person removes the feces
and places such material in a bag or wrapper made of plastic or paper or
otherwise disposes of such feces on his own property.
§ 200-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-8
1:73
§ 200-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply:
KEEPER — Any person, other than the owner, harboring or having in his
possession any dog within the meaning of C.G.S. § 22-357.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — All property within the Town of Clinton boundaries
which is not owned by the Town of Clinton or the State of Connecticut, the
federal government, or any agency thereof.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any property owned, occupied or controlled by the
Town of Clinton or the State of Connecticut, federal government or any
agency thereof, including but not limited to parks, streets, sidewalks or
grass areas adjacent to streets and sidewalks.
§ 200-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates this article shall be subject to a fine of $50 and a
fine of $75 for each subsequent violation.
§ 200-10. Appeals.
Any person who receives a notice of violation may appeal said notice to the
Board of Selectmen, in writing, within 10 days of the date of said notice and
request a hearing on said violation. All such appeals shall be considered and
all hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of C.G.S.
§ 7-152c, which is hereby adopted for the establishment of an appeal and
citation hearing process for considering all appeals under this article.
§ 200-8 CLINTON CODE § 200-10
1:74
Chapter 209
BAZAARS AND RAFFLES
§ 209-1. Adoption of statutory provisions.
At the biennial municipal election held on October 7, 1963, a vote taken on
the question of adopting the provisions of C.G.S. §§ 7-170 through 7-186, as
amended, pertaining to the operation and conduct of bazaars and raffles,
showed the following result: yes, 488; no, 242.
Chapter 218
BINGO
§ 218-1. Purpose.
These restrictions in no way supersede or replace any requirements or
regulations that have been established by state statute. Each applicant
for a permit to hold a bingo game shall abide by these local restrictions
which are available through the Chief of Police, the licensing authority. Said
restrictions are enacted within the provisions of the statute and subject to
the same penalties for violation thereof.
§ 218-2. Rules.
A. Rule No. 1. The playing of bingo by anyone under the age of 16 years is
hereby prohibited unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
B. Rule No. 2. All bingo games shall terminate at 12:00 midnight.
C. Rule No. 3. The playing of bingo on Sunday is hereby prohibited.
D. Rule No. 4. Prizes offered shall not include alcoholic beverages.
§ 218-3. Amendments.
These restrictions shall remain in force until further notice and may be
added to or modified by the Board of Selectmen as deemed in the best
interest of the Town.
Chapter 226
BOATING
§ 226-1. Speed limits.
Every motorboat operating within the waters under the jurisdiction of the
Town of Clinton shall not travel at a rate of speed to cause a hazardous
wake or wash, or greater than six miles per hour, upon the waters of
the Hammonassett River to a point designated by Green Marker No. 11,
situated in Clinton Harbor, excepting those boats lawfully towing water
skiers in the area permitted by § 226-2, or on the waters of the Indian River
§ 200-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-1
1:75
from the bridge on the Boston Post Road, U.S. Route 1, to a point designated
by Green Marker No. 11, situated in Clinton Harbor, or on any portion of
the Hammock River, or in that portion of the channel of Clinton Harbor from
Green Marker No. 11 to Marker No. 3 marking Wheeler Rock, situated at
the outlying entrance of said Harbor.
§ 226-2. Water-skiing.
No person shall engage in water-skiing, which for the purpose of this
chapter is defined as any water sport performed with a tow boat using inner
tubes, knee boards, skis or other inflatable towing devices, and no person
shall operate a motorboat towing a person so engaged on any water area
designated in § 226-1, except that area bounded on the east by the water
main to Cedar Island, on the south by the south bank of the Hammonassett
River, on the west by the west bank of the Hammonassett River, and on
the north by a line 100 feet south of the southerly border of the federally
maintained channel of Clinton Harbor until the channel ends, then by the
north bank of the Hammonassett River.
§ 226-3. Penalties for offenses.
A. For purposes of this chapter, jet skis and all similarly powered personal
watercraft are considered motorboats and are subject to the speed
regulations in the areas designated in § 226-1.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of any of these sections shall be
fined not more than $100.
Chapter 234
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 241.
Fees — See Ch. 296.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 320.
Inland wetlands — See Ch. 335.
Seasonal use structures — See Ch. 432.
§ 226-1 CLINTON CODE § 226-3
1:76
ARTICLE I
Filing of Written Declaration
[Adopted 4-10-1963]
§ 234-1. Written declaration required.
Any addition to or new construction, alteration, or removal of any building
in the Town of Clinton amounting in each instance to more than $100 in
actual value shall be subject to prior filing of a written declaration with the
Town Clerk on forms prescribed by the Assessor, accompanied by a fee of
$1, stating location and approximate cost of the work.
§ 234-2. Penalties for offenses.
The penalty for conviction of failure to comply with this article shall be a
penalty of not more than $10
§ 234-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-2
1:77

ARTICLE II
Building Code
[Adopted 5-6-1969]
§ 234-3. Adoption of State Building Code.
The Town of Clinton hereby accepts and adopts the Basic Building Code of
the State of Connecticut, issued by the State Public Works Department,7 as
the Building Code of the Town of Clinton.
7. Editor's Note: Pursuant to C.G.S. § 29-252, the State Building Code is now adopted and
administered by the State Building Inspector and the Codes and Standards Committee
with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Works.
§ 234-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-3
1:79

ARTICLE III
Building on Unaccepted Streets
[Adopted 1-11-1972; amended in its entirety 12-26-2001]
§ 234-4. Minimum standards for issuance of building permit.
A. Except for the exemptions provided in C.G.S. § 8-27, no building permit
shall be issued for the construction of, and no person, firm or corporation
shall construct in the Town of Clinton, any building or structure on any
subdivision not abutting an accepted highway or street until a roadway
leading from a public highway to the furthermost side line of such lot
shall have received a binder course as the same is defined in the Clinton
Road Construction Regulations in effect at the time.
B. A subdivision with a cash bond posted for improvements is exempt from
this requirement. However, in no case shall a certificate of occupancy be
issued until said binder course is in place.
§ 234-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-4
1:81

ARTICLE IV
Building Permit for Property with Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 3-6-2002]
§ 234-5. Building permit to be withheld; exception.
Pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-148(C)(2)(B), the Building Official,
prior to approving an application for a building permit and issuing said
permit, shall confirm with the Tax Collector of the Town that there are no
delinquent taxes due and owing for the property which is the subject of
the application. The Building Official shall not approve an application for
a building permit nor issue said permit for any property for which real
estate taxes are delinquent, unless and until said taxes and all outstanding
interest and fees are paid in full; provided, however, that the Building
Official may approve an application for a building permit and issue said
permit in the event that the Building Official, in his discretion, determines
that said permit is required to repair a condition that impairs the health and
safety of the occupants of said building.
§ 234-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-5
1:83
Chapter 241
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 234.
§ 241-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and convenience
through a building numbering system ensuring that addresses can be
identified with the ease and speed essential to the quick response of
emergency services, such as firefighting, police and emergency medical
care.
§ 241-2. Duty of owners.
It shall be the duty of the owners of all residential, commercial, and other
buildings within the Town of Clinton to identify such buildings or parts
thereof with numbers as herein provided. It shall be unlawful for any person
to place, maintain, or allow to remain on a building or any unit thereof any
number other than the one required by this chapter.
§ 241-3. Assignment of numbers.
A. The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Clinton may assign to each
building, or part of a building, an identification number by which such
building or part thereof shall be designated. The Board of Selectmen
shall be authorized to change the identification number of any building
or part thereof, at any time and from time to time, whenever such change
is deemed necessary or appropriate.
B. All new buildings on any street or highway within the Town of Clinton
shall have affixed thereto identification numbers assigned hereunder
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
§ 241-4. Notice of assignment.
Whenever the Board of Selectmen, acting in accordance with this chapter,
shall have assigned an identification number or numbers to a building, it
shall send to the owner thereof written notice thereof and shall direct such
owner to affix to such building the number or numbers assigned, to be
completed within 30 days after the sending of such notice.
§ 241-5. Existing buildings.
It shall be the duty of the owner of every building existing on the effective
date of this chapter, without prior notice, to affix the identification number
previously assigned to such building or, in the absence of such assignment,
the identification number which customarily has been used for such
§ 234-5 CLINTON CODE § 241-5
1:84
building. Such numbers shall be affixed within 30 days of the effective date
of this chapter.
§ 241-6. Specifications and location of numbers.
A. The identification number of a building shall be located on the exterior
front of the building or on a post located between the building and the
public or private street on which it fronts. The numerals shall be at least
three inches in height, shall be of a color contrasting with the color of
the background material to which they are affixed and shall be made of
substantial and permanent material. The identification number shall be
placed or affixed so as not to be easily effaced or removed and shall be
positioned not less than four feet nor more than 10 feet from the surface
of the ground directly below it. The identification number shall be so
placed as to assure clear visibility from the public or private street on
which the building fronts.
B. If a building is set back more than 100 feet from the center line of the
street on which it fronts, or if the building's identification number cannot
be made clearly visible from such street because of an intervening
obstruction, the identification number shall also be affixed to a post
located at the driveway entrance which provides the closest vehicular
access to the building or part of the building to which the identification
number has been assigned.
C. For buildings containing two or more residential, business or
commercial units which have entrances from interior passageways,
identification numbers shall be affixed on or adjacent to every exterior
door of the building as well as on or next to the entrance door of each
individual unit.
D. For building complexes consisting of two or more residential, business,
or commercial building units served by separate driveways, signs shall
be posted at the entrance to each such driveway, or if two or more of
such driveways intersect, at each intersection, listing the identification
number of the unit served by each driveway; in addition, identification
numbers shall be affixed on or next to every entrance door of each
building unit.
§ 241-7. Penalties for offenses.
Every owner of a building who violates § 241-4 or 241-5 hereof, or who
refuses or neglects to comply with any other provision of this chapter, shall
be punishable by a fine of not less than $10 and not more than $100.
Chapter 247
BURNING, OUTDOOR
§ 247-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
§ 241-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 247-1
1:85
APPROVED INCINERATOR — A masonry or metallic receptacle, having no
opening larger than 1/4 square inch when in use for burning combustible
material, located not nearer than 15 feet to any combustible structure or
material and not used for industrial or commercial purposes.
BARBECUE — Masonry or metallic structures or equipment used
exclusively for cooking food.
FIRE MARSHAL — The Clinton Fire Marshal or his representatives
designated for any purposes of this chapter.
OUTDOOR FIRE — Any fire in the open air, outside a closed structure,
approved incinerator, or barbecue, and shall include the burning over of
land and the burning of vegetation, refuse, waste, structures, vehicles and
all other combustible material.
PERMIT — Written permission for an outdoor fire issued by the Fire
Marshal in such form and for such period of time and under such conditions
as he shall stipulate.
§ 247-2. Kindling of outdoor fires.
No person, firm or corporation shall kindle an outdoor fire in the Town of
Clinton except under all of the following conditions:
A. In accordance with a valid permit issued as herein defined.
B. Such fire shall be constantly attended by a competent person with
adequate fire-extinguishing equipment, and adequate provision shall be
made to ensure that such fire shall not approach nearer than 50 feet to
any combustible structure or material not authorized to be burned under
the permit.
C. No such fire shall be kindled:
(1) After sunset and before sunrise except on special authorization of the
Fire Marshal; and
(2) Unless the permittee has ascertained from the Clinton
Communications Center that the Fire Marshal or Director of Health
or Fire Chief has not prohibited such fires on the day of such fire.
[Amended 8-5-2009]
§ 247-3. Prohibition of outdoor fires. [Amended 8-5-2009]
The Fire Marshal, Director of Health or Fire Chief may prohibit any or all
outdoor fires, whether under issued permits or in approved incinerators,
whenever, in his judgment, weather or atmospheric or other conditions may
make such fires hazardous to person or property or to public health or
safety.
§ 247-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person convicted of violating, or abetting the violation of, any provision
of this chapter shall be fined not more than $25.
Chapter 259
§ 247-1 CLINTON CODE § 247-4
1:86
CEMETERY
§ 259-1. Indian River Cemetery.
The Clinton Cemetery Association, Inc., of Clinton, Connecticut, shall be
given charge of the Town's interest in the Indian River Cemetery.
Chapter 265
CITATIONS FOR VIOLATIONS OF ZONING REGULATIONS
§ 265-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish penalties for violations of Clinton
Zoning Regulations, to enable the Zoning Enforcement Officer (the ZEO) to
issue citations for the types of zoning violations hereinafter specified, and
to establish a citation hearing procedure in accordance with C.G.S. §§ 8-12a
and 7-152c.
§ 265-2. Types of violations for which citations may be issued.
A. Home occupations.
B. Signs.
C. Sediment and erosion controls.
D. Motor vehicle sales and repairs.
E. Junkyards.
F. Storage of materials, equipment, etc., without permits.
G. Prohibited uses per Section 24 of the Clinton Zoning Regulations.
§ 265-3. Violator defined.
The owner or agent of any building or premises where a violation of any
provision of the regulations under § 265-2 above has been committed or
exists, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where
such violation has been committed or exists, or the owner, agent, lessee
or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such violation
has been committed or exists, or the agent, architect, builder, contractor or
any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation
and/or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation
exists, shall be issued a citation for such violation in accordance with the
procedures herein.
§ 265-4. Issuance of prior written warning by notice of violation.
A. In those instances where the ZEO deems that there is time to do so
and where the ZEO determines that a continuing violation is not causing
immediate or significant harm, a written warning in the form of a notice
of violation shall be sent prior to issuing the citation sent by regular mail
and certified return receipt. In the case where a notice of violation is
sent to a party other than the owner of the property, then a copy of the
§ 247-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-4
1:87
notice may be sent to the owner of the property as shown on the Town's
Assessor's field card.
B. Such notice of violation shall provide:
(1) Details of the specific violation.
(2) Instructions on how to remedy the violation.
(3) A ten-day period of abatement within which no fine shall accrue.
(4) That the alleged violator may contest his liability at a hearing before
a hearing officer by delivering, in person or by mail, written notice
of such intent within 10 days of the date of notice of violation to said
violator.
C. If the violation continues after the period of abatement specified within
the notice of violation, a citation may be issued in accordance with the
provisions herein.
D. A violation of the same character that is repeated within 24 months
after the notice of violation is deemed a continuing violation and a new
citation may be issued without a new notice of violation.
§ 265-5. Amount of fine.
A. No fine imposed under the authority of this section may exceed $150 for
each day a violation continues.
(1) For a violation of any lettered subsection of § 265-2, the fine shall be
$50.
(2) For any subsequent violation of the same subsection, the fine shall
be $100.
(3) For any further violations of the same subsection, the fine shall be
$150.
B. In addition to the imposition of a fine, the ZEO may take such other
enforcement action as the circumstances warrant.
C. The alleged violator shall be responsible for reporting, in writing,
subsequent compliance to the ZEO. Until such time, the fine(s) shall
continue to be imposed on a daily basis.
§ 265-6. Citation.
A. For any violation that is not timely abated or is a continuing violation, a
citation may be issued by the ZEO, which shall contain the following:
(1) The detail of the unabated or continuing violation.
(2) The amount of the fine due.
(a) The fine shall accrue on a daily basis from two days following the
date of the citation, and the citation shall so state.
(3) That the alleged violator may contest his liability at a hearing before
a hearing officer by delivering, in person or by mail, written notice of
such intent within 10 days of the date of citation to said violator.
(4) That if the alleged violator does not demand such a hearing, an
assessment and judgment shall be entered against him.
(5) That such judgment may issue without further notice.
B. The citation shall be sent by both certified mail and regular USPS mail.
§ 265-7. Uncontested violations.
§ 265-4 CLINTON CODE § 265-7
1:88
A. If the alleged violator or other person to whom a citation has been
sent pursuant to § 265-6 above wishes to admit liability for any alleged
violation, he may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of
the fine in person or by mail to the Zoning Enforcement Officer at the
Land Use Office.
B. Any alleged violator or other person who does not deliver or mail a
written demand for a hearing to the Clinton Land Use Office within
10 days of the date of the citation provided in § 265-6 above shall be
deemed to have admitted liability, and the Zoning Enforcement Officer
shall certify such person's failure to respond to the hearing officer.
C. The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fine provided
for by law and shall follow the procedures set forth in § 265-9 below.
§ 265-8. Hearing procedure.
A. The First Selectman of the Town of Clinton shall appoint one or more
citation hearing officers, who shall be other than police officers or
employees or persons who issue citations, to conduct the hearings
authorized by this section.
B. No ZEO, building inspector or employee of the municipal body
exercising zoning authority may be appointed to be a hearing officer.
C. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the
date, time and place for the hearing.
D. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days
from the date of the mailing of such notice, provided that the hearing
officer shall grant, upon good cause shown, any reasonable request by
an interested party for postponement or continuance.
E. An original or certified copy of the initial notice of violation issued by a
police officer or other issuing officer shall be filed and retained by the
Town, shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of C.G.S.
§ 52-180 and evidence of the facts contained therein.
F. The presence of the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be required at the
hearing if such person so requests.
G. The alleged violator or other person wishing to contest liability shall
appear at the hearing and may present evidence in his behalf. The
hearing officer may accept from such alleged violator copies of
documents by mail and may determine thereby that the appearance of
such person is unnecessary. If the alleged violator fails to appear, the
hearing officer may enter an assessment of the fine by default against
him upon a finding of proper notice and liability under this chapter.
H. The Zoning Enforcement Officer, or his designated representative other
than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
I. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and
with such methods of proof as he deems fair and appropriate. The rules
regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but
all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
J. The hearing officer shall announce his decision at the end of the hearing.
If he determines that the alleged violator or other person is not liable,
he shall dismiss the matter and enter his determination in writing
§ 265-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-8
1:89
accordingly. If he determines that the person is liable for the violation,
he shall forthwith enter and assess the fine against such person as
provided by this chapter.
§ 265-9. Further enforcement.
A. If such fine assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing
officer shall:
(1) Send by first-class mail a notice of the fine assessment to the person
found liable; and
(2) Shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months after such
mailing, a certified copy of the notice of fine assessment with the
Clerk of the Superior Court for the Judicial District of Middlesex,
together with an entry fee of $8.
B. The certified copy of the notice of fine assessment shall constitute a
record of the fine assessment.
C. Within such twelve-month period, fine assessments against the same
person may be accrued and filed as one record of fine assessment.
D. The Clerk of the Court shall enter judgment in the amount of such record
of fine assessment and court costs of $8 against such person in favor of
the Town.
E. Notwithstanding any other provision of the General Statutes, the
hearing officer's fine assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall
have the effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of execution on such
judgment may issue without further notice to such person.
§ 265-10. Appeal.
A. The person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to
this chapter is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal.
B. An appeal shall be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of
such fine assessment by filing a petition to reopen the fine assessment,
together with an entry fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a
small claims case pursuant to C.G.S. § 52-259, in the Superior Court for
the Judicial District of Middlesex, which shall entitle such person to a
hearing in accordance with the rules of the judges of the Superior Court.
§ 265-11. Disposition of money received.
All monies received pursuant to the procedure set forth herein shall be
payable to the treasurer of the Town of Clinton.
Chapter 280
DUMPSTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 447.
§ 265-8 CLINTON CODE § 280-1
1:90
§ 280-1. Placement of dumpsters; time limit.
A. For residential property of three living units or fewer, a dumpster placed
on private property for the purpose of disposal of any solid or liquid
waste material and at least 10 cubic yards in size may be kept on
the property no longer than 60 days from the date of the dumpster's
delivery. If a dumpster is placed on private property in conjunction with a
construction project that has an approved building permit, the dumpster
must be removed within 15 days of the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy or final inspection. The dumpster must be located on private
property and not on the public highway or on the Town's property.
B. For residential property of more than three living units and all
commercial/industrial property, a dumpster placed on private property
for the purpose of disposal of any solid or liquid waste material and
at least 10 cubic yards in size shall be shielded on three sides by a
fence, or similar barrier, so that the dumpster is not visible from any
Town or private roadway by passing vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Only
one entrance or access to the dumpster will be permitted, with the
other three sides sufficiently shielded from view. The dumpster must be
located on private property and not on the public highway or on the
Town's property.
§ 280-2. Notice of violation.
Whenever the First Selectman or his/her designee determines that there
has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, except as to § 280-3B,
such officer shall give notice of such violation to the person responsible
therefore, as hereinafter provided.
A. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing, sent by certified mail, return receipt requested;
(2) Set forth the violations of this chapter;
(3) Specify a final date for the correction of any violation; however, an
extension of time may be granted by the enforcement officer;
(4) Be served upon the owner or the owner's agent and the occupant,
provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof
is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by
this notice or if such person is served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required under the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
permanent compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and
(6) State that the penalties and enforcement provisions of this chapter
will become effective on the final date set for the correction of any
violation.
B. Any person notified in accordance with this section who fails to correct
any violation of this chapter by the date specified in said notice shall be
in violation of this chapter and subject to its penalties and enforcement
provisions.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the First Selectman or his designee may
elect to first provide informal verbal notice to the owner or owner's
§ 280-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-2
1:91
agent and the occupant of the property in an attempt to resolve the
matter prior to formal written notice being sent.
§ 280-3. Appeals.
A. Any person notified in accordance with § 280-2 above may appeal said
notice of violation(s) to the Board of Selectmen within 15 days of the date
of said notice. If an appeal is taken as aforesaid, the first day of violation
shall be seven days after the decision of the Board of Selectmen or on
such later date as established by the Board of Selectmen.
B. The Town hereby specifically adopts the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-152c
for the establishment of an appeal and citation hearing process for
considering all appeals under this chapter.
§ 280-4. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
A. Penalties.
(1) Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate
municipal offense.
(2) Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(3) Each separate offense under this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine of $50 payable to the Town of Clinton.
B. Enforcement.
(1) The First Selectman, his/her designee, or any police officer in the
Town of Clinton is authorized to issue a citation for a violation of this
chapter.
(2) In addition thereto, the First Selectman or his/her designee is
authorized to initiate legal proceedings in the Superior Court for the
immediate correction of the violation(s), collection of any penalties,
and the recovery of all costs, including costs of remedial action(s)
authorized by the Court and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Town to enforce this chapter.
(3) All fines, Court costs, costs of remedial action, and attorney fees, as
ordered by the Court, shall constitute a lien on the subject premises,
provided that the owner of said premises has been notified of the
violation(s) as herein provided and was made a party to the
enforcement proceedings.
Chapter 296
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Notice of land use applications — See Ch. 350.
§ 280-2 CLINTON CODE § 280-4
1:92
ARTICLE I
Waiver of Building Permit Fees
[Adopted 1-9-2002]
§ 296-1. Waiver for elderly or disabled persons.
Building permit fees for owner-occupied single-family homes, where one
of the record owners is aged 65 or over or disabled, shall be waived
for installation, alteration, or repair to said home for the following
improvements:
A. Handicapped access, i.e., ramps, doors, special addition to accommodate
handicapped needs, etc.
B. Roofing, siding and/or storm windows and doors.
C. Plumbing, electrical and/or heating and air conditioning.
§ 296-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-1
1:93

ARTICLE II
Land Use Applications
[Adopted 6-21-20148]
§ 296-2. Authorization and purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 8-1c, the Town of Clinton does hereby
establish a schedule of reasonable fees for the purpose of funding the
approximate actual municipal administrative cost of reviewing, evaluating
and processing of applications by the Town of Clinton land use regulatory
commissions.
§ 296-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article the following definitions apply:
LAND USE APPLICATION — Any application to a land use regulatory
commission within its statutory jurisdiction, which is herein referred to as
"application."
LAND USE REGULATORY COMMISSION — The Clinton Planning and
Zoning Commission, The Clinton Zoning Board of Appeals and the Clinton
Inland Wetlands and Conservation Commission, which are herein referred
to individually as "commission."
REVIEW, EVALUATION AND PROCESSING — All functions performed in
connection with or associated with a land use application by a land use
regulatory commission, including but not limited to fees and expenses
relating to the administrative handling of the application and consultant
expenses in direct, connection with the technical review of the application,
including both preapproved and post-approval costs associated with the
application, such as engineering review of construction plans and
inspections of improvements during construction to assure compliance.
§ 296-4. Fee schedule.
The base fees as set forth in this article are due and payable to the Town of
Clinton upon submission of a land use application, unless another date for
the payment is specified herein.
A. Planning and Zoning Commission.
(1) Zoning.
(a) Zoning Permit: $15.
(b) Zoning permit (issued after construction):
[1] First occurrence per offense (by person or entity): $250.
[2] Second occurrence per offense (by person or entity): $500.
[3] Third occurrence per offense (by person or entity): $750.
[4] Fourth occurrence per offense (by person or entity): $1,000.
(c) Home occupation permit: $20.
(d) Outdoor entertainment permit: $15.
8. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, Land Use Applications,
adopted 9-8-2004.
§ 296-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-4
1:95
(e) Sign permit: $20.
(f) Vendor's permit: $15.
(g) Certificate of zoning compliance: $50.
(h) Flood hazard certificate: $75.
(i) Coastal area management (CAM) application:
[1] Residential: $30.
[2] Commercial: $75.
(j) Amendment request for regulation or zone change: $250, plus
actual cost of legal notices in excess of $50.
(k) Gravel excavation or dumping: $150.
[1] Plus, month permit (per month if less than one year): $25; or
[2] Plus, year permit (per year): $150; or
[3] Plus, renewals or extensions (per year): $150.
(l) Special exception, Planning and Zoning Commission: $100.
[1] New construction:
[a] Plus, per each square foot of building: $0.15.
[b] Plus, per parking space: $5.
[2] Change of use:
[a] Plus, per each square foot of building for which the
change applies: $0.15.
[b] Plus, per parking space for the new use: $5.
(m) Site plan application: $75.
[1] New construction:
[a] Plus, per each square foot of building: $0.10.
[b] Plus, per parking space: $5.
[2] Change of use:
[a] Plus, per each square foot of building for which the
change applies: $0.10.
[b] Plus, per parking space for the new use: $5.
(n) Re-noticing due to applicant error, withdrawal, or postponement
(at applicant's request) to be paid by applicant at cost.
(o) Additional fees per application:
[1] Microfilming: $10.
[2] Department of Energy and Environmental Protection: as
determined by DEEP.
(2) Subdivision.
(a) Subdivision application: $100.
[1] Plus, per lot: $150.
[2] Plus, per linear foot of road: $1.
(b) Resubdivision application: $150.
[1] Plus, per lot: $150.
[2] Plus, per liner foot of road: $1.
(c) Additional fees per application.
[1] Microfilming: $10.
[2] Department of Energy and Environmental Protection: as
determined by DEEP.
B. Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1) Zoning Board of Appeals application for variance: $200.
(2) Coastal area management (CAM) application:
§ 296-4 CLINTON CODE § 296-4
1:96
(a) Residential: $30.
(b) Commercial: $75.
(3) Certificate of approval of location, dealer's and repair licenses: $150.
(4) Appeal of decision of Zoning Enforcement Officer: $100.
(5) Re-noticing due to applicant error, withdrawal, or postponement (at
applicant's request) to be paid by applicant at cost.
(6) Additional fees per application:
(a) Microfilming: $10.
(b) Department of Energy and Environmental Protection: as
determined by DEEP.
C. Aquifer Protection Agency.
(1) Residential: $100.
(2) Commercial: $200.
(3) Single-family home: $15.
D. Inland Wetlands and Conservation Commission.
(1) Regulated activity (within zero to 50 feet of or in wetlands or
watercourses):
(a) Residential uses: $125 plus $40 per lot.
(b) Commercial and industrial uses: $300.
(c) Significant activity fee (Section 2.20.1): $250.
(2) As-of-right (logging, farm ponds, agricultural): $35.
(3) Activity within 100 feet of wetlands (Commission permit).
(a) New residential structure: $75.
(b) New commercial or industrial lot: $100.
(c) Addition to existing structure on residential lot: $50.
(d) Addition to existing structure on commercial or industrial lot:
$75.
(4) Activity within 100 feet of wetlands (wetland enforcement officer
permit). Issued for the following activities within 51 feet to 100 feet
of the wetlands: decks, porches, residential additions, sheds, pools,
fences, minor driveway work, stone walls and test holes.
(a) Residential lot: $35.
(b) Commercial or industrial lot: $50.
(c) Deep test pits, per lot: $20.
(5) Boundary change/verification of Inland Wetlands Official Map.
(a) New subdivisions (residential or industrial): $250.
(b) New commercial or industrial development: $250.
(c) Existing residential lot: $25.
(d) Existing commercial/industrial lot: $100.
(6) Modification of previous approval:
(a) Residential lot: $25.
(b) Commercial or industrial lot: $50.
(7) Additional fees per application.
(a) Microfilming: $10.
(b) Department of Energy and Environmental Protection: as
determined by DEEP.
(8) Re-noticing due to applicant error, withdrawal, or postponement (at
applicant's request) to be paid by applicant.
§ 296-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-5
1:97
§ 296-5. Consultant expenses.
A. Prior to or contemporaneous with the filing of an application, the
applicant shall advise the commission in writing as to the professional
evidence by way of testimony or certification that it intends to submit
as part of or in support of said application. Such written statement
shall include the specific areas of expertise (e.g., traffic and hydrology)
in which the commission may require the technical assistance of
consultants.
B. A commission may charge fees in addition to the base fees set forth
above in order to obtain additional technical assistance in reviewing and
evaluating an application where the commission determines, based upon
information provided or required to be provided by the applicant, that
the nature, size or intensity of the land use application shall require
services of consultants not provided for within the fees set forth in
§ 296-4.
C. The commission shall determine the amount of the fee in addition to the
base fee required for the review, evaluation and processing of the subject
application at the same rate that they are charged.
D. An applicant may provide the written statement required under
Subsection A and request a determination by the commission as to
whether additional technical assistance will be required and the amount
of the additional fee prior to submission of the application. Payment of
the additional fee shall be made upon submission of the application or
within 30 days of the determination of the required additional fee by the
commission, whichever shall later occur.
E. Failure to provide the statement required under Subsection A or to
pay the additional fee required hereunder may render the application
incomplete under the commission regulations.
§ 296-6. Duplication of review.
In making a determination as to whether additional technical assistance will
be required, each commission shall give due consideration to and shall use
to the extent feasible the technical assistance that may have been engaged
by another commission in reviewing the same application so as to eliminate
duplication of consultant review fees.
§ 296-7. Determination that fees are not required.
A commission may by resolution determine that base fees, or portions
thereof, are not required in particular cases of resubmission of a
disapproved application, or an application to revise an approved application
or in cases where the application changes are minor. Boards, commissions
and departments of the Town of Clinton are exempt from fee requirements.
§ 296-5 CLINTON CODE § 296-7
1:98
Chapter 304
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 304-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile restaurant,
private or public institution, catering kitchen, commissary or similar place,
public or private, where food or drink is prepared for sale or service on the
premises or elsewhere and any operation where food or beverage is served
or provided to the public with or without charge.
§ 304-2. License required; display of license.
A. No individual, firm, partnership or corporation shall operate a food
service establishment, as defined in § 304-1 of this chapter, within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Clinton Health Department without a valid
license issued by the Director of Health of the Town of Clinton. Only
those individuals, firms, partnerships or corporations that comply with
the requirements of this chapter and the Public Health Code of the State
of Connecticut shall be entitled to receive such a license.
B. Licenses duly issued by the Director of Health of the Town of Clinton
shall not be transferable and are only valid as to the original licensee.
C. A license duly issued by the Director of Health of the Town of Clinton
shall be prominently and conspicuously displayed in or at every food
service establishment.
§ 304-3. Application for license; inspection.
A. Any individual or individuals desiring to operate a food service
establishment shall make written application for a license to, and on
forms provided by, the Director of Health of the Town of Clinton. Such
application shall include the applicant's or applicants' names and
addresses and whether the applicant or applicants will operate as a
partnership or corporation, and if such applicant or applicants will
operate as a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners;
the location of the food service establishment; a description of the
proposed operation; and the signature of the applicant or applicants.
If the application is for a license to operate a temporary food service
establishment, it shall also include the inclusive dates of proposed
operation.
B. Upon receipt of an application for a license to operate a food service
establishment, the Director of Health of the Town of Clinton, or his
duly authorized agent, shall make an inspection of the proposed
establishment to determine compliance with the provisions set forth in
this chapter and the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut.
When inspection reveals that all such requirements have been met, a
license shall be issued to the applicant or applicants by the Director of
Health.
§ 296-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-4
1:99
§ 304-4. License fees.
The fees for licenses issued under § 304-3 of this chapter shall be those
established from time to time in accordance with the Charter of the Town of
Clinton. Such fees may be applicable for initial licensing or license renewal,
whether the license in question is considered permanent or temporary.
§ 304-5. Suspension or revocation of license.
A. Whenever the Director of Health of the Town of Clinton determines that
the holder of a license issued under § 307-3 of this chapter has failed to
comply with the provisions of this chapter and/or the Public Health Code
of the State of Connecticut, said Director shall give notice by certified
mail to the licensee of the facts or conduct not in compliance and of
the institution of proceedings which could result in the suspension of
said license. Such notice shall also state that the licensee shall have an
opportunity to be heard at a hearing conducted by the Director of Health
to determine whether such suspension should occur and to be scheduled
at a place and time designated by the same, except that no hearing shall
be so scheduled less than 14 days from the receipt by the licensee of
such notice.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, no
hearing shall take place and no suspension shall occur if the licensee
receiving notice under Subsection A substantially corrects the conditions
and/or conduct cited in said notice, as determined by the Director of
Health, before the scheduled time said hearing is to take place. Such
determination shall be made by the Director of Health upon a request in
writing for inspection made by the licensee not less than three working
days before said hearing is so scheduled to take place.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section or any
other provision of this chapter or of the Public Health Code of the
State of Connecticut, if the Director of Health of the Town of Clinton
finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of any food service
establishment which, in said Director's judgment, constitute a
substantial hazard to the public health, said Director may, without
notice, issue a written order to the licensee indicating that all food
service operations shall be discontinued pending a hearing. Such
hearing shall be promptly scheduled at a time and place designated
by the Director of Health, such time and place to be set forth in said
order. Such order shall be served upon the licensee by certified mail and
shall inform the licensee of the conditions complained of as well as of
the opportunity of said licensee to be heard at the scheduled hearing.
Until determined otherwise, whether at such hearing or as a result of
a decision of the Director of Health to reinstate the suspended license
under Subsection D of this section, said licensee shall comply with the
order duly issued.
D. Any licensee whose license has been suspended may, at any time, make
written application for a reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of
the license. Within 10 working days following receipt of such application,
which application should include a statement signed by the applicant or
applicants that, in their judgment, the conditions causing suspension of
§ 304-4 CLINTON CODE § 304-5
1:100
the license have been corrected, the Director of Health, or his authorized
agent, shall make a reinspection. If the applicant or applicants are found
to be in substantial compliance with the requirements of this chapter
and/or the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut, the suspended
license shall be reinstated.
E. Any license issued under § 304-3 herein may be permanently revoked
for serious and/or repeated violations of any of the provisions of this
chapter and/or the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut or
for interference with the Director of Health of the Town of Clinton, or
his authorized agent, in the performance of his duties. Prior to any such
revocation, the Director of Health shall notify the licensee by certified
mail of the institution of proceedings which could result in the revocation
of said license and of the reasons for which said license is subject to
revocation. Such notice shall also state that the licensee shall have the
opportunity to be heard at a hearing promptly scheduled and conducted
by the Director of Health to determine whether such revocation should
occur and to be scheduled at a place and time designated by the same;
provided, however, that such hearing shall be so scheduled within 10
working days of receipt of such notice by said licensee.
§ 304-6. Findings after hearing.
Based upon the record of any hearing held under the provisions of this
chapter, the Director of Health of the Town of Clinton shall make a finding
as to the issues under consideration at such hearing and shall furnish to the
licensee, applicant or applicants a written report of the hearing decision.
§ 304-7. Appeals. [Amended 8-5-2009]
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 19a-229, any person aggrieved by an order issued by
the Director of Health of the Town of Clinton may, within three business
days after receipt of such order, appeal to the Commissioner of Public
Health of the State of Connecticut, who shall thereupon immediately notify
the authority from whose order the appeal was taken and examine into the
merits of such case and may vacate, modify or affirm such order.
§ 304-8. Construction or remodeling of food service establishment.
No individual, partnership or corporation shall begin to construct or
remodel any food service establishment until the plans for such construction
or remodeling are first reviewed and approved by the Director of Health
of the Town of Clinton. This section shall not be construed to override or
supplant the requirements or provisions of any other applicable laws and/
or regulations regarding the construction or remodeling of any food service
establishment but rather shall be construed to be in addition to any such
laws and/or regulations thereto.
§ 304-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-9
1:101
§ 304-9. Control of communicable diseases.
No person while affected with any disease in a communicable form, or while
a carrier of such disease, or while afflicted with boils, infected wounds,
sores or an acute respiratory infection, shall work in any food service
establishment in any capacity in which there is a likelihood of such person
contaminating food, drink or food contact surfaces with pathogenic
organisms, or transmitting disease to other individuals, and no person
known or suspected of being infected with any such disease or condition
shall be employed in such an area or capacity. If the management of the
establishment has reason to suspect that any employee has contracted any
disease in a communicable form or has become a carrier of such disease,
it shall notify the local Director of Health immediately. When the local
Director of Health has reasonable cause to suspect the possibility of disease
transmission from any food service establishment employee, the Director
shall secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee, or make such
other investigation as may be indicated, and take appropriate action. The
Director of Health may require any or all of the following measures:
A. The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food service
establishments.
B. The immediate closure of the food service establishment pursuant to
§ 304-5C of this chapter until, in the opinion of the Director of Health, no
further danger of disease outbreak exists.
C. Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the establishment
where there would be no danger of transmitting disease.
D. Adequate medical and laboratory examinations of the employee or other
employees and of his and their body discharges.
§ 304-10. Sources of food and drink.
All food and drink in food service establishments shall be from sources
approved or considered satisfactory by the Director of Health and shall
be clean, wholesome, free from spoilage, free from adulteration and
misbranding and safe for human consumption. Any food or drink considered
unsafe for human consumption shall be either summarily condemned or
embargoed, sampled, destroyed, or disposed of in a manner satisfactory to
the Director of Health.
§ 304-11. Food from establishments outside Town jurisdiction.
[Amended 8-5-2009]
Food from food service establishments outside the jurisdiction of the Clinton
Health Department may be sold within the jurisdiction of the Health
Department if such food service establishments conform to the provisions
of this chapter or to substantially equivalent provisions. To determine the
extent of compliance, reports from responsible authorities in other
jurisdictions where such food service establishments are located should be
submitted to the Director of Health of the Town of Clinton.
§ 304-9 CLINTON CODE § 304-12
1:102
§ 304-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter and/or the
Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut shall be fined not more than
$100 or imprisoned not more than three months, or both.
§ 304-13. Service of notice.
Whenever it shall have been provided in this chapter that there shall be
notice by certified mail or notice in writing, such notice shall be deemed to
have been properly served when such notice has been delivered personally
to the person or persons subject to the notice or his or their agent by any
proper officer or official authorized to deliver such notice within this state.
Such notice may also be delivered personally by the Director of Health
or a duly authorized agent thereof; provided, however, that the person or
persons subject to such notice, or his or their agent, acknowledge receipt
of said notice in writing. A copy of all notices sent or delivered under this
chapter shall be filed in the records of the enforcement authority.
Chapter 320
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 234.
§ 304-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-13
1:103

ARTICLE I
Liberty Green Historic District
[Adopted 10-17-1979]
§ 320-1. Purpose and description.
A. Purpose. To promote the educational, cultural, economic and general
welfare and to preserve the historic and architectural character of
certain areas of the Town through the preservation and protection of
buildings and places of historic interest, by the maintenance of such as
landmarks in the history of architecture and of the Town, the state, and
the nation, and through the development of appropriate settings for such
buildings, there is hereby established an historic district in the Town,
to be known as "Liberty Green Historic District." The boundaries of the
historic district are shown on a map incorporated herein by reference
and titled "Liberty Green Historic District."
B. Description. The following geographical description of the Liberty Green
Historic District is based on current land records and maps of the
Assessor, Town of Clinton:
(1) Southern boundary. Beginning at a point being the southwest corner
of property now or formerly of the Town of Clinton (Lot No. 23),
the boundary of the Liberty Green Historic District extends on a
direct line southeasterly across the west branch of Liberty Street to
a point being the southwestern corner of property now of the Town
of Clinton (Lot No. 26) and known as the "Green" or "Common,"
thence southeast along the southern boundary of said Green to a
point being the southeast corner of said Green, thence on a direct
line southeasterly across the east or main Liberty Street right-ofway
to a point being the southwest corner of the property now or
formerly of Lillian and George Dufresne (Lot No. 6), thence along the
southern boundary of said Dufresne to a point being the southeast
corner of said Dufresne.
(2) Eastern boundary. Beginning at a point being the southeast corner
of aforesaid Dufresne property, the Liberty Green Historic District
boundary extends generally northeast along the rear or east
boundary of said Dufresne to a point being the northeast corner of
said Dufresne, thence northeast along the rear or east boundary of
property now or formerly of Ernest R. Knopf and Natalie V. Miller
(Lot No. 5) to a point being a junction of said Knopf-Miller boundary
with that of property now or formerly of Mary R. and Louis Pontillo
(Lot No. 4), thence running southeasterly along the southern
boundary of said Pontillo to a point being the southeast corner of
said Pontillo and thence turning northeasterly along the rear or
east boundary of said Pontillo to a point being the junction of said
Pontillo boundary with property now or formerly of Gilbert and
Ann Stannard (Lot No. 3), thence extending southeasterly along the
southern boundary of said Stannard to a point being the southeast
corner of said Stannard, thence turning northeasterly along the rear
or east boundary of said Stannard to a point being the northeast
corner of said Stannard, thence along the rear or east boundary of
§ 320-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-1
1:105
property now or formerly of Kathleen and Bruce Breiling (Lot No. 2)
to a point being the northeast corner of said Breiling.
(3) Northern boundary. Beginning at a point being the northeast corner
of aforesaid Breiling property, the Liberty Green Historic District
boundary extends northwesterly along the northern boundary of said
Breiling to a point being the northernmost corner of said Breiling,
thence continuing northwesterly along the northern boundary of
property now or formerly of Sophia Evonciu to a point being the
northwest corner of said Evonciu, thence following the same
compass bearing of the northern boundary of said Evonciu, the
Liberty Green Historic District boundary extends across Liberty
Street to a point being the intersection of said Liberty Green Historic
District boundary with the western boundary of the Liberty Street
right-of-way.
(4) Western boundary. Beginning with the point heretofore described on
the west side of the Liberty Street right-of-way, the Liberty Green
Historic District boundary continues generally southwest along the
west boundary of the Liberty Street right-of-way to a point being the
northeast corner of property now or formerly of the Town of Clinton
(Lot No. 23), thence northwesterly along the northern boundary of
said Town of Clinton property to a point being the northwest corner
of said Town of Clinton property, thence turning southwest along the
west boundary of said Town of Clinton property to a point being the
southwest corner of said Town of Clinton property.
§ 320-2. Historic District Commission.
A. Establishment of Commission. An Historic District Commission is hereby
established and shall consist of five members and three alternate
members who shall be electors of the Town holding no salaried Town
office. They shall be appointed within 15 days of the effective date of this
article by the Board of Selectmen in such a manner that one member is
appointed for a term expiring on the first day of January of each of the
following years: 1981, 1982, 1983, 1984 and 1985; alternate members
for terms expiring on the first day of January of 1981, 1982 and 1983.
All subsequent appointments shall be made by the Board of Selectmen
and shall be for a term of five years, except that an appointment to fill an
unexpired term shall be only for the duration of said unexpired term.
B. Organization.
(1) Within a period of 30 days after the appointment of members of
the first Commission, said members shall meet, organize and elect a
Chairman, Vice Chairman and a Clerk from its own members; within
a period not exceeding 30 days after the first of January of each
succeeding year, commencing in 1981, the members shall elect a
Chairman, Vice Chairman and Clerk from its members. Alternate
members shall not participate in election of officers of the
Commission. When a member of the Commission is unable to act
at a particular time because of absence, sickness, disqualification
by reason of personal interest, or other good reason, he shall notify
the Chairman who shall designate an alternate member to serve in
§ 320-1 CLINTON CODE § 320-2
1:106
the place of such member. All members and alternates shall serve
without compensation.
(2) The Commission shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings,
which shall be held at least quarterly, and provide a method for
calling special meetings. The presence of four members or alternate
members shall constitute a quorum, and no resolution or vote, except
a vote to adjourn or to fix the time and place of its next meeting, shall
be adopted by fewer than three affirmative votes.
§ 320-3. Powers and duties of Commission.
The Commission shall have such powers, shall perform such functions, and
shall be subject to such limitations as shall, from time to time, be prescribed
by the applicable General Statutes of Connecticut. The Commission shall
adopt rules of procedure and may adopt regulations not inconsistent with
said statutes; may, subject to appropriation, employ clerical and technical
assistance; and may accept money gifts and expend the same for purposes
consistent with this article. The Commission shall perform all the functions
of an historic district study committee relative to establishing new historic
districts, as provided in the General Statutes, and from time to time may
suggest proposed amendments to this article.
§ 320-4. Certificate of appropriateness required.
A. No building or structure shall be erected, altered, restored, moved or
demolished within the Liberty Green Historic District until after an
application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior
architectural features has been submitted to and approved by the
Commission. "Exterior architectural features" shall include such portion
of the exterior of a structure as is open to view from a public street,
way or place. The style, material, size and location of outdoor advertising
signs and bill posters within the Liberty Green Historic District shall also
be under the control of the Commission. The provisions of this section
shall not be construed to extend to color of paint used on the exterior of
any building or structure.
B. No area within the Historic District shall be used for industrial,
commercial, business, home industry or occupation parking, whether
or not such area is zoned for such use, until after an application for a
certificate of appropriateness as to parking has been submitted to and
approved by said Commission.
§ 320-5. Hearing and decision on application for certificate of
appropriateness.
A. The Commission shall hold a public hearing upon each application for
a certificate of appropriateness. Notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be given by publication in the form of a legal advertisement
appearing in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town
at least seven days before such hearing. The Commission shall pass
upon such application and shall give written notice of its decision to
the applicant. Evidence of approval, as referred to in § 320-4, shall
§ 320-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-5
1:107
be a certificate of appropriateness issued by the Commission. The
Commission shall set forth its reasons for approving or denying each
application for a certificate of appropriateness in a written notice of its
decision to the applicant and in the record of its proceedings. Failure
of the Commission to act within 65 days shall constitute approval, and
no evidence of approval shall be needed. The Commission shall keep a
record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all its
doings. [Amended 8-5-2009]
B. In its deliberations the Commission shall not consider interior
arrangement or use and shall take no action except for the purpose of
preventing the erection, reconstruction, alteration or razing of buildings
or parking in the Liberty Green Historic District obviously incongruous
with the historic aspects of the district.
§ 320-6. Determination of appropriateness.
If the Commission determines that the proposed erection, construction,
restoration, alteration, razing, moving or parking will be appropriate, it
shall issue a certificate of appropriateness. In the passing upon
appropriateness the Commission shall consider, in addition to any other
pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance,
architectural style, general design, arrangement, texture and material of
the architectural features involved and the relationship thereof to the
architectural style and pertinent features of other structures in the
immediate neighborhood. In passing upon appropriateness as to parking,
the Commission shall take into consideration the size of such parking
area, the visibility of cars parked therein, the closeness of such area to
adjacent buildings and other similar factors. A certificate of appropriateness
may be refused for any building or structure the erection, reconstruction,
restoration, alteration, moving or razing of which, in the opinion of the
Commission, would be detrimental to the interest of the Liberty Green
Historic District.
§ 320-7. Variances or modifications.
Where, by reason of topographical conditions, district borderline situations,
immediately adjoining existing developments or because of other unusual
circumstances, the strict application of any provisions of C.G.S. §§ 7-147a
to 7-147k, inclusive, amended, or of this article would result in exceptional
practical difficulty or undue hardship upon the owner of any specific
property, the Commission in passing upon applications shall have power to
vary or modify strict adherence to said sections or to interpret the meaning
of said sections so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship, provided that
such variance, modification or interpretation shall remain in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of said sections so that the general character
of the district shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting
variances, the Commission may impose such reasonable and additional
stipulations and conditions as will in its judgment better fulfill the purpose
of said sections.
§ 320-5 CLINTON CODE § 320-8
1:108
§ 320-8. Enforcement; penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-5-2009]
If any action or ruling taken by the Commission pursuant to the provisions
of C.G.S. §§ 7-147a to 7-147k, inclusive, as amended, or pursuant to the
provisions of this article has been violated, the Commission may, in addition
to other remedies, institute an action or proceeding to prevent such
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, razing,
maintenance or use for parking or to restrain, correct or abate such
violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land.
Regulations and orders of the Commission issued pursuant to said sections
of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended, or this article, shall
be enforced by the Building Official of the Town of Clinton. The Building
Official is hereby authorized to inspect and examine any building, structure,
place or premises and to require in writing the remedying of any condition
found to exist therein or thereon in violation of any provision of the
regulations or orders made under the authority of said sections of the
General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended, or this article. The owner
or agent of any building or premises where such a violation has been
committed or exists, or the owner, agent, lessee or tenant of an entire
building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or
exists, or the agent, architect, builder, contractor, or any other person who
commits, takes part or assists in such violation, shall be fined not less
than $10 nor more than $100 for each day that such violation continues.
However, if the offense is willful, the person convicted thereof shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $250 for each day that such violation
continues, and the Superior Court for the district wherein such violation
continues or exists shall have jurisdiction of all such offenses, subject to
appeal as in other cases. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 320-9. Appeals.
Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the
Commission or of any officer thereof may, within 15 days from the date
when such decision was rendered, take an appeal to the Superior Court,
which appeal shall be made returnable to such Court in the same manner
as that prescribed for civil actions brought to such Court. Notice of such
appeal shall be given by leaving a true and attested copy thereof in the
hands of or at the usual place of abode of the Chairman or Clerk of the
Commission within 12 days before the return day to which such appeal has
been taken. Procedure upon such appeal should be the same as that defined
in C.G.S. § 8-8, as amended.
§ 320-10. Exemptions. [Amended 8-5-2009]
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any feature in the Liberty Green Historic District
which does not involve a change of design thereof, nor to prevent the
construction, reconstruction, alteration, or demolition of any such feature
which the Building Official certifies is required by the public safety because
§ 320-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-10
1:109
of unsafe or dangerous condition, nor to prevent the construction,
reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any such feature under a permit
issued by the Building Official prior to the effective date of establishment of
the district.
§ 320-11. Recording.
This article and any amendment hereof shall be recorded in the Land
Records of the Town of Clinton and indexed by the Town Clerk in the
Grantor Index under the names of the owners of record of such real
property as is included within the district.
§ 320-10 CLINTON CODE § 320-11
1:110
Chapter 335
INLAND WETLANDS
§ 335-1. Citations for violations of regulations.
Any police officer or other person authorized by the Selectman is authorized
to issue citations for violations of the Inland Wetlands Regulations of the
Town of Clinton to the extent and in a manner as provided by this chapter.
Any such citation may be served either by hand or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the person named in the citation. If the person named
in the citation sent by certified mail refuses to accept such mail, a citation
may be sent by regular United States mail. The fines set forth in this chapter
shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any penalties or remedies set forth
in the Clinton Inland Wetlands Regulations and the Connecticut General
Statutes.
§ 335-2. Penalties for offenses.
The fine for each citation shall be not less than $250 nor more than $1,000.
The amount of the fine shall be based on the severity of the environmental
impact of the unauthorized activity.
§ 335-3. Time period for uncontested payment.
A person receiving a citation shall be allowed a period of 30 days from
his or her receipt of the citation to make an uncontested payment of the
fine specified in the citation to the Treasurer of the Town of Clinton. If the
citation has been sent by regular mail pursuant to § 335-1 of this chapter,
the day of receipt of the citation shall be three business days after the
day of mailing of the citation. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any
proceedings, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or
other person making the payment.
§ 335-4. Hearing procedures for citations.
Any person issued a citation shall be entitled to a hearing to contest
the citation. All procedures, including but not limited to notice, hearing,
disposition, appeal and enforcement, shall be as set forth in C.G.S. § 7-152c,
Hearing procedure for citations, and C.G.S. § 22a-42g, as the same may be
amended from time to time by the General Assembly.
§ 335-5. Selection of hearing officers.
The First Selectman shall appoint one or more hearing officers to conduct
hearings necessary to effect this chapter. Neither the Inland Wetlands
Enforcement Officer nor any employee of the Town of Clinton exercising
inland wetlands authority nor any member of the Town of Clinton Inland
Wetlands and Conservation Commission may be appointed as a hearing
officer pursuant to this chapter.
§ 320-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-5
1:111
Chapter 350
LAND USE APPLICATIONS, NOTICE OF
§ 350-1. Purpose; authority.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote communication between officers,
boards, commissions and agencies of the Town of Clinton by providing
notice of the pendency and general content of land use applications, and
this chapter is adopted pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A) and § 5-5 of the
Clinton Town Charter.
§ 350-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
administration of this chapter:
APPLICATION —
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, domestic or foreign limited liability
company, trust, estate, association, corporation or any other legal or
commercial entity, including a board, commission, agency or official of the
Town of Clinton.
RECIPIENT AGENCY — Clinton Planning and Zoning Commission (PZC),
Clinton Inlands Wetlands Commission (IWC), Clinton Zoning Board of
Appeals (ZBA), Clinton Park and Recreation Department, Clinton Design
Advisory Board, Clinton Harbor Management Commission (HMC), Clinton
Shellfish Commission, Clinton Public Works Commission, the Clinton Open
Space Advisory Board and such other officer, board, commission or agency
of the Town of Clinton that the Clinton Board of Selectmen by resolution
shall designate to receive the notices provided for in § 350-4 of this chapter.
REVIEWING AGENCY — Clinton Planning and Zoning Commission (PZC),
Clinton Inlands Wetlands Commission (IWC), Clinton Zoning Board of
Appeals (ZBA) and Clinton Harbor Management Commission (HMC).
Any application made pursuant to the Zoning Regulations, Subdivision
Regulations or Inland Wetland and Watercourses Regulations which
requires action by a reviewing agency, including but not limited to site
plan to PZC, special exception to PZC, special permit to PZC, special
exception to ZBA, scenic road designation to PZC, map boundary or
regulation change to PZC or IWC, coastal site plan reviews, subdivision/
resubdivision applications, regulated activities applications to IWC, and
determination of permitted nonregulated or exempt activities to IWC.
A.
Any application to the ZBA, including but not limited to variance
applications, appeals from the decision of the Zoning Enforcement
Officer and any application made pursuant to Connecticut General
Statutes or the provisions of any other local ordinance or regulation.
B.
C. Any application to the HMC relating to matters within its jurisdiction.
§ 335-5 CLINTON CODE § 350-3
1:112
§ 350-3. Scope of provisions.
This chapter shall apply to any application submitted by any person to any
reviewing agency of the Town of Clinton, as those terms are defined in
§ 350-2.
§ 350-4. Notice of application.
A reviewing agency receiving an application shall provide the notice
required under this section to all other recipient agencies regarding the
pending application within seven days of the receipt of the application. Said
notice shall be addressed to such agency's chairperson and, at a minimum,
shall identify the person making the application, the location of the subject
property and a general description of the project or activities proposed in
the application. The form of such notice is attached hereto as Exhibit A and
shall be made a part of the application.9
§ 350-5. Obligation of recipient agency.
A recipient agency receiving notice of an application under § 350-4 shall
forward a copy of any prior decision, including any conditions imposed
thereon, or any prior written comments or recommendations related to any
prior application with respect to the property and the application identified
in the notice, as may be contained in the street files in the Land Use
Office as of the effective date of this chapter, and as said street files
may thereafter be supplemented, or stored in alternative forms, such as
microfiche, microfilm or other document retrieval or storage systems, on
or off site. Items waiting to be filed or transferred to alternative storage
or retrieval systems are to be considered part of the street files to be
examined. The recipient agency may, but shall not be required to, examine
or transmit materials that are no longer in the street files but have been
transferred to microfiche, microfilm or other document retrieval or storage
system. Said response transmittal shall be made prior to the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the reviewing agency occurring more than 14 days
after the receipt of said notice. The transmitted document(s) shall become
part of the file of the reviewing agency for the subject application, and
in the event a reviewing agency shall conduct a public hearing on the
application, the transmitted documents shall be placed in the record of the
public hearing.
§ 350-6. Administration.
A. The chairperson of the reviewing agency and the chairperson of each
recipient agency, or such other member of the reviewing agency or
each recipient agency as the agency shall designate, shall notify staff
who shall be responsible for the timely transmittal of the notices from
reviewing agencies and the transmittal of responses from the recipient
agencies as required under this chapter.
9. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 350-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-6
1:113
B. If reviewing agencies or recipient agencies have a clerk or
administrative staff person, the clerk or staff person shall assist in
the timely transmittal of the notices from reviewing agencies and the
transmittal of responses from the recipient agencies.
C. The provisions of this chapter are for the benefit of reviewing agencies
and shall not be deemed to confer rights upon applicants, recipient
agencies or the general public.
D. The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed directory and shall not
constitute a grounds for appeal or a basis for civil liability in the event
of an incomplete or untimely notice, response to notices or other
noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 358
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumpsters — See Ch. 280.
Nuisances — See Ch. 390.
Solid waste — See Ch. 447.
Beach regulations — See Ch. 545.
§ 358-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
LITTER — Any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or waste material,
whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper, or other natural
or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including but not limited
to any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or detachable tab of any bottle,
jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing
material or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or
other lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or
paper containers or other packaging or construction material which has not
been deposited in a litter receptacle.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A receptacle suitable for the depositing of litter.
§ 358-2. Prohibited acts.
No person shall throw, scatter, spill or place or cause to be blown, scattered,
spilled, thrown or placed or otherwise dispose of any litter upon any public
property in the Town or upon private property in this Town not owned by
him or in the waters of this Town, whether from a vehicle or otherwise,
including but not limited to any public highway, public park, building,
beach, campground, forest land, recreational area, trailer park, highway,
road, street or alley, except:
A. When such property is designated by the State of Connecticut or the
Town for the disposal of garbage and refuse and such person is
authorized to use such property for such purpose; or
§ 350-6 CLINTON CODE § 358-2
1:114
B. Into a litter receptacle in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried away or deposited by the elements upon any part of
said private or public property or waters.
§ 358-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of § 358-2 of this chapter shall be
fined not more than $100 for each offense. In addition thereto, in the
discretion of the court, such person may be directed to pick up and remove
from any public place or any private property, with prior permission of
the legal owner, upon which it is established by competent evidence that
such person has deposited litter, any or all litter deposited thereon by
anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. When any such material
or substances are thrown, blown, scattered or spilled from a vehicle, the
operator thereof shall be deemed prima facie to have committed such
offense.
Chapter 369
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND PRACTITIONERS
§ 369-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
MASSAGE — Any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the
external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any
mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without any such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders,
creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in
this practice.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed business
where any person engages in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or
carried on any of the activities mentioned under "massage" and shall also
include any massage business operated on a house call basis.
MASSEUR and MASSEUSE — Any person who, for any consideration
whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as herein defined.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, syndicate, company, trust or
corporation who or which owns, leases, operates, or has an interest in a
massage establishment.
§ 369-2. Prohibition. [Amended 2-11-1992]
Until such time as the Commissioner of Public Health has adopted
regulations pursuant to the authority granted by C.G.S. § 19a-14, as
amended, no person shall allow a massage establishment to be conducted
in Clinton and no masseur and/or masseuse shall engage in the practice of
massage as defined herein in Clinton.
§ 358-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 369-3
1:115
§ 369-3. Exempted persons and organizations. [Amended
2-11-1992]
This chapter shall not apply to the following individuals while engaged in
personal performance of the duties of their respective professions:
A. Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical therapists
who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the
State of Connecticut.
B. Nurses who are registered under the laws of the State of Connecticut.
C. Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the
State of Connecticut, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the
massaging of the neck, face, scalp, and hair of the customer or client, for
cosmetic or beautifying purposes.
D. Hospitals, nursing homes, clinics or rehabilitation facilities operating or
licensed under other provisions of the laws of the State of Connecticut
or to the employees working under the direction of such facilities.
E. Those persons who are eligible to use the title "Connecticut-Certified
Massage Therapist" under the provisions of C.G.S. §§ 20-206a, 20-206b
and 20-206c; or persons who hold an American Massage Therapy
Association Certificate of Massage Therapy; or persons who have
successfully completed a course of study of not less than 500 hours,
with the instructor present, at a school of massage therapy which is
accredited by an accrediting agency recognized by the United States
Department of Education and which provided, at the time of graduation,
a curriculum which was approved by the American Massage Therapy
Association. The applicant must document qualifications to the
satisfaction of the Town Clerk.
§ 369-4. Permit required. [Added 2-11-1992]
A. No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on or permit to be engaged
in, conducted, or carried on, in or upon the premises in the Town, the
operation of a massage establishment without first having obtained a
permit from the Town Clerk.
B. Persons claiming exemption under § 369-3E of this chapter shall file
an application with the office of the Town Clerk. The application for
exemption shall be approved or denied based upon § 369-3E criteria
by the Town Clerk within 10 working days. Any permit or exemption
permit issued under this section shall either be posted at his/her place of
business or be on his/her person.
C. Said permits shall be for a one-year term and may be renewed annually,
provided that the applicant qualifies in every respect for its reissuance.
§ 369-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$100. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
Chapter 390
§ 369-3 CLINTON CODE § 369-5
1:116
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 190.
Alcoholic beverages and loitering — See Ch.
194.
Animals — See Ch. 200.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 247.
Dumpsters — See Ch. 280.
Littering — See Ch. 358.
Septage disposal — See Ch. 438.
Solid waste — See Ch. 447.
§ 390-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to define, prohibit and abate blights and
nuisances and to protect, preserve, and promote public health, safety and
welfare and to preserve and protect property values. This chapter is
adopted pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv) and is considered a "Blight
Ordinance."
§ 390-2. Scope of provisions.
This chapter shall apply to the maintenance of all premises now in existence
or hereafter constructed, maintained, or modified but shall exclude
agricultural lands as defined in C.G.S. § 22-3(b); land dedicated as public
or semipublic open space or preserved in its natural state through
conservation easements; or areas designated as inland wetlands and
watercourses.
§ 390-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
DEBRIS — Material which is incapable of immediately performing the
function for which it was designed, including but not limited to abandoned,
discarded, or unused objects; junk comprised of equipment such as
automobiles, boats, and recreation vehicles which are unregistered and
missing parts, not complete in appearance and in an obvious state of
disrepair; and parts of automobiles, furniture, appliances, cans, boxes,
scrap metal, tires, batteries, containers, and garbage which are in the
public view.
DECAY — A wasting or wearing away; a gradual decline in strength,
soundness or quality; or to become decomposed or rotten, except a
contained compost pile.
DILAPIDATED — Decayed or rotten beyond repair.
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT — Any apparatus designed to operate by an
internal combustion engine, or designed to be towed by any apparatus
§ 369-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-3
1:117
propelled by an internal combustion engine, to also include electric and
pneumatic equipment.
NATURAL FIELD STATE — Areas where grass, weeds, and brush exist in
their natural, unlandscaped state.
NATURALLY WOODED STATE — Areas where trees, brush and plants exist
in their natural, unlandscaped state.
PERSON — Any man, woman, corporation, or other legal entity capable of
owning real property.
PREMISES — A platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of
land or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or
nondwelling structure, and includes any such building, accessory structure
or other structure thereon or any part thereof. The term "premises," where
the context requires, shall be deemed to include any buildings, dwellings,
parcels or land or structures contained within the scope of this article.
PUBLIC VIEW — Visible from any public right-of-way or neighboring
property, at grade level.
STRUCTURE — Any building, dwelling, fence, swimming pool, or similarly
constructed object.
§ 390-4. Public nuisance.
It is hereby declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing,
occupying or having charge or possession of any premises in the Town of
Clinton to maintain such premises or any public right-of-way abutting said
premises in such manner that any of the following conditions exist thereon,
which shall be defined as blight:
A. Any structure which is in a state of dilapidation or decay or is open to
the elements or unable to provide shelter or serve the purpose for which
it was constructed due to damage, dilapidation, or decay.
B. Premises occupied by a structure intended for human occupancy and/
or commercial activity in which grass, weeds, or similar vegetation
(excluding flowers, fruits, and vegetables and areas maintained in their
original naturally wooded, field, or shoreline state) is allowed to reach
and remain at a height of 10 inches or greater for a period of 10 days or
longer.
C. Dead, decayed, diseased or damaged trees constituting a hazard or
danger to public property or persons lawfully therein.
D. More than one unregistered and unstreetable motor vehicle in the public
view, pursuant to C.G.S. § 14-150a.
E. Property with any combination of three or more pieces of nonoperational
mechanical equipment excluding licensed motor vehicles stored on the
premises and in the public view.
F. Property that has any of the following conditions:
(1) Premises containing accumulated debris, not including compost
piles or piles of grass and/or brush which are not visible from a
public right-of-way and do not otherwise constitute a public health
or safety hazard; or
§ 390-3 CLINTON CODE § 390-4
1:118
(2) Landscaping on any premises, including but not limited to trees,
shrubs, hedges, grass, and plants, which physically hinders or
interferes with the lawful use of abutting premises or blocks or
interferes with the use of any public sidewalk and/or private street
or right-of-way or any road sign.
§ 390-5. Effect on other ordinances and regulations.
A. The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other statutes, codes, ordinances or regulations which
prescribe standards other than are provided in this chapter.
B. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance,
regulation or other code of the Town or state, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety and property values of the people shall prevail.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed to require any Town official to hold a
sale or public auction of motor vehicles. Any licensed wrecker service or
garage shall comply with C.G.S. § 14-150, as revised, in such matters as,
including but not limited to, owner notification, towing of motor vehicles,
storage, and payment of service.
D. This chapter shall not be intended to affect violations of any other
ordinance, code or regulation existing prior to the effective date of
this chapter, and any such violations may be governed and continue
to be punishable under the provisions of those ordinances, codes, or
regulations in effect at the time the violation was committed and/or this
chapter as may be appropriate.
§ 390-6. Responsibility for compliance.
The owner, lessee, or occupant of premises subject to this chapter, including
the agents thereof, shall be jointly and severally obligated to comply with
the provisions of this chapter. Whenever the person, as herein defined, is
a corporation or other legal entity, the officers thereof shall be jointly and
severally responsible with that corporation or other legal entity.
§ 390-7. Complaints; notice of violation.
A. Complaints may be submitted to the First Selectman or his/her designee
by members of the public, but such complaints must be in writing and
signed on forms provided by the Town.
B. Whenever the First Selectman or his/her designee determines that there
has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, except as to
§ 390-4D, such officer shall give notice of such violation to the person
responsible therefor as hereinafter provided.
(1) Such notice shall:
(a) Be in writing;
(b) Be sent by both regular mail and certified mail, return receipt
requested;
(c) Set forth the violations of this chapter;
§ 390-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-7
1:119
(d) Specify a final date for the correction of any violation; however,
an extension of time may be granted by the enforcement officer;
(e) Be served upon the owner or the owner's agent and the
occupant, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon such
occupant, if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in
or about the dwelling affected by this notice or if such person
is served with such notice by any other method authorized or
required under the laws of this state;
(f) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
permanent compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and
(g) State that the penalties and enforcement provisions of this
chapter will become effective on the final date set for the
correction of any violation.
(2) A copy of the notice should also be sent to the complainant.
C. Whenever the First Selectman or his/her designee determines that there
has been a violation of § 390-4D pertaining to unregistered motor
vehicles, such officer shall give notice of such violation to the person
responsible therefor, which notice shall be in compliance with
Subsection B, except that:
(1) The notice shall specify that the owner has 30 days to correct the
violation by removing the vehicle or registering it; and
(2) The notice of the violation may be published in a newspaper having
a substantial circulation in the Town of Clinton.
D. Any person notified in accordance with this section who fails to correct
any violation by the date specified in said notice shall be in violation of
this chapter and subject to its penalties and enforcement procedures.
Any person in violation of § 390-4D 30 days after notice of alleged
violation in accordance with Subsection C above shall be subject to the
removal and disposition of the unregistered motor vehicle.
E. Notice pursuant to Subsection C and enforcement pursuant to
Subsection D shall not apply to wrecker services until 60 days from
the required filing date pursuant to C.G.S. § 14-150, provided that the
wrecker has complied with statutorily mandated notification procedures
and sent copies thereof to the Chief of Police. Such wrecker services
shall be licensed pursuant to C.G.S. § 14-66 and shall have a principal
place of business in the Town of Clinton and shall be in compliance with
all applicable Town ordinances, including but not limited to the Zoning
Ordinance, and all applicable zoning and wetland permits.
F. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the First Selectman or his designee may
elect to first provide informal verbal notice to the owner or owner's
agent and the occupant of the property in an attempt to resolve the
matter prior to formal written notice being sent.
§ 390-8. Appeals.
A. Any person notified in accordance with § 390-7 above may appeal said
notice of violation(s) to the Board of Selectmen, in writing, within 15
days of the date of said notice. If an appeal is taken as aforesaid,
the first day of violation shall be seven days after the decision of the
§ 390-7 CLINTON CODE § 390-8
1:120
Board of Selectmen or on such later date as established by the Board of
Selectmen.
B. The Town hereby specifically adopts the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-152c
for the establishment of an appeal and citation hearing process for
considering all appeals under this chapter.
§ 390-9. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
A. Penalties:
(1) Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate
municipal offense.
(2) Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(3) Each separate offense under this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine of $100 payable to the Town of Clinton.
B. Enforcement.
(1) The First Selectman, his/her designee, or any police officer in the
Town of Clinton is authorized to issue a citation or summons for a
violation of this chapter.
(2) In addition thereto, the First Selectman or his/her designee is
authorized to initiate legal proceedings in the Superior Court for the
immediate correction of the violation(s), collection of any penalties,
and the recovery of all costs, including costs of remedial action(s)
authorized by the Court and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Town of Clinton to enforce this chapter.
(3) All fines, court costs, costs of remedial action, and attorney fees, as
ordered by the Court, shall constitute a written lien on the subject
premises, provided that the owner of said premises has been notified
of the violations as herein provided and was made a party to the
enforcement proceedings. Notification of the placement of a written
lien will be sent 15 days prior to the placement of a lien in the Clinton
land records.
Chapter 396
OIL AND GAS EXPLORATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 234. Solid waste — See Ch. 447.
§ 396-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words
shall have the meanings given here, unless otherwise clearly indicated by
the context:
APPLICATION — The physical act of placing or spreading natural gas waste
or oil waste on any road or real property located within the Town of Clinton.
§ 390-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 396-1
1:121
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING — The fracturing of underground rock
formations, including shale and nonshale formations, by man-made fluiddriven
techniques for the purpose of stimulating oil, natural gas, or other
subsurface hydrocarbon production.
NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES — All geologic or geophysical
activities related to the exploration for or extraction of natural gas,
including, but not limited to, core and rotary drilling and hydraulic
fracturing.
NATURAL GAS WASTE —
OIL EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES — All geologic or geophysical activities
related to the exploration for or extraction of oil, including, but not limited
to, core and rotary drilling and hydraulic fracturing.
OIL WASTE —
§ 396-2. Prohibitions.
A. The application of natural gas waste or oil waste, whether or not such
waste has received a beneficial use determination or other approval
for use by the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection
("DEEP") or any other regulatory body, on any road or real property
located within the Town of Clinton for any purpose is prohibited.
B. The introduction of natural gas waste or oil waste into any wastewater
treatment facility within or operated by the Town of Clinton is
prohibited.
Any liquid or solid waste, or its constituents, that is generated as a
result of natural gas extraction activities, which may consist of water,
brine, chemicals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, heavy
metals, or other contaminants;
A.
Leachate from solid wastes associated with natural gas extraction
activities;
B.
Any waste that is generated as a result of or in association with the
underground storage of natural gas;
C.
Any waste that is generated as a result of or in association with
liquefied petroleum gas well storage operations; and
D.
Any products or by-products resulting from the treatment, processing,
or modification of any of the above wastes.
E.
Any liquid or solid waste, or its constituents, that is generated as a
result of oil extraction activities, which may consist of water, brine,
chemicals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, heavy metals, or
other contaminants;
A.
B. Leachate from solid wastes associated with oil extraction activities; and
Any products or by-products resulting from the treatment, processing,
or modification of any of the above wastes.
C.
§ 396-1 CLINTON CODE § 396-2
1:122
C. The introduction of natural gas waste or oil waste into any solid waste
management facility within or operated by the Town of Clinton is
prohibited.
D. The storage, disposal, sale, acquisition, transfer, handling, treatment
and/or processing of waste from natural gas or oil extraction is
prohibited within the Town of Clinton.
§ 396-3. Bids and contracts.
A. All bids and contracts related to the retention of services to construct
or maintain any publicly owned and/or maintained road or real property
within the Town of Clinton shall include a provision stating that no
materials containing natural gas or oil waste shall be utilized in
providing such a service.
B. All bids and contracts related to the purchase or acquisition of materials
to be used to construct or maintain any publicly owned and/or
maintained road or real property within the Town of Clinton shall include
a provision stating that no materials containing natural gas or oil waste
shall be provided to the Town of Clinton.
C. The following statement, which shall be a sworn statement under penalty
of perjury, shall be included in all bids related to the purchase or
acquisition of materials to be used to construct or maintain any publicly
owned and/or maintained road or real property within the Town of
Clinton and all bids related to the retention of services to construct or
maintain any publicly owned and/or maintained road or real property
within the Town of Clinton: "We _____________ hereby submit a bid for
materials, equipment and/or labor for the Town of Clinton. The bid is
for bid documents titled ____________. We hereby certify, under penalty
of perjury, that no natural gas waste or oil waste will be used by the
undersigned bidder or any contractor, subcontractor, agent or vendor
agent in connection with the bid; nor will the undersigned bidder or
any subcontractor, agent or vendor agent thereof apply any natural gas
waste or oil waste to any road or real property within the Town of Clinton
as a result of the submittal of this bid if selected."
§ 396-4. Penalties for offenses.
A. This chapter shall apply to any and all actions occurring on or after the
effective date of this chapter. In response to a violation of this chapter,
the Town of Clinton is empowered to:
(1) Issue cease and desist orders demanding abatement of the violation;
(2) Seek any appropriate legal relief, including immediate injunctive
relief, as a result of any violation of this chapter;
(3) File a complaint with any other proper authority; and
(4) Require remediation of any damage done to any land, road, building,
aquifer, well, watercourse, air quality or other asset, be it public or
private, within the Town of Clinton.
B. The Town of Clinton may recoup from the offending person(s), jointly
and severally, all costs, including experts, consultants and reasonable
attorneys' fees, that it incurs as a result of having to prosecute or
remediate any infraction of this chapter. Any person who violates this
§ 396-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 396-4
1:123
chapter shall be liable for a fine of $250 per Connecticut statute. The
Town of Clinton may also pursue other penalties as applicable defined in
the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 396-5. Enforcement.
Any designee authorized by the First Selectwoman/Selectman of the Town
of Clinton may pursue penalties against any person(s) who commit
violations of this chapter. The involvement of any Clinton officials will not
require testing of waste products to determine chemical contents; this
work will be done via contacting the Connecticut DEEP or other third-party
analytical laboratories as is current practice of the Town of Clinton for
other exposures to potentially hazardous chemical situations. Any designee
authorized by the First Selectwoman/Selectman of the Town of Clinton may
request the Commissioner of the Connecticut DEEP pursue civil penalties
defined by the Connecticut General Statutes, as applicable.
§ 396-6. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or part of this
chapter or the application thereof to any person, individual, corporation,
firm, partnership, entity or circumstance shall be adjudged by any court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such order or
judgment shall not affect, impair, effect or invalidate the remainder thereof,
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
subdivision, section or part of this chapter or in its application to the
person, individual, corporation, firm, partnership, entity or circumstance
directly involved in the controversy in which such order or judgment shall
be rendered. To further this end, the provisions of this chapter are hereby
declared to be severable.
Chapter 402
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 402-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHARITABLE — As defined in accordance with the Internal Revenue Code,
Section 501(c)(3).
HAWKER or PEDDLER — Any person, whether principal or agent, who goes
from place to place within the boundaries of the Town selling or bartering
or carrying for sale or barter or exposing therefor any food, goods, wares or
merchandise, either on foot or from any vehicle. This shall include soliciting
orders of purchase for future delivery of any goods, wares or merchandise,
including magazines and other printed matter.
§ 396-4 CLINTON CODE § 402-1
1:124
RELIGIOUS and RELIGION — Shall not mean and include the word
"charitable" as herein defined but shall be given their commonly accepted
definitions.
SOLICIT and SOLICITATION — The request directly of money, credit,
property, financial assistance or other items of value on the plea or
representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or
other items of value will be used for a charitable or religious purpose.
§ 402-2. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful to hawk or peddle upon the public streets of the Town
any goods, wares or other merchandise at public or private sale or auction,
or to hawk or peddle any such articles from house to house within the Town,
without first complying with this chapter and Chapter 408 of the General
Statutes, as amended.
§ 402-3. Registration.
A. An applicant for permission to vend, solicit, hawk or peddle as described
in § 402-2 shall be required to register the following information with the
Board of Selectmen acting through its Chief of Police or his designated
authority:
(1) Name and home and business addresses.
(2) Name and address of business, firm or corporation which the
applicant represents.
(3) General physical description, being weight, height, and color of hair
and eyes.
(4) Description of kind and cost of goods intended for vending, peddling
or hawking.
(5) Specific dates, not to exceed one year, in which applicant intends to
vend, peddle, hawk or solicit orders in the Town.
B. Simultaneous with the provision of this information, the applicant shall
provide the Chief of Police with photographic identification that includes
a signature specimen.
§ 402-4. Fee.
Each applicant for permission under this chapter shall pay a fee of $200,
which fee shall be used by the Town for the purpose of defraying the costs
of enforcing this chapter.
§ 402-5. Hours of operation.
No person under any circumstances may sell, barter or carry for sale or
barter or expose any food, goods, wares or merchandise either on foot or
from any vehicle or solicit contributions for any charitable or religious cause
before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m.
§ 402-6. Unlawful acts.
No person may:
§ 402-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-6
1:125
A. Hawk or peddle on any public street within 1,000 feet of any school
grounds on any day school is in session during the period commencing
one hour before school is in session and ending one hour after the
session terminates.
B. Hawk or peddle except when the motor vehicle is lawfully parked or
stopped.
C. Hawk or peddle except from the side of the truck away from moving
traffic and as near as possible to the curb or edge of the street.
D. Hawk or peddle to a person standing in the roadway.
E. Stop on the left side of a one-way street to hawk or peddle.
F. Back a motor vehicle to hawk or peddle.
G. Allow any person to ride in or on a motor vehicle except for the licensee,
his employee or authorized agent.
§ 402-7. Conduct of vendors; issuance of receipts.
Each person who wishes to vend, hawk, peddle or solicit within the Town
shall at all times conduct himself in an orderly and lawful manner and shall
give a written receipt for all orders taken within the Town. The receipt shall
be signed by the vendor/solicitor and shall set forth a brief description of
the goods, wares or merchandise ordered or sold, the total purchase price
thereof, and the amount received by the solicitor from the purchaser.
§ 402-8. Exceptions.
A. Sections 402-1 and 402-9 through 402-13 shall not apply to the
following:
(1) Persons less than 16 years of age.
(2) Persons exempted under the General Statutes.
(3) Persons licensed by the state.
(4) Persons selling only to stores or other business establishments for
resale.
(5) Charitable or religious organizations or their representatives
engaging in solicitation where no food, goods, wares or merchandise
is offered in exchange for money, credit, property or financial
assistance even if such exchange is labeled a donation.
B. Sections 402-1 through 402-7 shall not apply to the following:
(1) Sales by farmers and gardeners of the produce of their farms and
gardens.
(2) The sale, distribution and delivery of milk, teas, coffees, spices,
groceries, meats and bakery goods.
(3) Sales on approval.
(4) Conditional sales of merchandise.
(5) The taking of orders for merchandise for future delivery when full
payment is not required at the time of solicitation.
(6) Participants in specific fund-raising events sponsored by local
charitable, nonprofit organizations.
C. However, any individual engaged in any sales described in this section
may at his option apply for credentials as described in this chapter.
§ 402-6 CLINTON CODE § 402-9
1:126
§ 402-9. Registration, application for license and credentials
required.
Except as provided in § 402-8, no person shall sell or expose or offer for sale
or solicit orders for any articles of foods or any goods, wares, merchandise,
materials or services or solicit for any contracts within the Town unless he
has registered with the police, made application for a license and obtained
identifying credentials as hereinafter provided.
§ 402-10. Complaints; revocation of credentials.
A. If, upon complaint, the Chief of Police has reason to believe that any
provision of this chapter has been violated by a licensed person, the
Chief of Police may revoke that individual's credentials. The Chief of
Police shall consider any complaint, whether made orally or in writing,
if made by an individual who is a resident or guest of a resident of the
Town. In order to be a valid complaint, any complaint made orally must
be received in writing by the Selectmen's office within 24 hours of the
original complaint.
B. Upon such revocation, if the aggrieved party wishes, he may appeal to
the Board of Selectmen for reconsideration; however, such appeal must
be received in writing within five days of the date of revocation. The date
of revocation shall be the date that the certified mail notice is received
by the individual at either the home or business address provided on his
credentials; however, such revocation is effective immediately from the
date it is issued.
C. The Board of Selectman shall hear the individual's appeal and review
the complaint against him at a meeting of the Board to be held not less
than five days nor more than 10 days after receipt of the appeal. The
Board shall, upon the evidence presented, either affirm the revocation or
reinstate the revoked credentials.
§ 402-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or making any
false statements or representations of fact for the purpose of obtaining
permission to solicit orders shall, upon conviction thereof, and in addition
to other penalties provided by law and herein, be subject to a penalty
in the amount of $50 for each day of violation or part thereof. Each day
of violation shall be considered a separate violation. Upon any registered
person being convicted of any crime or misdemeanor under this chapter or
a crime involving moral turpitude, the stamped credentials of such person
shall be delivered to the First Selectman and the Selectman's stamp thereon
shall be cancelled, and such person shall not thereafter solicit orders in the
Town.
§ 402-12. Promulgation of regulations.
The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized to make additional regulations
consistent with this chapter and C.G.S. § 21-37, as amended, to promote
the orderly conduct of solicitors and enforcement of this chapter. Each
§ 402-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-12
1:127
regulation shall be in writing and shall become effective upon publication in
a newspaper having a general circulation in the Town and filing of a copy
with the Town Clerk.
§ 402-13. Itinerant vendors.
A. No person shall engage in a temporary or transient business in the
Town without first obtaining a municipal license in accordance with the
provisions hereof and in accordance with Chapter 407 of the General
Statutes, as amended.
B. Each itinerant vendor shall make application for a municipal license
to the Chief of Police or his designee for a license which shall remain
in force as long as the licensee continuously keeps and exposes for
sale such stock of goods, wares or merchandise, but not later than the
October 1 following the date of issuance, upon the payment of a fee
as established by the Board of Selectmen, all in accordance with C.G.S.
§ 21-29, as amended. The word "continuously" as used in this subsection
shall be understood to mean throughout the year, not necessarily every
day or weekend.
§ 402-14. Solicitor's license.
A. An applicant for a license to solicit in the Town shall:
(1) Submit, when applicable, a copy of a valid Health Department
certificate enforceable for the same period of time as the requested
license.
(2) Submit, when applicable, a copy of a certificate from the State
Sealer of Weights and Measures indicating that all weights and
measures used by the applicant in his business have been approved
and stamped.
(3) Demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Police Department that the
motor vehicle to be used pursuant to the issuance of the license
complies with all applicable state laws and motor vehicle regulations
and that, if it is a truck, it is equipped with a convex mirror mounted
on the front so the driver in his normal seating position can see the
area in front of the truck obscured by the hood.
(4) If applying for an itinerant vendor license, submit a copy of a valid
state license obtained pursuant to C.G.S. § 21-28, as amended.
(5) Pay a fee of $200 for a license to hawk or peddle or a fee of $200 for
an itinerant vendor license.
B. The Chief of Police shall provide the applicant with credentials stamped
with Town approval, which credentials shall set forth the name and
address of the applicant and his employer, if any; the nature of the
goods, wares or merchandise being vended; and the period during which
the applicant may vend, hawk or peddle. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this chapter or regulations, the Chief of Police shall not be
required to grant such permission to any person who has been convicted
of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or having been
found to act in violation of this chapter.
C. Each applicant shall display prominently upon his person his stamped
credentials at all times while conducting business in the Town.
§ 402-12 CLINTON CODE § 402-14
1:128
D. Stamped credentials shall be nontransferable and shall entitle the holder
thereof, for the period indicated therein, unless revoked, to solicit within
the Town as specified in his application, provided that the holder shall
have his stamped credentials prominently displayed on his person at
all times while soliciting and shall exhibit the same at any time upon
request by any police officer or agent of the Board of Selectmen, or any
purchaser or prospective purchaser.
E. All licenses shall expire on the October 1 following the date of issuance
unless otherwise specified.
F. Participants in specific fund-raising events sponsored by local charitable,
nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from requirements to obtain a
local solicitor's license.
§ 402-15. Hawking, peddling or vending of food items.
A. Any person who wishes to hawk, peddle or vend food items as defined in
Section 19-13-B48 of the State Public Health Code, as amended, must:
(1) Apply in person to the Director of Health for inspection of each
vehicle and/or cart to be used for dispensing food items.
(2) Pay a Health Department inspection and certification fee of $50
(established by the Board of Selectmen), except that charitable and
religious organizations shall be exempt from payment of said fee and
their certificate shall expire five days from issuance.
(3) Meet and then maintain all of the regulations of Section 19-13-B48
of the State Public Health Code, as amended, and this chapter.
B. All certificates shall expire on the October 1 following the date of
issuance unless otherwise specified.
Chapter 432
SEASONAL USE STRUCTURES
§ 432-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The Clinton Director of Health or his authorized
agent or agents.
PERSON — Any person, firm, corporation, trustee, individual, co-owner or
other entity owning real property or the lessee thereof.
SEASONAL USE — Any dwelling structure occupied for less than nine
months of any one calendar year which does not contain one or more of the
following:
A. A positive heating supply to the structure or converted area;
Energy conservation measures, such as insulation to protect from heat
loss; or
B.
A potable year-round water supply which is protected from freezing, or,
if water is supplied on a year-round basis.
C.
§ 402-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-1
1:129
WINTERIZATION — The act of converting a seasonal use dwelling structure
into a year-round use dwelling structure by providing one or more of the
following:
§ 432-2. Permit required for winterization or conversion.
A. As of the effective date of this section, no person shall undertake to
winterize, as defined under these regulations, or otherwise convert any
seasonal use dwelling structure presently unsuitable for year-round
occupancy to year-round use without first obtaining a winterization
permit from the Director of Health, except as provided in Subsection D
below.
B. An applicant for a winterization permit shall provide a plan, prepared
by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut, to the
Director of Health which demonstrates full and complete compliance
with the subsurface sewage disposal regulations of the State of
Connecticut (Sections 19-13-B100a and 19-13-B103 of the Regulations
of Connecticut State Agencies, as amended). The applicant shall also
provide a completed application for and permit to construct a subsurface
sewage disposal system to the Director of Health.
C. Upon approval by the Director of Health of the plan in Subsection B,
the Director of Health shall approve the applicant's application for and
permit to construct a subsurface sewage disposal system. The applicant
shall be responsible for installation of the approved subsurface sewage
disposal system, and the Director of Health may make any inspections
he deems appropriate during and/or on completion of the installation to
ensure the approved plan was followed.
D. No winterization permit shall be issued until such approved subsurface
sewage disposal system has been completed, inspected and approved
for use by the Director of Health or the Director's authorized agent.
The Director of Health may authorize the initiation of construction of
or modification to certain features of the dwelling to accommodate the
conversion of the dwelling to year-round use prior to the installation of
the subsurface sewage disposal system to avoid damage to the approved
subsurface sewage disposal system. This authorization may only be
granted in instances where the Director feels the timing of such building
construction is necessary to minimize damage to the approved
subsurface sewage disposal system that will be installed and facilitate
dwelling construction. Installation of the approved subsurface sewage
disposal system may proceed in conjunction with construction on the
dwelling, but in no case may the dwelling be occupied on a year-round
basis, nor any certificate of occupancy be issued, until the approved
A. A positive heating supply to the structure or converted area;
Energy conservation measures, such as insulation to protect from heat
loss; or
B.
A potable water supply which is protected from freezing or public water
services supplied on a year-round basis.
C.
§ 432-1 CLINTON CODE § 432-2
1:130
subsurface sewage disposal system is installed to the Director's
satisfaction and a winterization permit is issued. [Amended 8-5-2009]
E. Upon approval of the installed subsurface sewage disposal system, the
Director of Health shall issue a winterization permit to the applicant.
F. The winterization permit issued by the Director of Health shall expire
and become void unless all improvements proposed by the applicant to
convert the dwelling structure to year-round use commensurate with
the approved subsurface sewage disposal system provided pursuant to
Subsections B and C above have been completed and a certificate of
occupancy has been issued for the subject premises with 24 months of
the issuance of the winterization permit. If said improvements have not
been so completed and the winterization permit expires, said structure
shall continue to be a seasonal use dwelling.
Chapter 438
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
§ 438-1. Authority and purpose.
A. Commission authority. The Clinton Water Pollution Control Commission
is the Town's designated Water Pollution Control Authority, as provided
in Chapter 103, § 7-245 et seq., of the Connecticut General Statutes,
as amended, and has the powers and responsibilities conferred by said
statutes, along with the Town ordinance creating the WPCC, which
became effective on March 26, 1983. The WPCC is directly responsible
for the planning, design, and oversight of all water pollution control
facilities in the Town of Clinton, in accordance with federal, state, and
local regulations.
B. Purpose.
(1) To protect the health and welfare of the residents of the Town
of Clinton through the prevention of public health nuisances and
environmental degradation that may have a detrimental impact on
the quality of the Town's groundwater and surface water resources.
(2) To establish a program for the mandatory cleaning and inspection
of septic tanks, and other sewage-receiving structures, on a timely
basis.
(3) To compile statistical data, by the Town of Clinton and the Director
of Health, using records provided by the septic tank cleaners,
concerning the frequency of pump-outs and condition of sewagereceiving
structures.
(4) To establish and maintain a current listing of properly licensed and
registered septic tank cleaners and septic system installers.
(5) To promote the proper collection and disposal of sewage in
conformance with the Public Health Code, the Connecticut General
Statutes and this chapter, all as may be amended.
(6) To educate property owners and septic system users on the purpose,
use and care of on-site sewage disposal systems.
§ 432-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 438-2
1:131
§ 438-2. Adoption of Connecticut Public Health Code by reference.
The provisions of the Public Health Code, including but not limited to
Sections 19-13-B100a, 19-13-B103 and 19-13-B104 of the Code Regulations
of Connecticut State Agencies, and the "Technical Standards for Subsurface
Sewage Disposal Systems," all as may be amended, are hereby incorporated
by reference into this chapter and made a part hereof.
§ 438-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings hereto assigned.
CLEAN(ED) AND INSPECT(ED) or CLEANING AND INSPECTION — In
addition to the requirements of Section 19-13-B103c(e), a visual evaluation
of the integrity of the septic tank or other sewage-receiving structure
for watertightness, evidence of damage to the structure, the presence of
structurally sound covers over inspection ports and inlet and outlet baffles,
as appropriate, the cleaning of the outlet filter, if present, and measurement
of the liquid capacity of the tank.
DEP — The State of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection,
acting by its Commissioner or duly authorized representative.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The Director of Health for the Town of Clinton,
or his/her authorized agents.
DPH — The State of Connecticut Department of Public Health, acting by its
Commissioner or duly authorized representative.
ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A septic system, a cesspool, privy,
or any other system, or lack thereof, which receives sewage, except for any
such system for which a permit has been issued by the DEP pursuant to
C.G.S. § 22a-430.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person or legal entity that alone, jointly, or
severally with others has legal title to any real property in the Town of
Clinton.
PUBLIC HEALTH CODE — The State of Connecticut Public Health Code,
including, but not limited to, the "Technical Standards for Subsurface
Sewage Disposal Systems," established pursuant to Section 19-13-B103d(b)
of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, as established pursuant
to C.G.S. § 19a-36, as may be amended.
PUMP-OUT — The removal of septage from an on-site sewage disposal
system by a septic tank cleaner or septic system installer.
SEPTIC SYSTEM INSTALLER — Any individual who installs septic systems
and is licensed by the DPH pursuant to C.G.S. § 20-341a et seq., as
amended.
SEPTIC TANK — The watertight receptacle which is used for the treatment
of sewage and is designed and constructed so as to permit the settling of
§ 438-2 CLINTON CODE § 438-3
1:132
solids, the digestion of organic matter by detention and the discharge of the
liquid portion to a leaching system.
SEPTIC TANK CLEANER — Any individual who cleans on-site sewage
disposal systems and is licensed by the DPH pursuant to C.G.S. § 20-341a et
seq., as amended.
SEWAGE — Domestic sewage consisting of water and human excretions
or other waterborne wastes incidental to the occupancy of a residential
building or a nonresidential building, as may be detrimental to the public
health or the environment, but not including manufacturing process water,
cooling water, wastewater from water-softening equipment, blowdown from
heating or cooling equipment, water from cellar or floor drains or surface
water from roofs, paved surface or yard drains.
SEWAGE-RECEIVING STRUCTURE — A septic tank or other receptacle that
receives sewage from the house sewer pipe.
WPCC — The Town of Clinton Water Pollution Control Commission, acting
by its duly authorized agents.
§ 438-4. Cleaning, inspection, maintenance and disposal
requirements.
A. Each property owner whose real property within the Town of Clinton has
an on-site sewage disposal system shall have the septic tank or other
septic-receiving structure cleaned and inspected by a septic tank cleaner
or septic system installer at least once in every five-year period.
B. If it is determined by the septic tank cleaner or septic system installer
that the septic tank requires the addition of risers or repair of the baffles,
this work shall be completed and/or inspected by a septic tank cleaner
or septic system installer within 60 days from the date of the cleaning
and inspection.
C. The Director of Health shall have the right to observe the above-stated
cleaning and inspection.
D. The Director of Health, in his/her reasonable discretion, may require
more frequent cleaning and inspection for any on-site sewage disposal
system that, because of its current use, requires more frequent
maintenance. Properties that may require more frequent cleaning and
inspection include, but are not limited to, food service establishments,
marinas, institutional establishments, day-care facilities and multifamily
dwellings. More frequent cleaning and inspection may be required by
the Director of Health if the sewage-receiving structure for any on-site
sewage disposal system is undersized for its current use.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to absolve any property owner
or occupant from complying with the conditions of any permit issued by
the DEP or the Director of Health.
§ 438-5. Registration and reporting.
A. Any septic tank cleaner or septic system installer providing services
under this chapter shall be registered with the Town of Clinton. The
criteria and standards for such registration shall be adopted by the
§ 438-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 438-5
1:133
WPCC in consultation with the Director of Health, and such registration
criteria and standards shall be available at the offices of the WPCC and
the Director of Health.
B. All septic tank cleaners and septic system installers shall file reports
as required by the WPCC within 30 calendar days of such cleaning
and inspection, through a reporting system as prescribed by the WPCC.
The report of septic tank cleaning and inspection shall satisfy the
requirement for an application for and issuance of a written permit for
disposal of the contents of the septic tank or other sewage-receiving
structure per Section 19-13-B103c(c) of the Public Health Code.
C. The Director of Health and the WPCC shall provide training on the
reporting system at no cost to the septic tank cleaner or septic system
installer.
D. The septic tank cleaner or septic system installer shall notify the
Director of Health and the property owner, in writing, within five
business days if in the course of cleaning and inspection there is
evidence of a failure of the system as defined by Section 19-13-B103c(f)
of the Public Health Code.
§ 438-6. Cleaning and inspection implementation schedule.
A. The WPCC shall develop an implementation schedule to facilitate an
orderly procedure for the scheduling of the cleaning and inspection of
on-site sewage disposal systems on a defined basis. The implementation
schedule shall begin with those on-site sewage disposal systems for
which the WPCC has no record of cleaning or inspection.
B. A notice with a deadline will be sent out within 60 days of the next
required cleaning and inspection by the WPCC. The schedule of these
deadlines shall be established based on a five-year period from the latest
reported maintenance in the WPCC records.
C. For property owners or renters who occupy their homes or place of
business on a seasonal basis, cleaning and inspection shall be scheduled
to allow the maintenance to be performed while their home or business
is occupied.
§ 438-7. Maintenance required.
A. The property owner may choose any septic tank cleaner or septic system
installer to inspect the on-site sewage disposal system, and clean and
inspect the septic tank or septic-receiving structure, provided the septic
tank cleaner or septic system installer is registered with the Town of
Clinton as provided in § 438-5 herein.
B. The property owner shall have the on-site sewage disposal system
cleaned and inspected within 60 days of the date of written notification
from the WPCC. Upon written request to the WPCC from a property
owner, the WPCC shall grant one extension of no more than 60 days. The
WPCC shall not grant more than one such extension.
§ 438-8. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any septic tank cleaner or septic system installer in violation of this
chapter may be subject to the following:
§ 438-5 CLINTON CODE § 438-8
1:134
(1) First offense: letter of warning.
(2) Second offense: requirement that the septic tank cleaner or septic
system installer post a bond of $500 in the form satisfactory to the
Town for a period of one year.
(3) Third offense: forfeiture of bond of $500 and/or registration
suspension for one year.
B. As authorized in C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(10), any property owner who shall
violate any provision of this chapter may be subject to a civil penalty
of $100 for each day of each violation. Such penalty shall be enforced
by citation issued by the First Selectman; provided, however, that the
First Selectman shall issue to such property owner a written warning
providing notice of the specific violation no less than 10 days prior to
issuing the citation.
C. The penalties set forth in this section are not exclusive and, when the
violation is also a violation of the provisions of any federal, state or local
law, then such additional penalty, or remedy or enforcement, set forth in
any such statute, regulation or ordinance shall pertain in addition to the
penalty provisions of this section.
§ 438-9. Appeals.
A. Any property owner notified in accordance with § 438-8B above may
appeal said notice of violation(s) to the Board of Selectmen, in writing,
within 15 days of the date of said citation. If an appeal is taken as
aforesaid, the first day of violation shall be considered to be the date that
is seven days after the decision of the Board of Selectmen or on such
later date as established by the Board of Selectmen.
B. The Town hereby specifically adopts the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-152c
for the establishment of an appeal and citation hearing process for
considering all appeals under this chapter.
§ 438-10. Conflicting provisions.
In any case where this chapter or any regulation enacted hereunder is
deemed to be in conflict with any provision of the Public Health Code or the
Connecticut General Statutes, the applicable provision of the Public Health
Code or the Connecticut General Statutes shall apply.
§ 438-11. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, paragraph or provision of this chapter shall
not invalidate any other section, paragraph or provision hereof.
§ 438-12. When effective.
Upon passage of this chapter, it shall become effective on the date that is
30 days following publication in a newspaper having general circulation in
the Town of Clinton.
Chapter 447
§ 438-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 438-12
1:135
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 247.
Dumpsters — See Ch. 280.
Littering — See Ch. 358.
Nuisances — See Ch. 390.
§ 447-1. Declaration of policy.
Regulation and control of the storage, collection, recycling, transport and
disposal of solid waste are necessary for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Town.
§ 447-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AUTHORITY — The Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority established
pursuant to Chapter 446e of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
BULKY WASTE — Unwanted material that is composed of clean fill, masonry
products, concrete, rock, untreated wood, brush, demolition material, and
land-clearing debris and meets the definition as set forth by the State of
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED DISPOSAL SITE — The location or facility designated by the
Town for disposal of solid waste.
DIRECTOR — The duly appointed Town Engineer of the Town of Clinton,
or such other person as may be designated from time to time by the Town
Engineer, who shall have the duties, powers and responsibilities set forth in
this chapter.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Waste material which may pose a hazard to human
health or the environment, including but not limited to waste defined and
identified as hazardous under the Federal Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act and under applicable regulations of the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Items of solid waste (occasionally referred
to as "recyclables") that are designated by the appropriate State of
Connecticut General Statutes, the State of Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection or as set forth in this chapter that can be
separated or diverted from the solid waste stream for the purposes of
processing them or causing them to be processed into a material product,
including the production of compost, in order to provide for disposition of
the items in a manner, other than incineration or landfilling, which will best
protect the environment.
RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The duly appointed Assistant Town
Engineer of the Town of Clinton and/or designated person who shall have
the duties, powers and responsibilities set forth in this chapter.
§ 438-12 CLINTON CODE § 447-2
1:136
SOLID WASTE — Unwanted or discarded materials, not elsewhere defined
as bulky waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
material, but excluding hazardous waste as hereinafter defined and
semisolid or liquid materials which are collected and treated in a sewerage
system.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTOR — A person, firm or corporation engaged
in the regular business of collecting and transporting solid waste and/or
recyclable material within the Town of Clinton.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The person(s) that generates solid waste must
separate out all recyclable items as set forth in this chapter.
§ 447-3. Solid waste collectors.
All solid waste originating within the limits of the Town of Clinton shall
be collected, transported and disposed of either by the Town or by solid
waste collectors licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
No other person, firm or corporation shall collect, transport or dispose of
solid waste, except that individual collectors of solid waste or owners of
premises upon which solid waste has accumulated may collect, transport
and/or dispose of such solid waste under special permits issued by the
Director.
§ 447-4. Solid waste containers.
A. The owner of premises in which solid waste is generated or accumulated
shall provide suitable receptacles or containers for storing such solid
waste until it is collected and removed. Solid waste containers shall be
maintained in good condition and shall be replaced when no longer in
such condition.
B. All solid waste containers shall be leakproof, verminproof, galvanized
metal or plastic receptacles with securely fitting covers, of not less
than 20 nor more than 30 gallons' capacity, except that residences and
commercial establishments may provide a large covered container or
bin designed to be emptied into or attached to a refuse truck, and
other types of containers may be used under special permits issued by
the Director. Grass cuttings and leaves shall be placed in a waterproof
plastic bag of not over 33 gallons' capacity.
§ 447-5. Storage and handling of solid waste.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall store or accumulate solid waste
anywhere in the Town, other than in approved solid waste containers,
except under special permits issued by the Director.
B. Failure to remove any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste within
the 10 days after written notice to do so, sent by the Director to the party
responsible by certified or registered mail, shall be deemed a violation
of this chapter.
C. No person, form or corporation shall place, move or discard any solid
waste in such a manner as to allow it to be carried or deposited by the
elements in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other
public place.
§ 447-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 447-5
1:137
D. No person, firm or corporation shall dispose of any solid waste upon any
public or private property, except as otherwise allowed by law.
E. Hazardous waste. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to place hazardous waste into any solid waste or recyclables container
or to submit any such substance to the Transfer Station or the Mid-
Connecticut System.
F. Bulky waste and scrap metal may not be collected or mixed with
municipal solid waste and shall be delivered to the place and at the
time as the Director may from time to time have designated. Applicable
charges shall by paid by the person/firm delivering the waste. Scrap
metal will be collected at the disposal site in containers and will
henceforth be recycled in accordance with a plan approved by the
Director.
§ 447-6. Recyclable material.
Recyclable material that is delivered to a designated disposal site by a
resident in a separate, clean form and deposited in the area designated
for recyclables shall not be charged. Recycled material that is delivered to
the designated disposal site by refuse collectors in accordance with a plan
approved by the Director or Recycling Coordinator will be accepted upon
payment of the disposal charge. The Director or Recycling Coordinator shall
determine whether the materials meet the specifications and requirements
of this section, paying special attention to the manner in which it is
delivered, separated and deposited in the designated areas.
A. Source separation for recycling by solid waste collectors.
(1) Recyclable materials. Each refuse collector must collect separated
mandatory recyclable materials from his customers in the manner
specified in this chapter and/or as required by the Director or
Recycling Coordinator.
(2) Separation of materials; collection. Recyclable materials shall be
separated from other solid waste and placed at the curb or other
designated place for collection on the days designated by the
collector. The collector shall determine and provide public notice of
the schedule for collecting all recyclable materials.
(3) Separation at dumpster. Multifamily dwelling units and commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential entities not utilizing curbside
collection must have an area conveniently located and approved
by the Director or Recycling Coordinator in sufficient quality and
condition designated for recyclable materials. Each container shall
be marked as to the material it is to receive. The type, location,
signing and number of containers shall be in accordance with a plan
presented to the Director or Recycling Coordinator by the property
owner.
(4) Methods of separating and packing. All recyclable materials shall be
separated from solid waste in the following manner:
(a) Clean and unsoiled paper shall be separated into the categories
defined in the definition of "recyclable material" and securely
tied in flat bundles, none of which shall weigh more than 50
pounds. Empty corrugated cardboard must be collapsed and tied
§ 447-5 CLINTON CODE § 447-6
1:138
in bundles not weighing more than 50 pounds and shall not be
more than two feet wide and four feet in length.
(b) Unbroken glass bottles, all types of metal food and beverage
cans and aluminum products, including used aluminum food
trays and foil, must be emptied of their contents and separated
from other solid waste and combined in rigid upright containers
used only for this category of recyclables and containing no
paper, plastic or other refuse. These materials need not be
flattened or processed in any way. Labels, corks, and neck rings
need not be removed. The container(s) shall be covered and
marked with three decals obtained from the Director or
Recyclable Coordinator or the hauler and placed equidistant
around and halfway up the sides of each container. Appropriate
recycling boxes may also be utilized.
(5) Each load of solid waste shall be subject to inspection by the Director
or Recycling Coordinator before and after dumping at the designated
disposal site to ensure that recyclable materials have been removed.
(6) Recyclable materials must be contained for transportation from the
source to the designated disposal site in either a truck separate
from those that pick up municipal solid waste or in a separate
compartment of a truck that picks up municipal solid waste. A
separate compartment means an area with its own floor, walls and
lid.
(7) Recyclable bottles and cans as collected shall be delivered to sites
designated by the Director or Recycling Coordinator.
(8) Additional rules and regulations concerning the separation and
recovery of designated recyclables may be established by a
resolution of the Board of Selectmen from time to time; they shall be
effective 15 days after publication in a local newspaper and posting
at the Clinton Transfer Station (if it is still in operation). Solid waste
collectors shall provide a copy of said new rule or regulation in two
consecutive billings to customers.
(9) Refuse collectors must leave their customers' containers in a neat
position and off the road and shall clean up materials spilled during
transport, collection or disposal. Containers larger than one cubic
yard must be left behind enclosures when said containers shall be in
public view. "Public view" shall mean visible from a road or public
parking area.
B. Source separation for recycling at the Clinton Transfer Station.
(1) Recyclable materials. Residents using the Clinton Transfer Station
must separate and deliver mandatory recyclable materials in the
manner specified by the Director or Recycling Coordinator.
(2) Separation of material. Recyclable materials shall be separated from
other solid waste and transported to the Clinton Transfer Station.
§ 447-7. Bulky waste.
A. Use of the bulky waste area shall be limited to residents of the Town of
Clinton and industries or commercial business, provided that such refuse
§ 447-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 447-7
1:139
collected or generated is a direct result of work operations or business
operations in the Town of Clinton.
B. No person or business, whether or not a resident of Clinton, may dispose
of refuse material originating outside the Town of Clinton.
C. Refuse disposed of at the bulky waste area shall be limited to bulky
waste and recyclables collected or generated in the Town of Clinton.
(1) The following materials will not be accepted at the bulky waste area:
(a) Automobiles or large parts thereof.
(b) Dangerous chemicals or explosives.
(c) Carcasses of any animals.
(2) In addition, the Selectmen, or their authorized agent, may prohibit
the disposal of any other refuse if in their opinion the nature and
quantity of such refuse is deemed to be dangerous to the public
health, welfare or safety or detrimental to the proper operation of
the bulky waste area.
D. Any person disposing of refuse shall do so at the specific locations and
in the proper containers, as determined by the custodian in charge of
the bulky waste area. Dumping of bulky waste anywhere else inside or
outside of the proper area will be a violation of this chapter.
E. No scavenging shall be permitted.
F. Under no circumstances shall burning of refuse be permitted at the
bulky waste area except by authorized Town personnel with permission
of the Fire Marshal.
G. The Selectmen shall set the hours and days of operation of the bulky
waste area as they shall deem appropriate.
§ 447-8. Licensing of solid waste collectors.
A. All solid waste collectors shall make application to the Director, in the
manner designated by the Director, for a license to collect, transport,
and dispose of solid waste and shall provide the Director with such
information as the Director may reasonably request, including the trade
or business name of the applicant, the names and addresses of all
officers, directors, principal shareholders and/or owners of the
applicant's business, and the names of other municipalities in which
the applicant collects, transports and/or disposes of solid waste and/or
recyclables. Satisfactory evidence of liability insurance, in such amount
and covering such risks as the Director or Recycling Coordinator may
reasonably require, shall be a prerequisite for a license.
B. A license may be denied in the discretion of the Director for any of the
following reasons, among others:
(1) The applicant has had previous license suspensions for an aggregate
exceeding six months in the previous five years and/or revocations,
either in the Town of Clinton or elsewhere, with respect to the
collection, transport and/or disposal of solid waste and/or
recyclables.
(2) The applicant's vehicles and/or equipment does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter or to standards established by the
Authority or the Director.
§ 447-7 CLINTON CODE § 447-8
1:140
(3) The applicant has not complied with one or more requirements of
the Town, another municipality or the Authority with respect to the
storage, collection, transport and/or disposal of solid waste and/or
recyclables.
C. Nontransferable licenses and renewals thereof shall be issued to
qualified solid waste and/or recyclable materials collectors for a period
of one year, commencing on the first day of July. No solid waste and/
or recyclable collector shall operate in the Town without such a license
currently in force.
D. If a licensed solid waste and/or recyclable collector (hereinafter referred
to as a "licensee") wishes to sell, lease, license, loan or in any other
manner, or to any effect, transfer all or any part of his business,
customers, or service route to another solid waste and/or recyclable
collector, such licensee shall give written notice thereof to the Director
at least 10 business days before the effective date of the transfer stating
the name, address and telephone number of the transferee, a clear
and concise description of the nature and extent of the business being
transferred and the effective date of the transfer.
§ 447-9. Suspension of license.
A. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for
suspension of any license issued by the Director hereunder, in addition
to any other penalty which may be imposed by law.
B. The Director may suspend a license as follows:
(1) For the first violation of § 447-8D or 447-14C, D or E, not less than
10 nor more than 30 days, and for the subsequent violation thereof,
not less than 30 nor more than 90 days.
(2) For the first violation of § 447-5C or 447-14B, not less than 30 nor
more than 90 days, and for the subsequent violation thereof, not less
than 90 nor more than 120 days.
(3) For the first violation of § 447-5D, 447-6A or 447-13A or C, not less
than 30 nor more than 120 days, and for subsequent violation, not
less than 90 nor more than 180 days.
C. When a license has been suspended hereunder two or more times,
the Director may thereafter suspend such license for a period of not
less than 180 days nor more than one year or, in the Director's sole
discretion, may initiate proceedings under § 447-10 hereof.
D. A suspension shall become effective 10 days from the date a written
notice of suspension is sent to the licensee by the Director unless the
licensee, within such ten-day period, files a written request for review
with the First Selectman. The notice of suspension shall be served on the
licensee by certified or registered mail or by delivering a copy thereof to
the licensee's place of business. Such notice shall include a summary of
the facts or conduct which forms the basis for the Director's action and
shall apprise the licensee of the right to file a request for review.
E. The request for review shall operate as an automatic stay of the
suspension, pending action by the Board of Review as hereinafter
provided; provided, however, that if the Director makes a written
determination that a stay will constitute a danger to the public health,
§ 447-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 447-9
1:141
safety or welfare, he shall send the solid waste collector a copy of such
determination by certified or registered mail and the suspension shall
thereupon become effective immediately.
F. Within 10 days from the date of the notice of suspension, the First
Selectman shall designate a Board of Review consisting of three
members of the Board of Selectmen (which may include the First
Selectman). Within 15 days after being so constituted, the Board of
Review shall makes its decision to confirm or vacate the suspension,
after giving the solid waste collector a full and fair opportunity to be
heard, including the right to be represented by counsel and the right to
present relevant evidence. The decision of the Board of Review shall be
final.
§ 447-10. Revocation of license.
A. To initiate proceedings to revoke a license issued under this chapter,
the Director shall issue a notice of revocation, which shall be served on
the licensee by sending a copy thereof to the address of the licensee
on file in the office of the Director, by certified or registered mail, and
delivering a copy to the licensee's place of business.
B. The notice of revocation shall include the following information:
(1) Notice that a hearing will be held before the Board of Selectman,
which date shall be no less than 30 nor more than 60 days from the
date of the notice of revocation, to determine whether the licensee's
license to collect, transport and/or dispose of solid waste and/or
recyclables should be revoked;
(2) A summary of the facts or conduct supporting the proposed
revocation; and
(3) Notice of the licensee's right to be represented at the hearing by
counsel, to present relevant evidence, and to examine and crossexamine
witnesses.
C. The Director shall provide a copy of the notice of revocation to the First
Selectman, who shall promptly call a meeting of the Board of Selectmen,
on the date and time and at the place specified in said notice, which date
may be the date of a regular meeting of the Board, to hear the complaint
against the licensee and to determine whether his license should be
revoked.
D. Within 10 days from said hearing, the Board of Selectmen shall make
a determination to revoke the license under consideration, suspend the
license for a period not to exceed three years, or reinstate the license to
its status immediately prior to the issuance of the notice of revocation.
E. Notice of the Board of Selectmen's determination shall be sent to the
licensee by certified or registered mail within three business days from
the date of the determination, and the revocation or suspension, if any,
shall thereupon become immediately effective.
§ 447-11. Special registration of vehicles.
A. Every licensee shall obtain from the Director a special registration for
each vehicle used to transport solid waste and/or recyclables, and will
be subject to such inspection as the Director may require, prior to the
§ 447-9 CLINTON CODE § 447-11
1:142
issuance of a registration. Special registrations shall not be transferable
from vehicle to vehicle; however, the Director may allow a temporary
transfer under special circumstances, such as a breakdown of a
registered vehicle, subject to such conditions as the Director may
prescribe.
B. All vehicles registered under this chapter shall meet the following
standards and such other, additional, or different standards as the
Director may, from time to time, require:
(1) All vehicles shall be equipped with automatic unloading mechanisms.
(2) Vehicles used for transporting liquid or semiliquid material shall be
of watertight construction.
(3) Vehicles with a capacity in excess of 10 cubic yards shall be of closed
construction; vehicles of smaller capacity may have an open top,
provided that they are equipped with an automatic or semiautomatic
furling cover or dumpster-type top.
C. A special registration fee shall be payable in the sum of $100 for each
vehicle having a capacity of 10 or more cubic yards and $50 for each
vehicle with a capacity of less than 10 yards.
D. Whenever a vehicle registered hereunder is transferred to another
licensee, such vehicle must be reinspected before being used to
transport solid waste and/or recyclables, but no additional registration
fee under this chapter shall be required.
E. A special registration number will be assigned to each vehicle and such
number shall be conspicuously displayed on the left front door of each
vehicle, or as may be specified by the Director.
F. Each licensee shall prominently display at all times on the left front door
of each registered vehicle, in letters at least four inches high, the trade
or business name, address and telephone number of the licensee.
§ 447-12. Suspension of special registration.
A. The Director may suspend a special registration issued under this
chapter for any violation of § 447-11A, B, D, E or F or 447-14A or B of
this chapter.
B. Whenever the Director finds that any of the above violations has
occurred, he may send the owner/operator of the vehicle a written
notice that the special registration for the vehicle is suspended, effective
immediately, until the violation is cured and the vehicle is in compliance.
C. The owner/operator shall, within 48 hours of receipt of said notice,
surrender the special registration to the Director, and the same shall
remain suspended until the Director shall have been advised by the
owner/operator that the violation has been cured and the Director has
inspected the vehicle and confirmed its compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 447-13. Designated disposal sites.
A. All licensees shall deliver solid waste and/or recyclables collected within
the limits of the Town of Clinton to the designated disposal sites, as
applicable, and shall pay the relevant disposal charges.
§ 447-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 447-13
1:143
B. Solid waste and/or recyclables delivered to the designated disposal sites
shall not include any hazardous waste and may not be of such quality or
nature as to:
(1) Materially impair the operation, capacity or structural integrity of
the designated disposal sites or of any solid waste disposal facility in
the State of Connecticut to which it may be later transferred; or
(2) Create flammable, explosive, or other harmful or dangerous
conditions.
C. Waste which does not comply with the requirements of Subsection B
above shall be disposed of as the Director or Recycling Coordinator
may determine. The Director or Recycling Coordinator may approve the
disposal of presegregated, recyclable material at one or more facilities
which accept and process such material.
D. Any licensee failing to pay any disposal charges within 30 days after
the date of an invoice therefor shall be liable for interest on the unpaid
charges at the rate of 1% per month or fraction thereof, plus costs of
collection, including reasonable attorney fees.
§ 447-14. Licensee's responsibilities.
A. All vehicles and equipment used to collect, transport and/or dispose of
solid waste and/or recyclables shall be operated and maintained in good
working order and free of obnoxious odors and residual solid waste.
B. Solid waste and/or recycling vehicles shall be covered at all times while
in motion on any public street or highway.
C. The licensee shall update, revise and keep current the information
provided under § 447-8 of this chapter and shall provide the Director
with current information from time to time and upon demand, including
a current list of the names and addresses of customers serviced by the
licensee.
D. If any resident of the Town in unable to obtain or is refused satisfactory
solid waste and/or recyclable collection service, such resident may make
application to the Director, who will designate one or more licensees
to provide such service, and failure or refusal of any such licensee to
comply, without good cause shown, shall be a violation of this chapter.
E. A licensee may refuse to provide collection service to any customer
who is more than 60 days delinquent in the payment of the licensee's
charges, provided that the licensee gives the Director 10 days' prior
written notice. Once all arrears have been paid in full, the licensee shall
restore collection services to the customer.
§ 447-15. Transfer Station.
A. The Clinton Transfer Station shall not accept solid waste from business
or commercial establishments or from solid waste collectors. Owners or
occupants of residential property in the Town of Clinton may dispose
of their solid waste and/or recyclable materials at the Clinton Transfer
Station, provided that:
(1) The solid waste was generated within the limits of the Town of
Clinton;
§ 447-13 CLINTON CODE § 447-15
1:144
(2) The resident has either an annual permit issued for hardship and
other special cases or a prepaid permit issued for a particular
quantity or period of time;
(3) Disposal is made only on scheduled days and times and in
compliance with such rules and procedures as may be established by
the Director or Recycling Coordinator;
(4) The solid waste contains no recyclable materials; and
(5) Recyclable materials are separated in accordance with § 447-6B of
this chapter.
B. The Board of Selectmen may establish and require the payment of
reasonable fees for use of the Clinton Transfer Station, to defray the cost
of its operation and maintenance.
C. The Town reserves the right to close the Clinton Transfer Station
temporarily, or permanently, at any time.
§ 447-16. Security and indemnity.
A. The Director may require a licensee to post a bond or provide such
other security as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to ensure
payment of all required fees.
B. A licensee, by accepting a license issued under this chapter, agrees
to hold harmless the Authority and the Town from any loss, damage
or injury arising from disposal or delivery to any designated disposal
sites of solid waste and/or recyclables which do not conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 447-17. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any solid waste collector and/or bulky waste collector who disposes of
more than one cubic foot of solid waste at any one time, at a location
other than that which is designated by the Town, shall be liable for a
civil penalty of $1,000 for each violation and $5,000 for any subsequent
violation.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who or which disposes of any solid waste
in violation of § 447-5D of this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty
of up to $10,000 for each day such violation continues.
C. Any person violating any other provision of this chapter, except § 447-6,
shall be liable to a fine of not more than $100 for each day such violation
continues.
D. Any commercial generator who violates any portion of § 447-6 of this
chapter shall be liable for a fine of up to $500.
E. Any solid waste collector and/or bulky waste and/or recyclables collector
shall be liable for a fine of up to $100 for failure to report on generators
or failure to tag violators or failure to assist the municipality in
identifying a bad load delivered to a designated disposal site. Any such
collector shall be liable for a fine of $1,000 for the first offense for
knowingly mixing recyclables with solid waste and a fine of up to $5,000
for subsequent violations.
F. The Authority shall be subject to a warning followed by a fine of $500
for failure to notify the municipality about the delivery of loads of solid
§ 447-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 447-17
1:145
waste originating from the municipality containing significant quantities
of recyclable items.
Chapter 455
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 194.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 241.
Littering — See Ch. 358.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 500.
§ 447-17 CLINTON CODE § 447-17
1:146
ARTICLE I
Excavations
[Adopted 10-10-1972]
§ 455-1. Authority; permit required.
Under the provisions of C.G.S. § 16-229, and any subsequent amendment
thereof, no public service company shall excavate any highway within the
Town of Clinton until its duly authorized representative has applied for and
received from the Clinton Board of Selectmen a written permit for such
excavation, except as herein otherwise provided.
§ 455-2. Issuance of permit.
Within 30 days after receipt of a proper application, the Board of Selectmen
shall issue a written permit for such excavation, upon such terms and
conditions as to the conduct of the work as may be reasonable.
§ 455-3. Emergency conditions.
Whenever emergency conditions make a formal application impracticable,
the First Selectman, or his designated representative, may give oral or
written permission for such excavation.
§ 455-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-3
1:147

ARTICLE II
Scenic Roads
[Adopted 5-10-2000]
§ 455-4. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this article is to help preserve Clinton's rural character and
beauty by enabling property owners to preserve scenic rural roads abutting
their property.
§ 455-5. Delegation of responsibility.
The power to designate scenic rural roads is hereby delegated to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, such designation to be made in
accordance with the standards and procedures set forth herein; however,
those powers regarding the same which are reserved unto the Board of
Selectmen are specified hereafter.
§ 455-6. Procedures for designating scenic rural road.
A. Petition.
(1) Property owners may petition the Planning and Zoning Commission
(PZC) for a designation of a Town road or portion of a Town road
as a scenic rural road. The petition shall state what road or portion
of road is requested to be designated as a scenic rural road and
describe those characteristics of the road which qualify it for scenic
rural road status, as well as other characteristics which enhance the
scenic character of the road.
(2) The petition shall be signed by the owners of a majority of lot
frontage abutting the road or portion of road in question, stating that
they approve of designating the road or portion of road a scenic rural
road, and indicating to the best of their knowledge their lot frontage
along the road or portion of road in question. Each signer of the
petition shall indicate his or her address. The petition shall include
the names and addresses of owners of lot frontage abutting the road
or portion of the road who did not sign the petition. The petition
must contain the name, address and signature of the circulator of the
petition, who must be a resident of Clinton. Said petition shall also
have a signed statement by the circulator that the circulator either
knows each individual who signed the petition or that the signer
satisfactorily identified himself or herself to the circulator.
B. The original of the petition shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission with the application form designated for a scenic
road designation, and a copy shall be filed by the circulator with the
Town Clerk.
C. The petition shall be processed and considered by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, which shall verify road frontage and ownership
as set forth on the petition pursuant to Subsection A above. A public
hearing shall be held. All time limits for receipt of application, opening
§ 455-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-6
1:149
and closing of public hearing, and decision shall be as specified in C.G.S.
§ 8-3.
D. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve the petition and
designate the road or portion of road that is the subject of the petition as
a scenic rural road. Such designation shall specify what characteristics
of the road or portion of road qualify it for scenic rural road status
and what other characteristics enhance its scenic character. Upon
designation, the road in question shall be protected under § 455-8 of
this article, provided that alterations or improvements may be made
pursuant to § 455-9 of this article.
E. The Planning and Zoning Commission may deny the petition and state its
reasons for the denial on the record.
F. If the petition is approved, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
provide notice of its decision pursuant to C.G.S. § 8-3(d), including
written notice to the circulator.
G. The Town Clerk shall maintain a list of all the roads or portions of
roads designated as scenic rural roads, and said list, along with any
maps of designated scenic roads submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, shall be available to the public for inspection.
§ 455-7. Standards for designation of scenic rural road.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall designate a road or portion of
road a scenic rural road if the following standards are met:
A. The road or portion of road is free of intensive commercial development;
B. The road or portion of road is free of intensive vehicular traffic;
C. Owners of a majority of the lot frontage abutting the road or portion
of road have signed the petition indicating that they approve of the
designation; and
D. The road or portion of road meets at least two of the following criteria:
(1) It is unpaved.
(2) It is bordered by mature trees or stone walls.
(3) The traveled portion of the road is no more than 20 feet in width.
(4) It offers scenic views.
(5) It blends naturally into the surrounding terrain.
(6) It parallels or crosses over brooks, streams, lakes or ponds.
§ 455-8. Protection of scenic rural roads from alterations and
improvements.
A. Restrictions.
(1) After a road or portion of road has been designated a scenic rural
road, the Town shall continue to maintain it as it had prior to such
designation. No repair, alterations or improvements shall be made
therein except:
(a) As specifically permitted by decision of the Board of Selectmen;
(b) As made necessary as a result of a natural disaster and permitted
pursuant to Subsection B of this section;
(c) As has been previously approved prior to the effective date of
this article; or
(d) As necessary to mediate an unsafe condition.
§ 455-6 CLINTON CODE § 455-8
1:150
(2) Any such repair shall be made with consideration of the rural
characteristics of the road and with as little change as feasible to
those characteristics which qualified this road or portion of road as
a scenic road.
(3) Otherwise, no material changes shall be made in the width of the
right-of-way or the traveled portion, the alignment, the grade, or
the elevation of the road, or in the type of roadway surface. Within
the right-of-way, no trees may be cut or removed, no stone walls or
portions thereof may be torn down or destroyed, no boulders may
be removed, and no trees or other vegetation within the untraveled
portion of the road may be disturbed, except as permitted herein.
(4) Routine road maintenance shall include removal of dead or seriously
diseased or damaged branches of tress; trimming of tree branches
that encroach on the traveled portion of the road below the height
needed to allow school buses and emergency vehicles to pass;
trimming and removal of brush and removal of boulders or other
obstacles that encroach on the traveled portion of the road;
necessary trimming for utility lines; trimming of brush to enhance
and protect scenic views, stone walls, mature trees, and other
characteristics of the scenic rural road set forth in the decision
designating it as a scenic rural road; correction of drainage
problems; and graveling, retreatment and repair of existing roadway
surfaces. All routine road maintenance shall be performed in a
manner to protect and enhance those characteristics of the road
which are specified in the decision designating the scenic rural road
as is practicable.
(5) Nothing herein shall prohibit a landowner from permanently
removing a portion of a stone wall or a tree in order to construct
or improve a driveway or, in the case of subdivision, to connect a
subdivision road with a designated scenic rural road. A property
owner may make improvements to that portion of an existing
driveway which lies within the right-of-way, including paving,
presuming necessary permits have been obtained for such work.
B. In case of a natural disaster in which the scenic rural road becomes
impassable or unsafe for public travel and access must be provided,
emergency repairs may be made as needed; they shall be made with
consideration to repairing in a manner which will avoid or reduce
adverse effects on the characteristics of the road specified in the
decision designating it a scenic rural road. Reconstruction of the scenic
rural road shall be done in a manner to restore the road to the extent
possible to its scenic character at the time of designation.
C. Paving of the unpaved traveled portion of the scenic rural road shall be
permitted if:
(1) The Board of Selectmen approves and authorizes said paving; and
(2) The owners of a majority of lot frontage along the unpaved portion of
the scenic rural road indicate their approval of the paving by signing
a written statement agreeing to the paving and filing with the Town
Clerk and the Board of Selectmen. The statement shall describe the
unpaved traveled portion of the scenic rural road to be paved and
§ 455-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-8
1:151
indicate each signer's knowledge, each signer's lot frontage along
the unpaved portion of the scenic rural road, the lot frontage of
property owners who have not signed, and the percentage of total lot
frontage represented by signers as compared to the total lot frontage
of the portion of the road to be paved.
D. No fewer than 20 days prior to the start of paving or of any work
on the road preparatory to paving, the Selectmen shall cause written
notice be sent, certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owners of
lot frontage along the unpaved portion on the scenic rural road to be
paved who did not sign the written statement. Said notice shall state
the date on which paving work or work preparatory to paving is to
begin, describe the unpaved portion of the scenic rural road to be paved,
and indicate that the statement approving the paving may be examined
at the office of the Town Clerk. If, within 15 days of receipt of said
notice by said property owners, no claim is made that the signers of
the written statement are not owners of a majority of lot frontage on
the unpaved portion of the scenic rural road to be paved, the paving or
work preparatory to paving may proceed on the scheduled date. If such
a claim is made, the Town Clerk shall immediately notify the Board of
Selectmen. If the Selectmen decide that the written statement is signed
by the owners of a majority of lot frontage abutting the unpaved portion
of the scenic rural road to be paved, the paving and work preparatory to
paving may proceed. If they decide that the written statement is not so
signed, the unpaved portion of the scenic rural road may not be paved.
Paving of the unpaved portion of a scenic rural road pursuant to this
subsection shall not abrogate any other protections of scenic rural roads
set forth in Subsections A and B of this section.
§ 455-9. Correction of safety hazards.
A. If the Board of Selectmen, or its designated agent, finds that specific
alterations or improvements need to be made in the road to correct a
hazard, whether such hazard to the safety of the public is in existence at
the time this article becomes effective or not, a public hearing shall be
held regarding such alterations or improvements, after necessary legal
notice, after which the Board of Selectmen shall render a decision as to
whether to undertake the alteration or improvement.
B. In rendering said decision, the Selectmen shall consider the nature of
the hazard and procedures for improvement which would cause the least
damage to the character of the scenic rural road, as well as costs for the
same. Stone walls which are interrupted for purposes allowed under this
article shall be rebuilt except where their existence would interfere with
the construction or existence of the improvement.
§ 455-10. Rescinding scenic rural road designation.
A. The procedure as to the petition, legal notice, public hearing, decision,
and notice of decision as set forth for designating a scenic road in
§ 455-6 of this article shall be followed with regard to a petition for
rescinding a scenic road designation. In addition, the application to
§ 455-8 CLINTON CODE § 455-10
1:152
rescind the designation shall include the reason(s) why the scenic road
designation should be rescinded.
B. If the decision rescinds the scenic rural road status of the road or
portion of road on question, the Town Clerk shall correct the list and
map of scenic roads accordingly. If the decision denies the petition for
rescission, the road or portion of road in question shall continue to be
designated as a scenic rural road protected by the provisions of this
article.
§ 455-11. Town responsibilities.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the Town of Clinton
to undertake improvements, repairs, alterations or maintenance, including
pavement, to any scenic rural road that the Town, through its designated
bodies, shall not choose to do.
§ 455-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-11
1:153
Chapter 465
TAXATION
§ 455-11 CLINTON CODE § 455-11
1:154
ARTICLE I
Payment of Taxes
[Adopted 6-27-1967; amended 8-5-2009]
§ 465-1. Installment payments.
The general property tax levy for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1968, and
for each succeeding fiscal year shall be payable in two equal installments,
the first such installment becoming due on July 1 and the second installment
on January 2 of each fiscal year, except that whenever the entire tax due on
any assessment list shall not exceed $100 said entire tax shall become due
on July 1 of the fiscal year for which it is levied.
§ 465-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 465-1
1:155

ARTICLE II
Exemption for Solar Energy Systems
[Adopted 3-16-1977]
§ 465-2. Exemption authorized.
The Town of Clinton, Connecticut, hereby authorizes the property tax
exemption for solar energy heating or cooling systems set forth in C.G.S.
§ 12-81(56)(a), (b) and (c).
§ 465-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 465-2
1:157

ARTICLE III
Effective Date of Tax Exemption
[Adopted 6-25-1985]
§ 465-3. Date of acquisition of property.
The property tax exemption authorized by any of Subsections (7) to (16)
inclusive of C.G.S. § 12-81, as amended, shall be effective as of the date of
acquisition of the property to which the exemption applies. Any tax-exempt
organization shall be reimbursed by the Town of Clinton for any tax paid
to the Town of Clinton, or to the prior owner of said property, by way of
adjustment at the transfer of title subsequent to its date of acquisition.
§ 465-4. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to all transfers of property subsequent to
January 1, 1983.
§ 465-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 465-4
1:159

ARTICLE IV
Waiver of Certain Tax Bills
[Adopted 5-15-1996]
§ 465-5. Authority of Tax Collector to waive payment.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-144c, as amended by P.A. 95-283, Section 10, the
Tax Collector of the Town of Clinton is hereby authorized to waive any
payment due from a taxpayer provided the amount of the tax is less than $5.
§ 465-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 465-5
1:161

ARTICLE V
Excess Tax Payments
[Adopted 5-15-1996]
§ 465-6. Disposition of excess payment.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-129, as amended by P.A. 95-283, Section 10, the
Tax Collector is hereby authorized to retain for the benefit of the Town any
payment received which is in excess of the amount due from any taxpayer,
provided the amount of the excess payment is less than $5. Any excess
payment by any taxpayer in an amount greater than $5 shall be refunded in
accordance with the provisions of C.G.S. § 12-129, as amended as aforesaid.
§ 465-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 465-6
1:163

ARTICLE VI
Exemption for Ambulance-Type Vehicles
[Adopted 11-13-1996; amended in its entirety 10-15-1997]
§ 465-7. Exemption granted.
Any ambulance-type motor vehicle which is used exclusively for the purpose
of transporting any medically incapacitated individual, except any such
vehicle used to transport any such individual for payment, is exempt from
personal property taxation.
§ 465-8. Definition.
For the purposes of this article, the term "ambulance-type vehicle" means
any motor vehicle that is specially designed or constructed, and equipped,
and is intended to be used for and is maintained or operated for the
transportation of invalid or incapacitated human beings.
§ 465-9. Application for exemption.
Application for such exemption shall be made upon such forms as may be
prescribed by the Town Assessor and shall contain:
A. The name and address of the applicant and the owners of the ambulancetype
vehicle.
B. A description of each such vehicle, including the make, model, year
of manufacture, vehicle identification number, current state license
number, and the length of time the ambulance-type vehicle has been in
use.
C. The location and description of the place or places from which it is
intended to operate.
D. Such other information as the Town Assessor shall deem necessary to
comply with this section.
§ 465-10. Review of vehicle.
Furthermore, the Assessor retains the right to review any vehicle claiming
an exemption, at any time, in order to either continue or remove the exempt
status.
§ 465-11. Initial application for exemption.
Initial application for exemption shall be made not later than November
1 following the assessment date with respect to which such exemption is
claimed. For vehicles purchased after October 1 and before August 1 of
the initial assessment year for which such exemption is requested, said
application shall be made not later than November 1 following the date of
purchase. Once approved, subsequent applications need not be filed unless
a new motor vehicle is purchased.
§ 465-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 465-12
1:165
§ 465-12. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to the assessment year which commenced
October 1, 1997, and succeeding assessment years thereafter.
§ 465-12 CLINTON CODE § 465-12
1:166
ARTICLE VII
Volunteer Fire Department Tax Exemption Program
[Adopted 7-1-201510]
§ 465-13. Active members.
Active members, hereinafter referred to as "members," as defined by the
Department's bylaws, are members of the Fire Fighter Division, the
Emergency Medical Service Division, and the Fire Police Division.
§ 465-14. Applicability.
This program is applicable to active members of the Clinton Volunteer Fire
Department who meet the requirements as set forth in the bylaws and the
Town of Clinton Volunteer Tax Exemption Program.
§ 465-15. Purpose.
Such property tax relief shall be in the form of an exemption to lessen or
pay a member's tax liability, not to exceed $1,000 per tax year per member.
Upon review of a member's compliance with the bylaws and attendance
records, the Fire Chief shall attest to the accuracy of the list of qualifying
members. The list shall be provided to the Board of Selectmen prior to
their second meeting in December. Upon approval, it will be forwarded to
the Assessor by December 30 for the preceding October 1 Grand List for
appropriate action.
§ 465-16. Instructions for application.
After completing one year of service, a member may apply for a tax
exemption reduction of up to $1,000, provided the minimum requirements
set forth herein are met.
§ 465-17. Eligibility.
Members shall meet the minimum requirements set forth in the bylaws
for responding to emergency calls, attending department meetings, drills,
activities and special events within the time frame of November 1 through
October 31 annually. The officer in charge shall verify attendance for each
function/response through the IMC accountability system. If any member is
caught falsifying attendance records, he/she will forfeit the tax exemption.
The Adjudicating Board of the Clinton Volunteer Fire Department may
remove the member from the tax exemption eligibility as part of the
discipline.
10.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. VII, Volunteer Fire Department
Tax Exemption Program, adopted 8-17-2014, and provided that it would be effective on the
Grand List of October 1, 2014.
§ 465-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 465-18
1:167
§ 465-18. Exemption applied.
Each member who has served the Town of Clinton and meets the criteria
as set forth in the preceding instructions, and shall have any real and/or
motor vehicle property taxes owed to the Town of Clinton, may receive
a tax exemption. Upon receipt of the information set forth above, the
Assessor shall apply a tax exemption against property assessed in the
name of the qualifying member, the amount of which shall reduce the
member's estimated tax liability to the Town of Clinton equal to the amount
of exemption for which the member qualifies hereunder. In no event may
a member(s) receive an exemption greater than the tax owed to the Town
of Clinton; provided further that no member shall receive this benefit if
taxes are delinquent on the May 15 prior to the July 1 due date. The tax
exemption shall be applied first against real property owned by the eligible
member(s), and the balance thereof, if necessary, against any personal
property assessment of the individual(s). In the event that the real property
is transferred during the year following the date of assessment of that
property, the exemption shall be pro-rated for the balance of the assessment
year. Said exemption shall not be carried over from one fiscal year to
another.
§ 465-19. Revisions.
The program pursuant to this article shall be revisited in accordance with
C.G.S. § 12-81w, as may be amended. The Town of Clinton or the Fire
Department may also request this article be revisited in the future.
§ 465-18 CLINTON CODE § 465-19
1:168
ARTICLE VIII
Tax Relief for Elderly and Disabled Persons
[Adopted 4-3-201311]
§ 465-20. Adoption of statute; qualifications.
The Town of Clinton hereby adopts the provisions of C.G.S. § 12-129n,
as amended, providing certain tax relief for the elderly and disabled in
accordance with the terms of said statute and in accordance with the
following recommendations as approved by the Board of Finance,
commencing with the October 1, 2001, Grand List. Qualifications for
property tax relief provided by this article shall be as follows:
A. An applicant or his/her spouse must own the property for which tax relief
is sought and has been a homeowner of the Town of Clinton as of the
date of application for a period of not less than one year, and does not
owe any delinquent taxes to the Town other than those allowed by law
under the Town's Tax Deferral Program;
B. Be 65 years of age or over by December 31 of the year preceding
application, or whose spouse, living with him/her is 65 years or over, or
60 years and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer who has qualified under
this section at the time of his/her death with respect to real property
eligible for tax relief under this article;
C. Be under age 65 and eligible in accordance with applicable federal
regulations to receive permanent total disability benefits under social
security, or has not been engaged in employment covered by social
security and accordingly has not qualified for benefits thereunder but
has become qualified for permanent total disability benefits under any
federal, state or local government retirement or disability plan, including
the Railroad Retirement Act and any government-related teachers'
retirement plan, in which the requirements with respect to qualifications
for such permanent total disability benefits are comparable to such
requirements under social security; and
D. Shall have individually, if unmarried, or jointly, if married, combined
adjusted gross income, as shown on Internal Revenue forms, social
security benefits, and all other income, taxable or nontaxable, of $60,000
or less during the calendar year preceding the filing of his/her
application in accordance with the guidelines set forth below.
§ 465-21. Program established; guidelines.
A. Tax relief shall be provided by the Town, to qualified applicants, with
household incomes of $60,000 or less, and residency requirements as
stated above. Maximum yearly allowable relief to be $550 or total tax
whichever is less. Total yearly program not to be more than 1/2 of 1% of
the Town of Clinton's preceding year total operating budget.
B. The real property for which tax relief is sought must be occupied by the
applicant as his or her principal residence and must either be owned by
11.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. VIII, Tax Relief for Elderly and
Disabled Persons, adopted 1-23-2002, as amended.
§ 465-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 465-21
1:169
the applicant or be real property for which the applicant or his or her
spouse is liable for taxes under C.G.S. § 12-48.
C. If property is held in trust for a person who would otherwise qualify for
the elderly tax relief program, the tax relief may still be granted if the
claimant is the primary beneficiary of the trust and the claimant meets
all the requirements under this program. Under these circumstances,
the application for relief shall be accompanied by a copy of the trust
agreement. The trust agreement shall be reviewed by Town Counsel
prior to any relief being granted to the claimant.
D. The property tax relief provided by this section shall be in addition to
and not dependent upon those benefits available to qualified taxpayers
under any C.G.S. §§ 12-129b to 12-129d, 12-129h and 12-170aa,
provided that the Town and state benefits in any one year shall not
exceed 75% of the real property tax which would have been imposed on
a qualified taxpayer in the absence of such statute and this section. Tax
relief would apply only to the residence itself, the house lot which the
residence is located and improvements on said lot.
(1) If a qualifying taxpayer owns property jointly with a non-spouse, tax
relief under the elderly tax relief program will be proportionate to
the qualifying taxpayer's interest in the property.
(2) Before the tax relief or any portion thereof under this section shall
be given, such person must first apply for tax relief under any
state statute for which he/she is eligible. If such applicant has not
applied for tax relief under any state statute because he/she is not
eligible, he or she shall so certify by filing annually to the Assessor
or authorized agent on a form acceptable to the Assessor an affidavit
testifying to his or her eligibility. The application must be filed each
year with the Assessor between February 1 and May 15 for tax relief
for the following fiscal year which begins on July 1.
E. Any otherwise-qualified applicant must own and reside on the property
subject to tax relief for at least 184 days per year, for the property to
qualify as the taxpayer's principal residence. Only one tax credit shall be
allowed for each property eligible for tax relief. In any case where title
to such real property is recorded in the name of the taxpayer or his or
her spouse who is eligible for tax relief and any other person or persons,
the tax amount shall be prorated to allow a tax credit equivalent to
the fractional share in the property of such eligible taxpayer or spouse;
if such property is a multiple-family dwelling, such tax credit shall be
prorated to reflect the fractional portion of such property occupied
by the eligible taxpayer as provided by state statutes. Persons not
otherwise eligible shall not receive any tax relief.
F. If any person entitled to the tax relief dies without leaving a qualified
spouse, prorated tax relief shall be given from October 1, of the
assessment year in which death occurs to the date of death. Such
prorated portion shall be determined by a fraction, the numerator of
which shall be the number of full months from the first day of October
in such assessment year to the date of death and the denominator shall
be 12. If such person dies, the tax relief which such person shall be
allowed for his or her estate shall be given for the next fiscal year
§ 465-21 CLINTON CODE § 465-21
1:170
and for any subsequent fiscal years in which the surviving spouse of
such person meets the requirements set forth. If any person receiving
qualified tax relief hereunder sells the property on which the tax relief is
granted, no additional tax relief shall be allowed for his or her interest
in the property, and the purchaser of such property shall pay the Town
a prorated portion of the tax relief for that fiscal year. Such prorated
portion of such relief shall be determined by a fraction, the numerator
of which shall be the number of months from the date of conveyance,
including the month of conveyance, to the end of the assessment year
and the denominator of which shall be 12. If such conveyance occurs in
the month of October, the grantor shall be disqualified for tax relief in
such assessment year. The grantee shall be required within a period not
to exceed 10 days immediately following the date of such conveyance
to notify the Assessor thereof, whereupon the Assessor shall determine
the amount of tax reduction to which the grantor is entitled for such
assessment year.
G. The Tax Collector and Assessor of the Town of Clinton shall prescribe,
with regard to their respective duties under this section, such forms
and procedures as may be necessary to implement this section. The
Assessor shall determine the applicant's qualifications for such relief.
All applications, federal income tax returns filed therewith and any
additional evidence of qualifying income which the Assessor may require
shall be kept confidential and not open to public inspection.
H. Applications for benefits under this section shall be filed annually with
the Assessor or authorized agent between February 1 and May 15 when
State of Connecticut applications are due, with the exception of the
initial year in which applications may be accepted between March 1,
2002, and May 15, 2002.
I. Any applicant who has received benefits from this section and is later
found to be ineligible after filing a false affidavit will be liable for all
benefits received. The amount due will be treated as taxes not paid from
the date they would have been due and will be subject to interest and
penalties as prescribed by law.
J. This article shall take effect on passage and publication according to
law. Once this article takes effect, it may be amended by vote of the
legislative body on recommendation of the Board of Finance without
complying with requirements of C.G.S. § 12-129n applicable to this
article's initial approval.
K. If any section, subsection or other portion of this article shall be
declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the
remaining portions of this article if they can be given effect without the
unconstitutional or invalid provisions.
L. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Assessor in determining
the amount of relief or in disapproving any such application under
this article may appeal to the Board of Selectmen in writing, within
10 days after the date of the written notification of the Assessor on
such application. The Board of Selectmen shall promptly consider such
§ 465-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 465-21
1:171
appeal and may grant or deny the relief requested, or make such other
modifications necessary to comply with this article.
§ 465-21 CLINTON CODE § 465-21
1:172
ARTICLE IX
Tax Abatement for Surviving Spouses
[Adopted 2-27-2002]
§ 465-22. Authority to grant abatement.
Pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 12-81x, the Tax Collector is hereby
authorized and directed to grant annually an abatement of all of the
property tax assessed by and due the Town of Clinton with respect to
real property owned and occupied by the surviving spouse of a Town of
Clinton police officer, supernumerary, volunteer firefighter or emergency
medical services member who died while in the performance of such police
officer's, supernumerary's, volunteer firefighter's or emergency medical
services member's duties, provided that said police officer, supernumerary,
firefighter or emergency medical services member was a resident of the
Town of Clinton at the time of his or her death.
§ 465-23. Information to establish eligibility.
Each person seeking the tax abatement provided herein shall provide the
Town with information that may reasonably be required to establish
eligibility therefor. If the surviving spouse subsequently remarries no
further abatement shall be granted.
§ 465-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 465-23
1:173

ARTICLE X
Tax Deferral for Elderly and Disabled Persons
[Adopted 11-19-2008]
§ 465-24. Adoption of statute.
The Town of Clinton hereby adopts the provisions of C.G.S. § 12-129n, as
amended, providing certain tax deferrals for the elderly and disabled in
accordance with the following recommendations as approved by the Board
of Finance.
§ 465-25. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the Town under
C.G.S. § 12-129n, as the same may be amended from time to time, and shall
be effective for the Grand List of October 1, 2001.
§ 465-26. Qualifications for tax deferral.
A. To qualify for the tax deferral provided in this article, a taxpayer shall
meet the following requirements:
(1) Shall be either 65 years of age or over at the close of the previous
calendar year, or his or her spouse, who is domiciled with him or her,
or has been confined to a nursing home from his or her residence in
Clinton, shall be 65 years of age or over or the surviving spouse of a
taxpayer previously qualified under this article at the time of his or
her death, subject to requalification under Section 134-3D, or under
age 65 and eligible in accordance with applicable federal regulations
to receive permanent total disability benefits under social security, or
have not been engaged in employment covered by social security and
accordingly have not qualified for permanent total disability under
any federal, state or local government retirement or disability plan,
including the Railroad Retirement Act and any government-related
teachers' retirement plan, in which requirements with respect to
qualifications for such permanent total disability benefits are
comparable to such requirements under social security;
(2) Shall occupy said real property as his or her principal residence for
not less than 184 days in each calendar year;
(3) Shall have first applied for the state elderly program, "Heart," and
may apply also for the Town of Clinton tax relief program;
(4) Shall have been liable for residential real property taxes to the Town
of Clinton for a period of one year immediately preceding the receipt
of tax benefits under this article; and
(5) Shall have individually, if unmarried, or jointly, if married, adjusted
gross income, as defined in the Internal Revenue Code of 1954,
as amended, plus social security benefits, income from other taxexempt
retirement and annuity sources and income from tax-exempt
bonds, hereinafter called "qualifying income," during the calendar
year preceding the filing of his or her application in an amount of not
more than the $60,000. [Amended 5-11-2014]
§ 465-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 465-26
1:175
B. The encumbrances and liens on the homeowner's property shall not
exceed the assessed value of the property at the time the benefits are
conferred.
§ 465-27. Benefits for property.
A. The benefits under this article shall be limited to the residence of the
taxpayer, the house lot upon which such residence is located and any
non-income-producing accessory buildings located upon said lot.
B. The property tax deferral provided by this article shall be in addition
to and not dependent upon those benefits available to elderly/disabled
taxpayers under any state statutes.
§ 465-28. Implementation; qualifying income; confidentiality.
The Tax Collector and the Assessor of the Town of Clinton shall prescribe,
with regard to their respective duties under this article, such forms and
procedures as may be necessary to implement this article. The Assessor,
in addition, shall satisfy himself or herself as to the qualifying income of
an applicant for benefits under this article by requesting and reviewing
such evidence, including documents, of qualifying income as he or she may
deem pertinent. All applications, federal income tax returns filed herewith
and any additional evidence of qualifying income which the Assessor may
require shall be kept confidential and not open to public inspection. No
applicant or spouse living with applicant shall be eligible for any benefit
under the tax deferral program if he or she is in arrears for any taxes owed
the Town.
§ 465-29. Appeals.
Persons aggrieved by an act or determination of the Assessor or Tax
Collector under this article may appeal to the Board of Selectmen, in
writing, within 10 days after the date of the written notification of the
Assessor on such application.
§ 465-30. Application for benefits.
Applications for benefits under this article shall:
A. Be made on forms provided by the Assessor of the Town of Clinton and
shall be accompanied by a copy of the applicant's most recent federal tax
return, if one was filed, and documentation of all other income;
B. State, in addition to the qualifying information set forth in the above
sections, whether or not the applicant is currently applying for any other
tax relief or deferral for the elderly/disabled under any state statute;
C. Disclose in writing the existence of all encumbrances and liens on his or
her residential real property, setting forth the face amount as well as the
balance due on each such encumbrances or lien; and
D. Provide proof of active homeowner's insurance of property.
§ 465-31. Filing of application.
§ 465-26 CLINTON CODE § 465-31
1:176
A. Applications for benefits under this article shall be filed with the
Assessor or authorized agent between February 1 and May 15 of any
year in which tax benefits are claimed.
B. Applicants who elect to apply for deferral benefits under this article
who have a qualifying income not more than $60,000 per household will
receive tax deferral benefits as stated herein, unless they opt to receive
a lower benefit. [Amended 5-11-2014]
C. Qualifying income is $60,000 or less. Benefit rate available is 75% of
the tax bill inclusive of any exemptions and state and Town relief. The
benefit shall, in any case, not exceed $5,000 for any one fiscal year.
Any qualified recipient of a tax deferral benefit shall be subject to the
following: [Amended 5-11-2014]
(1) All benefits shall be due to the Town upon the conveyance of the real
property or death of the recipient, whichever occurs first, subject to
requalification provisions in accordance with this article.
(2) Total deferments, including accrued interest, for all years shall not
exceed the current assessed value of the real property, as
determined by the Assessor.
(3) The recipient shall enter into a written agreement with the Town
providing for reimbursement of the total amount of such tax deferral
benefit, including interest accrued for the Grand List years 1990 to
2000. No interest shall be charged for the tax deferred starting with
the 2001 Grand List. The Tax Collector shall record on the Land
Records of the Town a municipal lien on the property disclosing
that said tax is payable upon the recipient's death or conveyance of
said property. Said lien shall have all of the same statutory priority
accorded a municipal tax lien.
§ 465-32. Proration of tax deferral.
The property tax deferral provided for in this article may, in any case where
title to real property is recorded in the name of the taxpayer or his or her
spouse and any other person or persons, be prorated to reflect the fractional
share of such taxpayer or spouse, as in percentage shown on deed, or if
such property is a multiple-family dwelling, such deferral may be prorated
to reflect the fractional portion of such current percentage occupied by the
taxpayer, as determined by the Town Assessor.12
12.Editor's Note: Former § 465-33, Termination of program, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 5-11-2014.
§ 465-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 465-32
1:177
Chapter 478
TOWN PROPERTY, USE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trees — See Ch. 484. Operation of vehicles on Town property — See
Ch. 500, Art. I.
§ 478-1. Governing agency.
For purposes of this chapter, the term "governing agency" shall mean:
A. The Board of Selectmen in matters involving the Town Green and
sidewalks.
B. The Board of Police Commissioners in matters involving Town roads and
parking areas.
C. The Board of Education in matters involving school grounds.
D. The Park and Recreation Commission in matters involving public
playgrounds and beaches.
E. The Harbor Management Commission in matters involving the Town
dock, mooring sites, marina, and Esposito Beach. [Amended
10-26-1988]
§ 478-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person within
the boundaries of the Town Green, public playgrounds, Town dock, mooring
sites and marina, beaches, Town roads, sidewalks and parking areas and
school grounds within the Town of Clinton:
A. To consume or possess alcoholic beverages or loiter in violation of
Chapter 194, Article III, Loitering or Drinking in Public Areas, or Article
IV, Possession of Alcohol by Minors, of this Code. [Amended 8-5-2009]
B. To cut, injure or deface, remove or disturb any tree, shrub, building,
fence, bench, or other structure, apparatus, or property; to pick, cut,
or remove any shrub, bush, or flowers; or to mark or write upon any
building, fence, bench, or other structure except by permission of the
governing agency.
C. To be in any Town property at times other than those established by the
governing agency.
D. To park vehicles or trailers in an area not designated for parking by the
governing agency.
E. To litter or otherwise dispose of waste materials on Town property other
than in provided containers or receptacles.
§ 478-3. Enforcement.
Failure to abide by these regulations or any rules set forth by the governing
agencies shall subject the violator to immediate removal from said Town
property. Any person who fails to leave when so ordered by a member of
§ 465-32 CLINTON CODE § 478-3
1:178
the Clinton Police Department shall be considered to be in violation of this
chapter.
§ 478-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions hereof shall be subject to a fine
of not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each violation.
Chapter 484
TREES
§ 484-1. Purpose.
The main purpose of this chapter is to protect our valuable urban forest
resource. Trees play important roles for the community by providing air
purification, habitats for animals, control of noise pollution, and
stabilization of soils, providing shade and creating esthetic beauty along
Town roads, in public parks and on Town-owned areas. It is also the intent
of this chapter to promote and protect the public health and safety on Town
property and roads by maintaining the Town's trees.
§ 484-2. Scope.
By this chapter, the Town of Clinton will regulate and control on Town
property the planting, removal, maintenance and protection of Town trees
to ensure the safety of the public and maintain the beauty of our Town trees.
§ 484-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
MAINTENANCE/PROTECTION — All operation of trimming, pruning,
spraying, injecting, fertilizing, treating, bracing, surgery and cutting above
or below the ground.
PLANTING — The permanent placement of any tree.
REMOVAL — Actual physical removal or the effective removal through
chemical application or other direct or indirect action resulting in the death
of a tree.
TOWN PROPERTY — Any land that the Town of Clinton owns or has a rightof-
way.
TREE — A woody plant that has a well-defined trunk and a crown attaining
a height of over eight feet.
URBAN FOREST — Trees that are integrated along streets, in public areas
and parks.
§ 478-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 484-4
1:179
§ 484-4. Tree Warden.
The Town of Clinton Tree Warden shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen and shall have all powers, duties, and authorities ascribed to
him/her as set out in the Connecticut Public Shade Tree Statutes,
particularly C.G.S. §§ 23-58, 23-59, 23-60 and 23-65, as may be amended,
and this chapter. The Tree Warden should be a resident of the Town of
Clinton. The Tree Warden should be an arborist. The Town Tree Warden
will inform the Town Tree Committee of any action prior to the removal or
planting of Town trees.
§ 484-5. Tree Committee.
There shall be a Tree Committee which shall be composed of no fewer than
two nor more than eight members appointed for a term of two years by the
Board of Selectmen. The requirements and duties of these members shall
be:
A. To have working knowledge of the habitat, planting, growth, care and
placing of trees.
B. To develop and maintain a working relationship with the Town Tree
Warden.
C. To assist the Tree Warden in assuring appropriate trees are planted in
properly designated locations.
D. To help develop and maintain a Town tree inventory.
E. To work to educate the residents of Clinton on the importance of the
urban forest.
F. To raise funds for tree planting as deemed necessary.
G. To coordinate and direct the work of any volunteers who wish to
contribute their time.
§ 484-6. Protection of trees.
A. Damage to trees. No person, company, utility or government agency
shall on Town-owned property in the Town of Clinton prune, remove,
deface, cut, paint, mark, injure, mutilate, kill, or destroy any tree or
permit any animal under his or its control to do so; permit any fire to
injure any portion of any tree; or permit any toxic chemical to seep, drain
or be emptied on or about any tree. During construction operations,
any contractor (public or private) shall erect suitable protective barriers
around Town trees which may be injured as a result of construction
activity.
B. Fastening materials to trees. No person shall fasten any sign, playbill,
picture, notice, advertisement, rope, wire, climbing spurs or other
materials to, around, or through any Town trees, except in an emergency,
such as storms or accidents.
C. Public utilities. Public utility work affecting trees shall be limited to the
actual necessities of the service of the company. The Town Tree Warden
shall review such work at least two months prior to being undertaken,
and such work done in a neat and professional manner.
Chapter 500
§ 484-4 CLINTON CODE § 484-6
1:180
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 484-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 484-6
1:181

ARTICLE I
Operation of Vehicles on Town Property
[Adopted 3-25-1976]
§ 500-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle, including a minibike, motorcycle
or snowmobile, on Town-owned or Town-leased property, except on streets,
roads, driveways, parking places and other areas intended for the use of
such vehicles.
§ 500-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be liable to a fine
of up to $100.
§ 500-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-2
1:183

ARTICLE II
Winter Parking
[Adopted 6-25-1985]
§ 500-3. Parking prohibited.
From November 1 to April 15 parking shall be prohibited upon Townmaintained
streets at all times during any snow or ice storm and for 24
hours after the cessation of any snow or ice storm.
§ 500-4. Removal of vehicles.
Any vehicle parked in violation of this article may be removed or conveyed
by or under the direction of any member of the Clinton Police Department
by means of towing or otherwise. Said removal shall be at the risk of the
owner. The owner or person in charge of said vehicle shall be permitted
to remove the vehicle from the custody of the Town of Clinton, upon the
payment of reasonable towing and storage charges.
§ 500-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined not more
than $25.
§ 500-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-5
1:185

ARTICLE III
Parking
[Adopted 11-13-1991]
§ 500-6. Policy.
This article establishes the regulations concerning the parking of vehicles
in the Town of Clinton and the enforcement thereof. The policy of this article
is to provide for the convenience, comfort and welfare of people who live,
work and otherwise travel in and to the Town, to permit traffic safety and
efficiency while minimizing or reducing traffic congestion, pollution and
nuisance arising out of the unregulated parking of vehicles.
§ 500-7. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the Town's general power so to do,
in particular, C.G.S. § 7-148(b), as amended. The Board of Police
Commissioners constitutes the Traffic Authority of the Town as defined in
C.G.S. § 14-297(6), as amended.
§ 500-8. Powers of Traffic Authority. [Amended 8-5-2009]
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 14-307, as amended, the Board of Police
Commissioners as Traffic Authority shall have the power to prohibit, limit or
restrict the parking of vehicles and to erect and maintain signs designating
the time or terms of such prohibition or restriction on any highway or
thoroughfare coming under the jurisdiction of the Town of Clinton.
§ 500-9. Duties of police officers.
Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic
in accordance with the provisions of this article and the statutes of the
State of Connecticut, or in emergencies as public safety or convenience may
require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order, signal or direction of a policeman.
§ 500-10. Failure to obey traffic signs and signals. [Amended
8-5-2009]
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions
of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by the Traffic Authority or in
accordance with the laws of the State of Connecticut except as directed by
a policeman as provided for in § 500-9.
§ 500-11. Temporary rules.
The Traffic Authority may from time to time, as the need arises, make
temporary rules for the regulation of the parking of vehicles in the Town
of Clinton. They shall be posted pursuant to § 500-15 of this article. The
violation of such temporary rules shall be a violation of this article.
§ 500-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-12
1:187
§ 500-12. Parking or standing prohibited in certain areas.
At any time it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to park or stand in any
of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic control
device:
A. In any intersection.
B. In a crosswalk.
C. In a marked fire lane.
D. Within 25 feet of any intersection or crosswalk.
E. Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
F. At any place where the vehicle would block the use of any driveway.
G. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any Fire Department station.
H. On any sidewalk.
I. At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
J. In any parking space designated for the use of handicapped persons if
the vehicle and the person operating the vehicle do not comply with the
provisions of C.G.S. § 14-253a, as amended.
§ 500-13. On-street parking.
No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb
except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any
vehicle in a street other than:
A. Parallel to the curb.
B. With the two curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the
regularly established curblines.
C. Within the lines demarcating a curbside parking space if so marked.
§ 500-14. Parking on private property.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any private property without the
consent of the owner of the property.
§ 500-15. Posting of signs. [Amended 8-5-2009]
The Traffic Authority shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where
parking is limited, restricted or prohibited indicating such limitations,
restrictions or prohibitions.
§ 500-16. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article
shall be fined in accordance with Subsection C following. The fact that an
automobile which is illegally parked is registered in the name of a person
shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in control
of the automobile at the time of such parking, except to the extent the
liability of a lessee under C.G.S. § 14-107, as amended, shall apply.
B. Any police officer may attach to any vehicle found in violation of this
article a notice to the owner or operator that such a vehicle has been
parked in violation of law, which notice shall indicate the nature of the
§ 500-12 CLINTON CODE § 500-16
1:188
violation and instruct such owner or operator to pay the penalty for
such violation at the Town of Clinton Police Department headquarters
in person or by mailing such notice of violation, with the amount of the
penalty, to the Town of Clinton Police Department.
C. The penalty to be paid pursuant to Subsections A and B above for the
violation of any provision of this article shall be set by the Board of Police
Commissioners. The highest fine per violation is $25.
§ 500-17. Towing and storage of vehicles.
A. Any motor vehicle found parked in violation of any state statute or Town
of Clinton ordinance shall be towed, if such vehicle has previously been
issued six or more Town of Clinton parking tickets which have not been
paid.
B. The vehicle shall be towed under the direction of a member of the Town
of Clinton Police Department to a public garage in the Town of Clinton.
C. Before a vehicle is released to the owner, towing and storage charges
shall be paid, and all parking tickets to the Town of Clinton Police
Department shall also be paid.
§ 500-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-17
1:189
Chapter 509
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Aquifer Protection Agency — See Ch. 6, Art. I. Water Pollution Control Commission — See
Ch. 24, Art. VII.
§ 500-17 CLINTON CODE § 500-17
1:190
ARTICLE I
Water Main Extensions
[Adopted 9-9-1987]
§ 509-1. Reimbursement of costs.
Whenever the Town appropriates funds to extend a water main into an area
to be used in whole or in part for industrial or commercial purposes, or
an area used or zoned for residential purposes, each owner of property
abutting such extension shall reimburse the Town for a proportionate share
of the cost to the Town of such extension; provided, however, that such
reimbursement may be waived whenever the Town and the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection concur in determining the need
for such extension in response to a community pollution problem, within the
purview of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 509-2. Computation of costs.
A. The amount of such reimbursement shall be computed so as to leave the
Town ultimately free of any of the cost of the water main extension and
expenses incidental thereto, including materials; installation; pumping
stations; service connections; curb, sidewalk and highway repairs;
installation of gate valves and shutoffs; debt service; and professional
fees. When any portion of the water service is to be used for a municipal
purpose, the Town shall contribute a fair proportion of the cost
representing such proportionate municipal share.
B. If any of the property to be assessed hereunder is used or zoned for
residential or agricultural purposes and abuts an extension of a water
main to be used in whole or in part for industrial or commercial
purposes, the assessment for such property shall be computed on a
front-foot or other equitable basis for a standard or minimum size main.
C. The assessment for certain property zoned for other than commercial
or industrial purposes, or classified as farm, forest, or open space land
on the last completed grand list, may be deferred in part pursuant to
the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Town Clerk shall
place a caveat on the land records in each instance where an assessment
is so deferred.
§ 509-3. Public hearing and notice.
A public hearing on any assessment under this article shall be provided and
due notice will be published at least 10 days before the date scheduled for
such hearing, in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town, and a
copy of such notice, signed by the Town Clerk, shall be mailed to the owner
of each property affected thereby.
§ 509-4. Appeals.
The owner of any property so assessed may appeal to the courts from
the valuation of his assessment in accordance with and subject to the
limitations of C.G.S. § 7-137c.
§ 509-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 509-5
1:191
§ 509-5. Determination of amount of assessment.
The Board of Selectmen shall determine the amount of each assessment
levied pursuant to this article and may allow assessments to be paid in
installments over a period of years, with interest on any outstanding
balance as determined by the Board. In determining the amount of any
assessment, the Board may consider area, frontage, grand list valuation,
actual and permitted use, and other relevant factors. Any such assessment
shall be a lien against the property affected, and the Board of Selectmen
shall cause a certificate of lien for each such assessment to be lodged
with the Town Clerk as provided by the Connecticut General Statutes. Any
installment of principal or interest due upon any such assessment which is
not paid shall bear interest, until paid, at the maximum rate then permitted
by law.
§ 509-5 CLINTON CODE § 509-5
1:192
Part III: Regulations
Chapter 545
BEACH REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 194.
Animals — See Ch. 200.
Boating — See Ch. 226.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 247.
Littering — See Ch. 358.
Use of Town property — See Ch. 478.
§ 545-1. Parking; speed limit.
A. Parking of any vehicle shall be limited to such places and hours as
designated by signs posted.
B. The maximum speed of any vehicle after entering the beach area will be
10 miles per hour.
§ 545-2. Refuse.
Refuse shall not be left on the grounds of the parking area but shall be
placed in containers provided for such purpose.
§ 545-3. Ballplaying and other games.
A. Ballplaying or the playing of other games is prohibited in roadway and
parking areas.
B. Ballplaying is prohibited except in areas designated.
C. Disorderly and all forms of rough play creating hazards to human safety
in the water or on the beach are prohibited.
§ 545-4. Pets.
No pets are allowed on the beach.
§ 545-5. Food and beverages; fires.
A. The use of crockery or glassware on the beach is prohibited.
B. There shall be no building of fires except in places provided.
§ 545-6. Boats in swimming areas.
The use of boats in swimming area is prohibited.
§ 545-7. Enforcement.
Violations of any of the regulations are sufficient causes for the lifeguard
and police officer on duty to evict any and all offenders from the beach.
§ 509-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 545-7
1:193
Chapter 580
SHELLFISH REGULATIONS
§ 580-1. Limitations on taking of shellfish.
The taking of shellfish shall be permitted between sunrise and sunset,
subject to the following limitation, restriction and regulations:
A. The taking of shellfish west of a line of sight from the northeast tip
of Cedar Island to the mouth of the Hammock River, and all of the
Hammock and Indian Rivers, shall be prohibited from April 1 to
November 1.
B. The season on shellfish shall close on the first day of April.
C. The limit of shellfish per person per day shall be 1/2 bushel, beginning
with the first day of November
D. The taking of oysters shall be by hand or tong only, and no seeds shall be
taken
E. All culling shall be done on the grounds where taken.
§ 580-2. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-5-2009]
The penalty for violation of any of these regulations shall be as prescribed
by C.G.S. § 26-257a.
Appendix
Chapter A600
AGREEMENT WITH KILLINGWORTH
§ A600-1. Agreement.
AN AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE TOWNS OF KILLINGWORTH AND
CLINTON BY THEIR SELECTMEN
First We agree that all the paupers now residing in each of said
towns shall belong to and be supported by the Town in which
they now reside except Betsey Marble who is to belong to and
be supported by the Town of Clinton
2 We further agree that all persons now residing out of said
towns, who shall hereafter become paupers shall belong to the
Town where they would belong if the old Town of Killingworth
had been Divided into two towns, as it now is before they were
born
3 We further agree that the Town taxes granted in October 1837
shall belong to each of said towns according to their assessment
list of 1837
§ 545-7 CLINTON CODE § A600-1
1:194
4th We further agree that all debts liabilities charges and expenses
already due and commenced or which may exist against said
old Town of Killingworth at the time of the passage of the Bill
Dividing said old Town of Killingworth into two towns be paid
equally between said two towns — It is however understood
that the expence made in consequence of the petition for the
Dividing of said Town of Killingworth into Two Towns is
objected to by the Town of Clinton and that, that subject is left
for future adjustment or legal Decision
5th We further agree that all funds and property of every name and
nature belonging to said old Town of Killingworth on the 19th
day of May, 1838, excepting the public records shall be equally
divided between the two towns of Killingworth and Clinton. It
is also agreed that we do nothing about dividing the old Town
wharf and Town sedge so called
6th We further agree that the Town Deposit fund of the old Town
of Killingworth be divided equally between said two towns of
Killingworth and Clinton
7th It is further understood and agreed that the Town of Clinton
upon receiving their share of said Deposit fund shall give a
sufficient bond to the Town of Killingworth conditioned to
refund to said Town of Killingworth the part of the deposit
fund so received by said Town of Clinton in case said Town of
Killingworth shall be compelled to repay the same to the State
of Connecticut, and apply the income thereof according to Law
Dated at Clinton
June 28, 1838
Chapter A601
SPECIAL ACTS
§ A601-1. Special Acts.
BOUNDARIES — HOMONOSCITT AND SAYBROOK
At a Session of the Genll Assembly at Hartford, March 10th, 1663.
To pruent future inconueniences that may arise between Saybrook and
Homonoscitt plantations, and for a full issue of the case, this Court orders
that the bounds between ye said plantations shall be where the common
passage ouer Manunketesek Riuer is, and so to run north into the Country
and south into the sea. The former uote concerning the bounds of these
plantations is retracted. Mr. Rossiter, Mathew Griswold and Joh: West are
to lay out the bowndes according to order of Court.
Colonial Records of Connecticut — 1636-1665, pp. 418, 419.
§ A600-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A601-1
1:195
PLANTATION — COMMITTEE TO LAY OUT
At a Generall Assembly of Election, Held at Hartford, May 14, 1663.
This Court doth impower Mr. Toppin, Mr. Gould, Mr. Shermon and Mr.
Howell as a Comittee to hear and consider the busines respecting
Hamonossitt, and to make reporte of their considerations to ye Court; and
likewise the case of the horss in Nicholas Clarkes hand is left according to
the premises to the consideration of the sayd Comittee.
This Court doth determine that the land at Homonoscitt doth not of right
belong unto the Town of Seabroke.
This Court appoynted Wm. Wadsworth, Ens. Auery, Lnt. Smith, as a
Committe to view the lands at Homonoscitt, and if they judg it nott fitt for
a plantation, and will not be uery prejediciall to Saybrook, then they are
to lay it out to Mr. Math; Allyn, Capt. Tallcott, John Allyn, Mr. Willis, and
according to the graunt of the Court; but if it be prejediciall to Saybrook,
they are to lay out what they judge right to the Towne of Saybrook and the
rest to Mr. Math: Allyn, Capt. Tallcott, John Allyn, Mr. Willys, Mr. Joseph
Haynes or Mr. Daniell Clerk, according as the Court shall determine, as
farr as it will go, according to their graunts, ye 1st graunt to be layd out
1st, and so successiuely; and what any two of this Committe agree to, shall
be a finall issue of the case. The time of meeting and attending this seruice
is to be appoynted by Saybrook and the Gent: concerned, sometime in June
next.
Colonial Records of Connecticut — 1636-1665, pp. 400, 401, 404.
PLANTATION RESERVED
At a Session of the Genll Assembly Holden at Hartford, the 19th of August,
1663.
The Comitte appoynted to view Hommonoscit, returned a writing under
their hands, dated June 3, 1663, wherein they expresst that according
to their best judgment it will make a comfortable plantation for the
entertainment of thirty families to subsist comfortably. The Comitte were
Wm. Wadsworth, Samll Smith, James Auery.
John Clow Junr presented a Petition to the Court for the planting of
Homonoscitt, and engaged to pay 10s. to the Treasury for it, according to
order.
This Court orders, that the land at Homonoscit be reserued for a
plantation.
This Court orders that the planting of Homonoscit be reffered to October
Court.
Colonial Records of Connecticut — 1636-1665, pp. 408, 409.
PLANTATION AUTHORIZED
At a Session of the Generall Assembly at Hartford, [October] the 8th, 1663.
This Court doth judge that Seabrook hath no right to Hommonoscitt.
§ A601-1 CLINTON CODE § A601-1
1:196
This Court doth declare that the former act about Homonoscitts not being
a plantation is hereby reuoaked; and the former order, that it should be a
plantation is to stand.
The Court doth appoynt S. Willys, Mr. Woollcott, and Wm. Wadsworth as a
Commity for the ordering of the plantation at Homonoscitt.
Colonial Records of Connecticut — 1636-1665, p. 414.
TOWN NAMED
At a Court of Election Held at Hartford, May 9th, 1667.
This Court orders that ye towne of Homonoscit shal for ye future be named
Kenilworth, & for yr brand of horses they shal have ye letter V on ye near
buttock.
Colonial Records of Connecticut — 1665-1677, p. 58.
CHURCH — GATHERING OF
A Generall Assembly Held at Hartford, October 10th, 1667.
This Court, upon the petition of the inhabitants of Kenilworth, doe hereby
declare and give them theire approbation and encouragemt to gather
themselves into church order, according to the order of the gospell.
Colonial Records of Connecticut — 1665-1677, p. 71.
BOUNDARIES — KENILWORTH
A General Assembly Held at Hartford, October the 8th, 1668.
This Court orders that if Saybrooke & Haddum Plantations doe agree
that theire bownds shall be setled according to the minde of this Court
recommended to them, that then there shall runn a west line from
Saybrooke bownds, which lyne shall be the north bownds of Kennilworth
and the sowth bownds of Haddum, soe farr as the grant of Haddum bownds
goeth; and from thence the bownds of Kenillworth shall runn of the same
till it meet with Guilford bownds.
Colonial Records of Connecticut — 1665-1677, p. 97.
BOUNDARIES — KENILWORTH AND SAYBROOK
At a Court of Election Held at Hartford, May 14th, 1674.
This Court appoynts Ens: Nath: White and Deacon John Hall to lay out the
line between Saybrooke and Kenilworth, and allso to lay out the North line
of Kenilworth from Saybrook lyne on the east till it meets with Guilford lyne
on the west, according to their grant.
Colonial Records of Connecticut — 1665-1677, p. 225.
§ A601-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A601-1
1:197
At a Court of Election Held at Hartford, May 13, 1675.
This Court recommends it to the inhabitants of Kenilworth to accomadate
Saybrooke in the bownds between them, soe that Saybrooke may run from
the riuer towards the west, three miles at their north bownds, and from
thence to runn a straight line till they meet with the line where the wadeing
place is at Manuncketesseck.
Colonial Records of Connecticut — 1665-1677, p. 256.
HAMMOCK RIVER BRIDGE
At a Genrll Court Held at Hartford, Octobr 8th, 1696;
At this Court John Kelcey, Will Barber, Will Stephens, Robert Lane, and
Peter Farnam, moved this Court in behalfe of some proprietrs in the Town
of Killinworth that a sluice and cart bridge might be built upon the river
called the Hamock River, at the charge of such persons as might be
benefitted thereby. This Court having considered that notice hath not
been given to all persons concerned, doe referre the matter to further
consideration at the Genll Court in May next, due notice thereof being given
in the mean time to all persons concerned.
Colonial Records of Connecticut — 1689-1706, p. 188.
At a Court of Election Held at Hartford, May 13th, 1697:
Mr Samll Buell of Killinsworth in behalf of severall of the inhabitants of the
said Town prosecuted a petition exhibited in October last by Jno Kelsie,
Will Barber, Will Stephens, Robert Lane, Peter Farnam, in behalfe of some
of the proprietors of the said Town that this Court would order that a
sluice and cart bridge should be built upon the river called the Hamock
River, at the charge of such persons that might recieve benefit thereby
being proprietors of lands in the said Town, in proportion to the benefitt
that might accrue to them by the bettering their lands thereby. This Court
considering that the worke may be of comon benefitt to those whose lands
are upon the said river, doe grant their petition, and doe order that the
worke be carried on by the consent of the majr part of the said proprietors,
and that all the persons that may according to the judgment of intelligent
men in such workes be benefitted thereby, shall bear an equall proportion
of the charge, according to their respective quantities of land that may be
advantaged and bettered, to be determined and stated by the select men
of the said Town of Killinsworth or the majr part of them in case the parties
concerned canot aggree.
Colonial Records of Connecticut — 1689-1706, p. 211.
BOUNDARIES — TOWN OF KILLINGWORTH
Att a Genll Assembly holden att Newhaven October the 14th, 1703, and
continued by Adjournment to the end of the 22d day of the same month:
§ A601-1 CLINTON CODE § A601-1
1:198
This Assembly doth grant to Lieut Henrie Crane, William Stephens, Samll
Buell and John Kelsie, and their associates, the present proprietors and
inhabitants of Killinworth, their heirs, successors and assignes forever,
according to their and each of their respective and just rights therein,
all that tract of land lying between the tracts of land belonging to the
inhabitants of the townes of Gilford and Saybrook, butted and bounded
as followeth, viz. on the south or southward by the sea; on the east or
eastward running north from the sea to a white oak staddle on the banke
with the top cutt off, and a heap of stones about it; thence runing a north
line to a white oak tree standing in the line near Ma-na-qua-tesott River at
the old riding place, marked with K.B. on the west, and with S.B. on the
east; thence running a north line to Haddum bounds where is a heap of flat
stones cast up, and near Haddum bounds is marked two chestnutt trees
growing on one root close by a great rock which is upright like a wall on the
south side; on the north running from said heap of stones in Haddum line
due west to an oak tree marked with H.B. on the north side and K.B. on the
south side, with a heap of stones laid about it; from thence a due west line
to the westermost branch of Hamanassett River; on the west by the midle
of the said Hamanassett River, as the river runnes till it fall into the sea;
together with all and singular the rights, profitts, priviledges, members
and appurtenances to the said tract of land or any part thereof belonging
or in any wise apperteining, and doe order that the parties above-named
shall have a pattent for confirmation of the premises to them, their heirs,
successors and assignes as above-mentioned. The pattent to be signed by
the Honbl the Governr, and by the Secretary, in the name and behalfe of
the Governr and Company of this Colony.
Colonial Records of Connecticut — 1689-1706, p. 449.
ECCLESIASTICAL SOCIETIES
At a General Assembly holden at Hartford, in his Majesty's English Colony
of Connecticutt, in New England, in America, on the ninth day of May, in
the 7th year of the reign of our sovereign lord George the 2d, of Great
Britain, &c., King, &c., Annoque Dom. 1734.
Upon the memorial of the inhabitants of the northern part of the Town
of Killingsworth, praying that a committee may be appointed to view the
circumstances of said inhabitants, and if they think them to be of ability to
be a distinct society; that then the said committee would affix a line for the
southern bounds of the same, and return their doings to this Assembly as
soon as the work shall be finished: Which prayer this Assembly grants, and
do appoint Messrs. James Wadsworth and Samuel Lynde, Esqrs, and Capt.
Samuel Hill, a committee to view the circumstances of said memorialists,
and if they think them of ability to be a distinct society to affix a line for
the southern bounds of said society, and make return of their doings to this
Assembly as soon as said work shall be finished.
Colonial Records of Connecticut — 1726-1735, Vol. VII, p. 489.
§ A601-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A601-1
1:199
At a General Assembly holden at Hartford, in his Majesty's English Colony
of Connecticutt in New England in America, on Thursday the 8th day of
May, anno regni Regis Georgii 2di, Magnae Britanniae, &c., 8vo, Annoque
Domini 1735.
Be it enacted by the Governour, Council and Representatives, in General
Court assembled, and by the authority of the same, That the said Town of
Killingsworth, by a line to begin at Saybrook bounds, at a place commonly
called the southeast corner of Pelatiah Ward's farm, being the proper
southeast corner of Capt. Peter Ward's ninth division land, and to extend
from thence west-south-west five degrees south to Guilford line, shall and
is hereby divided into two distinct ecclesiastical societies; and that the
part of said Town lying southerly of said line is hereby declared to be
a distinct ecclesiastical society, with all powers and privileges proper for
such a society; and that such part of said Town that lyeth northerly of the
abovesaid line shall be and is hereby, by the authority aforesaid, made into
one distinct ecclesiastical society, with all powers and privileges proper for
such a society; always provided that all lands in said Town (if the owner
liveth in the Town aforesaid) shall be taxed for the defraying parish charges
only where the owner or owners of such lands do live.
Colonial Records of Connecticut — 1726-1735, Vol. VII, p. 552.
BOUNDARIES — GUILFORD AND KILLINGWORTH
At a General Assembly of the Governor and Company of his Majesty's
English Colony of Connecticut in New England in America holden at
Hartford in said Colony on the second Thursday of May (being the tenth
day of said month,) and continued by several adjournments until the
seventh day of June next following, annoque Domini 1759.
Whereas the river called and known by the name of Hommosset River is
the bounds or dividing line between the towns of Guilford and Killingworth,
and that whereas said river in the great swamp called and known by the
name of the World's End Swamp divides into many branches or rivulets
and the true dividing branch never was agreed upon and settled by said
towns through said swamp, and it being represented to this Assembly that
the said swamp in those months by law prefixed for perambulating the
line or renewing bounds between towns is impassable, it being frequently
overflowed with water: Therefore it is resolved by this Assembly, that
the towns of Guilford and Killingworth have liberty and liberty is hereby
granted them to fix and renew their bounds through said swamp in any
month or season in the year, and that the same shall be as valid as tho' the
same should be done in the months of March and April; any law, usage or
custom to the contrary notwithstanding.
Colonial Records of Connecticut — 1757-1762, Vol. XI, p. 293.
§ A601-1 CLINTON CODE § A601-1
1:200
BOUNDARIES — GUILFORD AND KILLINGWORTH, PORTION OF TOWN
LINE RELOCATED
Upon the Petition of Abraham Pierson & Job Wright both of Killingworth
and the rest of the Inhabitants of said Killingworth shewing to this
Assembly that it would be greatly for the convenience of the Petitioners and
much for the Public good to make a small alteration in the dividing Line
between the Town of Guilford and Killingworth beginning at the Mouth
of Dudleys Creek in Hamonasset River and running South 50 Degrees
10 minuts East to West Rock so called upon the Sound being 216 Rods
Praying that said alteration may be made &c as per Petition on file &c Upon
which Petition this Assembly at their Sessions in October last appointed
a Committee to repair to said Killingworth and view said proposed
alterations examine into the Facts and make Report, which said Committee
have Reported to this Assembly that said alteration will be of Public
Advantage and beneficial to the Petitioners and no disadvantage to the
Petitioners as per Report on file &c
Resolved by this Assembly that a Streight Line from the Mouth of Dudleys
Creek in said Haomonasset River running South 50 Degrees 10' East to
West Rock so called upon the Sound being 216 Rods be and the same
is hereby established to be the dividing Line between the said Towns of
Guilford & Killingworth And that the Lands lying East of said Line be and
the same are hereby Annexed to the said Town of Killingworth, exclusive of
the Power and Authority in Town Meetings to make Rules and Ordinances
for regulating the Fisheries of Clams & Oysters which Power and Authority
is hereby reserved to the Town of Guilford in the same manner as though
this alteration in the Line between said Towns had not been made.
General Assembly — December 1790.
Public Records, State of Connecticut, From May 1789 through October
1792 — Vol. VII, p. 243.
Private Laws — Vol. II, p. 1150.
BOROUGH OF KILLINGWORTH — INCORPORATED
AN ACT INCORPORATING THE BOROUGH OF KILLINGWORTH,
PASSED, MAY 1820.
§ A601-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A601-1
1:201
SEC. 1. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives, in
General Assembly convened, That all the freemen of this State, inhabitants
of the Town of Killingworth, in Middlesex county, dwelling and inhabiting
within the following bounds, viz. beginning at the southern extremity of
the division line between the towns of Killingworth and Guilford, on Long-
Island-Sound: thence northwardly, on said division line, to Farm Bridge, on
Hamanasset River: thence north on said line to Hatter's Creek, (so called)
which empties into said river: thence following said creek northeasterly,
until the said creek crosses the Nodd Road, (so called): thence
northeastwardly, in a direct line so as to include the house of Jedediah
Buell: thence northeastwardly, so as to include the house of Samuel Kelsey:
from thence following the highway, leading to the house of Jesse Buell, and
including said house: thence southeasterly, so as to include the house of
Eber Wilcox: thence southeasterly, so as to include the house of Asa Kelsey:
thence eastwardly, on the highway, to the place where it intersects with
the Brush Hill Road, (so called): thence southwardly, by the road leading to
the house of Harvey Buell, and including the same: from thence, in a line
due south, to the southern boundary of the State of Connecticut, on Long-
Island-Sound: thence westwardly, following said last mentioned boundary,
to the first mentioned bounds, be, and the same are hereby ordained,
constituted, and declared to be, from time to time, forever hereafter, one
body corporate and politic, in fact, and in name, by the name of, "The
Warden, Burgesses, and Freemen of the Borough of Killingworth": and
by that name, they and their successors, forever shall, and may have
perpetual succession, and shall be persons in law, capable of sueing and
being sued, pleading, and being impleaded, in all suits of whatever nature;
and also to purchase, hold and convey any estate, real or personal, and may
have a common seal, and may change and alter the same at pleasure.
SEC. 2. And for the better government of said borough, be it further
enacted, that there shall be a meeting of said borough, holden annually, in
the month of September, at such time and place, as by the by-laws of said
borough, shall be directed, for the purpose of choosing all the officers of
said borough, and that the officers chosen at said meeting, shall continue
in office, for, and during the term of one year, from said annual meeting,
unless others shall be chosen sooner, and qualified in their stead.
§ A601-1 CLINTON CODE § A601-1
1:202
SEC. 3. And that the said borough, in legal meeting assembled, shall
annually choose a warden, and six burgesses, a Clerk, treasurer, and bailiff,
all which officers shall be chosen by ballot, and on each ballot which shall
be given in, shall be written the name, for whom the same is given, and
such ballot shall, by the person giving the same, in the presence of the
warden and burgesses, or such of them, as are present at such meeting,
be put into a proper box for that purpose, by said borough, to be provided;
and when the freemen present at any such meeting, shall have had a
reasonable time to give in their ballots, the warden, or in his absence, the
senior burgess present, in the presence of the meeting, shall open the box,
sort and count the ballots, and the person who shall have the majority of
the ballots given in, shall by the bailiff, or in his absence, by the senior
burgess present, be declared to be elected; and no ballot shall be received
after the box shall have been opened.
SEC. 4. And said borough, in legal meeting assembled, shall have power,
(the warden and majority of the burgesses concurring) to admit to the
freedom of said borough, all such freemen of this State, inhabitants of
the Town of Killingworth, without the limits of said borough, as hold real
estate, and are doing regular business in said borough; which persons, so
admitted, shall be entitled to all the privileges of freemen, of said borough.
SEC. 5. And said borough, in legal meeting assembled, shall have power
to levy taxes on the polls and rateable estate, within the limits of said
borough, for such purposes as said borough shall think proper; and to
choose a collector or collectors, to collect such taxes, who shall, having
received a warrant for that purpose, signed by the warden, have the same
power as collectors of Town taxes by law have, and shall be accountable
to the warden and burgesses, in the same manner as collectors of Town
taxes are by law accountable to the select-men: and in case any collector
shall not perform the trust committed to him, but shall fail of collecting
such tax, according to the terms of the warrant committed to him, on
complaint thereof, made by the burgesses to the warden, he shall issue his
warrant under his hand, directed to the bailiff, to distrain the sums or rates,
neglected by such collector, to be collected, or paid out of the estate of the
collector.
SEC. 6. The bailiff shall, within the limits of said borough, and on the
waters of said Killingworth harbour, whether within said limits or not,
have the same powers, authorities and privileges, and be liable to the
same suits and penalties, for neglect of duty in any case whatever, to all
intents and purposes, as constables by law now have, and use in their
respective towns, and shall execute all lawful precepts to him directed,
whether issued by virtue of the by-laws of said borough, or by the laws
of this State, within his said described limits: and that the treasurer shall
have the same powers and privileges as Town treasurers now by law have,
and shall be accountable to said borough.
§ A601-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A601-1
1:203
SEC. 7. The warden and burgesses be, and they are hereby empowered to
lay out new highways, streets and public walks, for the use of said borough,
and to exchange highways for highways, or to sell highways for the purpose
of purchasing other highways, taking in all respects the same measures, as
are directed by the laws of this State, to be taken, in case of highways, laid
out by select-men, for the use of their towns; and the party aggrieved by
the laying out of such streets, or highways, may have the same remedy by
application to the County Courts, as is by law provided in case of highways
laid out by select-men; and whenever such highways so laid out by the
warden and burgesses, may become unnecessary to the public, it may be
discontinued by said warden and burgesses.
SEC. 8. Said warden and burgesses, within the limits of said borough, have,
use, possess and enjoy all the powers and privileges granted to the selectmen,
and a justice of the peace in the several towns, by the seventh and
eighth paragraphs of an act of the legislature, entitled "An Act providing in
case of sickness."
SEC. 9. The warden and burgesses may, at the expense of said borough,
in some proper place in said borough, erect and keep in sufficient repair
a sign-post, which shall be a lawful sign-post, according to an act of the
legislature, entitled "An Act for erecting and continuing a sign-post in each
Town in this State."
§ A601-1 CLINTON CODE § A601-1
1:204
SEC. 10. The warden and burgesses, or a majority of them, shall have
power to make by-laws, relative to markets and commerce within the limits
of said borough; relative to the streets, and highways of said borough;
relative to nuisances within said borough limits; relative to wharves, docks,
channels, anchoring and mooring of vessels; relative to trees planted for
shade or ornament, convenient use, public or private; relative to sweeping
of chimneys, and preserving said borough from injury, from fire; relative
to the forms of oath, to be taken by the treasurer; relative to warning
meetings of said borough, and of said warden and burgesses, and the
times and places when and where they shall be holden; relative to the
mode of taxation, as to taxes to be levied in said borough; relative to
the penalties to be incurred, by those, who being chosen to any office,
shall (not being excused by said borough) refuse to serve; relative to a
watch; relative to the burial of the dead; relative to public lights and lamps;
relative to restraining horses, cattle, swine, sheep and geese, from going
at large within the limits of said borough; relative to their improvement
and preservation of the shell and scale fisheries, and taking fish within
said limits, provided that in relation to said fisheries, said Town shall have
given their assent thereto; relative to improvements made in deepening
the water in said harbour; relative to schools which may be established
by said borough; relative to trespasses committed within the limits of said
borough; relative to public landings; relative to firing of guns; relative
to noise and disturbance in the night season; and to inflict penalties for
the breach of such by-laws; Provided however, that such penalties shall,
in no case, exceed the sum of fifteen dollars for one offence; and said
penalties shall be payable to the treasurer, and such other persons as the
by-laws shall direct, and be recoverable by the persons to whom forfeited,
by action of debt, to be brought before a justice of the peace, or other
court within said borough, proper to try the same. Provided however, that
no by-law of said borough shall be repugnant to the laws of this State;
and provided also, that all the by-laws made by said warden and burgesses
shall be approved by said borough, in legal meeting assembled, and after
being so approved, shall be published at least three weeks successively, in
some public newspaper published in said borough, and if no newspaper be
published in said borough, then in a newspaper published nearest thereto,
before the same shall be of any force or validity; and all the by-laws of
said borough, shall, at any time within eight months after they are made
and published as aforesaid, be liable to be repealed by the Superior Court,
holden in said county of Middlesex, if by said Superior Court, on hearing,
adjudged to be unreasonable and unjust.
§ A601-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A601-1
1:205
SEC. 11. The warden and burgesses of said borough, shall have and
possess full power and authority, to make all such by-laws as shall be
necessary, to prevent any building or buildings, already erected, or which
may be hereafter erected within said limits, from being used or occupied
as a baker's shop, tallow chandler's shop, or blacksmith's shop, or for
purposes which equally, or in like manner, in the opinion of said warden
and burgesses, shall immediately expose said borough to injury by fire,
without licence first obtained from said warden and burgesses. Provided,
that said by-laws be approved and published in manner required, to render
valid other by-laws of said borough; and in like manner may be repealed by
the Superior Court.
SEC. 12. Said borough shall have full power and authority, to purchase or
erect a building or buildings, for the establishment of a school within said
limits; to establish a fund, or devise other means for the support of the
same; to prescribe the different branches which may be taught therein;
and to make all necessary regulations, and to exercise such powers, as the
interests of said school may require.
SEC. 13. And all grants or leases of real estate, belonging to said borough,
signed by the warden, and sealed with the borough seal, and approved by
said borough in legal meeting assembled, shall be good and effectual in
law, to convey the estate intended to be conveyed by such grant or lease;
Provided, the same is recorded in the records of the Town where the lands
granted or leased lie—And that said borough shall have power to appoint
inspectors of every kind of produce of the United States, brought to said
borough for sale or exportation—And the vote or choice of the major part of
the freemen present at any legal meeting, shall be considered as the vote
or choice of said borough.
SEC. 14. The freemen of said borough, in legal meeting assembled, may
appoint all proper officers, which may be necessary to carry into effect the
by-laws relative to the regulation of said harbour, and of the shell and scale
fisheries within said limits, may appoint haywards and all other officers and
inspectors not enumerated in this act, which shall be necessary to carry
the by-laws of said borough into execution.
SEC. 15. The warden and burgesses have power to form, constitute, and
regulate a fire company, and to enlist a sufficient number of firemen to fill
the same, and in case a sufficient number cannot be enlisted, to appoint a
sufficient number to fill up the same, and make all suitable and necessary
by-laws for regulating said fire company.
§ A601-1 CLINTON CODE § A601-1
1:206
SEC. 16. The warden and burgesses, bailiff and Clerk of said borough, and
inspectors of produce of the United States, brought to said borough, for
sale or exportation, shall be sworn to a faithful discharge of their duty,
and the form of oath to be taken by the warden and burgesses, shall be as
follows. You, A.B. being elected warden (or burgess, as the case may be) of
the borough of Killingworth, do swear that you will faithfully and uprightly
discharge the duties of that office, so long as you shall hold the same; so
help you God: and that the form of oath to be taken by the Clerk shall
be as follows, viz. You, A.B. being Clerk of the borough of Killingworth,
do swear that you will truly and faithfully attend and execute the office
of Clerk, according to your best skill, and make true entries and records
of all the votes and proceedings of said borough, and such other matters
as by law, or by the by-laws of said borough, are to be recorded in your
office; and that you will deliver true copies of the records in your hands,
when they shall be required of you, taking your lawful fees; so help you
God. And that the form of oath to be taken by the bailiff, shall be the
same, mutatis mutandis, as is prescribed by law to be taken by constables;
and that form of oath to be taken by inspectors of produce of the United
States, brought to said borough for sale or exportation, haywards and other
subordinate officers, shall be the same as is by law prescribed for surveyors
of highways, leather-sealers, &c. mutatis mutandis; which oath may be
administered by any justice of the peace, for the county of Middlesex, and
in the absence of any such justice of the peace, in any of the meetings
at which said warden, burgesses, &c. may be chosen, such oaths may be
administered by the Clerk, and the Clerk shall make a true record of the
administering of such oath, and by whom, before the person to whom the
same has been administered, shall be able to execute the office to which he
was chosen.
SEC. 17. Whenever the warden or other officer of said borough shall
resign, or be removed by death, or otherwise, another shall be chosen in
his place, until the annual meeting in the month of September, then next,
unless another shall be sooner chosen and sworn in his stead; and that the
warden of said borough, or in his absence, the senior burgess present at
any meeting of said borough, or of said warden and burgesses, shall, ex
officio, be moderator thereof; and the meeting of said borough may from
time to time be adjourned, by a major vote of the freemen present; and that
said borough may, at any time, hold special borough meetings, whenever,
in the opinion of the warden and burgesses, or a majority of them, the
circumstances of the borough require it.
§ A601-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A601-1
1:207
SEC. 18. The first meeting of said borough shall be holden at the academy
in said Killingworth, on the first Monday of July next, at one o'clock in
the afternoon of said day, for the choice of a warden, burgesses, Clerk,
treasurer and bailiff, and to transact such other business as shall be
necessary, which may be from time to time adjourned; and a copy of this
paragraph of this act, certified under the hand of the Secretary of this
State, and set upon the public sign-post in said Killingworth, at least eight
days before the said first Monday of July, shall be a legal warning of the
freemen of said borough to attend said first meeting; and the officers
chosen at such meeting, shall continue in office until the expiration of
the annual meeting in the month of September, unless others are sooner
chosen and qualified in their stead; and that said borough shall, at such
meetings, first choose a Clerk of said borough, who shall be immediately
sworn, and shall forthwith make a record of his being chosen and sworn,
and the record thus by him made, in such cases, shall be good and effectual
in law; and such record may be made by clerks thereafter, and shall be
good, any thing in this act notwithstanding. Said borough shall thereupon
proceed to choose a warden and other officers of said borough, mentioned
in this paragraph of this act. And that Austin Olcott, Esquire, justice of
the peace for Middlesex county, shall have, as to the first election of the
warden, burgesses, Clerk, treasurer and bailiff of said borough, the same
powers, and proceed in the same manner, as the wardens, burgesses and
bailiff of said borough are by this act to have and proceed in, at the future
elections in said borough, and shall be moderator of said meeting till a
warden be chosen and qualified according to this act; and said borough
shall, at said first meeting, appoint a time and place for holding the first
meeting of said warden and burgesses, which meeting shall have power
to adjourn from time to time: Always provided, that any thing in this act,
notwithstanding, the inhabitants living within the limits of said borough,
shall, to all intents and purposes, be and remain a part of the Town of
Killingworth, entitled to all its privileges, and subject to all its burdens, as if
this act had not been passed. Provided nevertheless, that if this act, or any
provision therein contained, shall be found inconvenient, or in any respect
inadequate, the same may be repealed, altered or revoked, by the General
Assembly.
SEC. 19. All charges and expenses that shall have been, or may be
incurred, in consequence of this act of incorporation, shall be borne and
defrayed by said borough, by taxes on the polls and rateable estate of said
borough, within said limits.
IN ADDITION—PASSED, MAY 1833.
Whereas it has been represented to this Assembly, that said borough at
the time for holding their last annual meeting, neglected to choose any
officers of said borough, and that in consequence, no person is legally
empowered to warn a meeting of the freemen of said borough, agreeable
to the provisions of their by-laws—therefore,
§ A601-1 CLINTON CODE § A601-1
1:208
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Assembly convened, That Austin Olcott, of said borough of Killingworth,
be, and he is hereby authorized and empowered to call a meeting of the
freemen of said borough, to be holden for the choice of officers, at the
academy in said borough, at such time in the months of May or June,
A.D. 1833, as he may direct. A notification signed by him, specifying the
object and time and place of said meeting, and set upon the public signpost
in said borough, at least five days before the day appointed for said
meeting, shall be sufficient notice. The said Austin Olcott shall preside at
said meeting, until a warden shall be chosen and sworn. The freemen of
said borough, when convened as aforesaid, shall have power to appoint
all such officers as they are authorized by law to appoint at their annual
meeting; and the officers, so appointed, shall continue in office until the
expiration of the month of September next, unless others shall be sooner
chosen and qualified in their stead.
SEC. 2. And be it further enacted, that this act shall take effect from the
time of its passage.
Private Laws — Vol. I, pp. 197-203.
BOROUGH OF KILLINGWORTH — FIRE COMPANY
AN ACT IN ADDITION TO AN ACT, INCORPORATING THE BOROUGHS
OF
BRIDGEPORT, STONINGTON, GUILFORD, KILLINGWORTH AND ESSEX
PASSED, MAY 1822.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Assembly convened, That the warden and burgesses, in each borough, shall
have power to form, continue, and regulate one fire company, in addition
to the one already authorized in the fourteenth section of the aforesaid act,
with all the powers granted to the said fourteenth section.
Private Laws — Vol. I, p. 234.
BOUNDARIES — KILLINGWORTH AND SAYBROOK
RESOLVE ANNEXING A PART OF KILLINGWORTH TO THE SECOND
SCHOOL DISTRICT, AND THE THIRD SCHOOL SOCIETY, IN SAYBROOK.
PASSED, MAY 1834
§ A601-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A601-1
1:209
Resolved That the dividing line between the eastern school district in
Killingworth, and the second school district of the third school society in
Saybrook, be so altered as to include the dwelling house of Benjamin P.
Jones, within the limits of said second school district, in the third school
society of Saybrook, as follows; beginning at the southerly side of the
highway or stage road, where said dividing line crosses said road: thence
running upon the south side of said highway, to a point parallel with
the western end of the petitioners dwelling house; thence around and by
said house to the southeast corner thereof; and then in a straight line
parallel with the southern side of said house, to said dividing line; and said
Benjamin P. Jones, together with the land and house included within the
above described limits, is hereby set off from the eastern school district in
Killingworth, and the school society to which said eastern school district
belongs, and is annexed to the second school district in the third school
society in Saybrook, and hereafter to be and remain a part of said society
in Saybrook, for all purposes whatever.
Private Laws — Vol. II, pp. 1092, 1093.
CLINTON — TOWN INCORPORATED
INCORPORATING THE TOWN OF CLINTON.
PASSED 1838.
Upon the petition of sundry inhabitants of the Town of Killingworth, in the
County of Middlesex, praying for reasons therein set forth, that a division
may be made of said Town, and that a new Town may be incorporated
therefrom, as per petition on file:
Resolved, SEC. 1. That all that part of the Town of Killingworth, in the
county of Middlesex, lying south of the line dividing the first and second
school societies in said Town, be and the same is hereby made and
constituted a separate and distinct Town, by the name of CLINTON. And
all the inhabitants now, or at any time, residing south of said line in said
Town, shall be and remain a separate and distinct corporation, with all
the powers, rights and privileges, and subject to all the liabilities and
obligations of other towns in this state, with the right of sending one
representative to the general assembly.
§ A601-1 CLINTON CODE § A601-1
1:210
Resolved further, SEC. 2. That all the paupers of said old Town of
Killingworth shall be divided between the two towns of Killingworth and
Clinton, according to their respective assessment lists on the levy of 1837;
and all persons who may hereafter become paupers of said old Town
of Killingworth, but who are now residing elsewhere, shall be divided
between said two towns of Killingworth and Clinton as aforesaid. And said
new Town shall pay its proportion, according to the assessment list of
1837, of all the debts, liabilities, charges and expenses already due and
commenced, or which may exist against said old Town of Killingworth, at
the time of the passage of this bill; and said new Town shall receive its
proportion according to said list, of all funds and property belonging to said
old Town of Killingworth, at the time of the passage of this bill, excepting
the public records. Provided always, that if after the organization of said
Town of Clinton, the selectmen of said two towns cannot agree as to which
Town any such paupers belong, or as to the division of funds and property
belonging to said old Town of Killingworth, the selectmen of either Town
may apply to Ely Warner, Ebenezer Cone and Obadiah Spencer, who are
hereby authorized and empowered to divide said paupers and said funds
and property, in manner and form as aforesaid, which division shall be final
and conclusive.
SEC. 3. The Town and highway taxes, laid upon the polls and ratable estate
in said old Town of Killingworth, on the first Monday of October last,
shall be divided between said two towns, according to the list of polls and
ratable estate in said two towns respectively; and said Town of Clinton may
appoint a collector, who shall have power to collect all that part of said
Town tax, which has accrued within and belonging to said new Town.
Resolved further, SEC. 4. That a meeting of the inhabitants of said Town of
Clinton shall be warned by Austin Olcott, Esq., or in his absence by David
Dibble, Esq., to be held in the meeting house of the first Congregational
society of said Town, at such time as he shall appoint, within twenty days
from the time this bill shall take effect, for the purpose of choosing all the
necessary and proper officers of said Town, which meeting shall be warned
in the same manner as other Town meetings in this state, and shall have
power to transact any business proper to be done by said Town; and said
Olcott or Dibble shall be moderator of said meeting.
SEC. 5. That this act shall take effect from and after the day of its passage.
General Assembly — Private Laws — Vol. IV, p. 1230.
MILEAGE OF CLINTON.
PASSED 1839.
Resolved by this Assembly, That the mileage from Clinton in Middlesex
County, [to Hartford,] shall be thirty-eight miles.
General Assembly — Private Laws — Vol. IV, p. 1231.
MILEAGE OF CLINTON.
PASSED 1840.
§ A601-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A601-1
1:211
Resolved by this Assembly, That the mileage from the Town of Clinton in
Middlesex county, be, to New Haven, twenty-five miles.
General Assembly — Private Laws — Vol. IV, p. 1232.
BOROUGH OF KILLINGWORTH — NAME CHANGED TO CLINTON
[BOROUGH OF CLINTON.]
AN ACT IN ADDITION TO THE ACT, ENTITLED "AN ACT
INCORPORATING THE BOROUGH OF KILLINGWORTH."
PASSED 1841.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives, in General
Assembly convened, SEC. 1. That Austin Olcott, Esq., of said borough of
Killingworth, and in case of his absence for the space of thirty days after
the passing of this act, George Carter, Esq., be, and he is hereby authorized
and empowered to call a meeting of the freemen of the said borough to
be holden for the choice of officers, at the academy in said borough, at
such times in the month of May, A. D. 1841, as he or they may direct. A
notification signed by said Olcott, or in case of his absence as aforesaid,
by said Carter, specifying the object, time and place of said meeting, and
set upon the public sign-post in said borough, at least five days before the
day appointed for said meeting, shall be sufficient notice. The said Austin
Olcott, and in his absence the said George Carter, shall preside at the
meeting aforesaid, until a warden shall be chosen and sworn. The freemen
of said borough when convened as aforesaid, shall have power to appoint
all such officers as they are authorized by law to appoint at their annual
meeting, and the officers so appointed shall continue in office until the
next annual meeting of said corporation, and until others are chosen and
qualified in their stead.
And be it further enacted, SEC. 2. That the name of the said borough of
Killingworth be changed to that of Clinton, and that this act take effect
from the time of its passage.
Private Laws — Vol. III, p. 227.
BOUNDARIES — CLINTON AND SAYBROOK
Relating to House Petition No. 21; The Same Being the Petition of Benjamin
P. Jones for a Resolution Annexing Him to the School Society or Town of
Clinton.
Resolved by this Assembly: That the resolution passed by the general
assembly, May session, A. D. 1834 changing and establishing a dividing line
between the eastern school district in Killingworth and the second school
district of the third school society of Saybrook, be, and the same is hereby,
approved.
Approved, June 25, 1873.
General Assembly — 1873.
Special Laws — Vol. VII, p. 505.
§ A601-1 CLINTON CODE § A601-1
1:212
[House Joint Resolution No. 345.]
[43]
CONCERNING SCHOOL PROPERTY IN TOWN OF CLINTON.
Resolved by this Assembly: That the Town of Clinton shall succeed to all
rights which any of its school districts enjoyed in any real estate within said
Town, at the time when said Town voted to consolidate its school districts.
Approved, March 21, 1895.
General Assembly — January, 1895.
Special Laws — Vol. XII, p. 43.
[House Joint Resolution No. 352.]
[88]
INCORPORATING THE GROVE BEACH IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATION.
Resolved by this Assembly; SECTION 1. That all owners of cottages,
dwellings, and building lots within the limits hereinafter specified in the
locality known as Grove Beach, in the towns of Clinton and Westbrook,
Middlesex county, are hereby constituted a body politic and corporate, by
the name of The Grove Beach Improvement Association, and by that name
they and their successors shall be a corporation in law capable of suing
and being sued, pleading and being impleaded in all courts of whatsoever
nature, and shall be vested with and possess the powers hereinafter
specified.
SEC. 2. The limits and territory of said Grove Beach Improvement
Association are hereby defined and established as follows, to wit: all that
territory in said towns of Clinton and Westbrook bounded westerly by a line
drawn due south from the center of the first culvert east of the bridge over
Hammock creek, on the new road from Clinton to Westbrook, to low-water
mark on Long Island sound; southerly by the low-water line of Long Island
sound from said mark tot he highway running northerly near the farm
house now owned by William L. Lewis: easterly by said highway from lowwater
mark on said sound to its junction with the new road from Clinton to
Westbrook; and northerly by said new road from said junction to the point
of starting.
SEC. 3-15. — [Text omitted — Generally provides for meetings, officers, bylaws,
powers, and assessments.]
Approved, April 3, 1895.
General Assembly — January, 1895.
Special Laws — Vol. XII, P. 118.
[Senate Bill No. 441.]
[213]
AN ACT AUTHORIZING H. W. REYNOLDS TO BUILD SEA WALLS.
Be it Enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Assembly Convened:
§ A601-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A601-1
1:213
H. W. Reynolds of West Hartford is authorized to construct and maintain
a sea wall or sea walls in front of his land situated at Grove Beach, in the
Town of Clinton, on Long Island Sound, said land being bounded northerly
by the highway, easterly by land formerly of Edward T. Mason, southerly
by Lond Island Sound, and westerly by land formerly of Catherine G.
Means, and to fill in and grade the space within said walls as he may deem
expedient, provided the same shall not obstruct public navigation; and the
space so filled, or to be filled as aforesaid, and the space southerly and
easterly of said land between said land and low water mark is granted to
said H. W. Reynolds, his heirs and assigns forever.
Approved, April 29, 1927.
General Assembly — 1927.
Special Laws — Vol. XX, p. 239.
[House Bill No. 947.]
[382]
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE TOWN OF CLINTON TO ISSUE SCHOOL
BONDS.
Be it Enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Assembly Convened:
Summary: This act of three sections authorized the Town of Clinton to
issue bonds to an amount not in excess of $175,000. for the repair or
reconstruction of buildings at the time of the passage of this act upon land
owned by The Trustees of the Morgan School Fund in the Town of Clinton
or the erection of new buildings thereon, and the equipping and furnishing
of such buildings, all for school purposes. Provisions for the detail of the
bonds were specified and reference made to applicable debt limitations.
Approved, June 18, 1929.
General Assembly — 1928.
Special Laws — Vol. XX, p. 974.
[Substitute for House Bill No. 415.]
[418]
AN ACT CONCERNING CERTIFICATION OF THE RECORDS OF
KILLINGWORTH BY THE TOWN CLERK OF CLINTON.
Be it Enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Assembly Convened:
The Town Clerk of the Town of Clinton, from photostatic copies on file in
his offices, is authorized to certify copies of the public records of the Town
of Killingworth recorded prior to June 1, 1838, which certified copies shall
have the same legal effect as copies certified from the original records of
the Town Clerk of the Town of Killingworth.
Approved, June 18, 1929.
General Assembly — 1929.
§ A601-1 CLINTON CODE § A601-1
1:214
Special Laws — Vol. XX, p. 1018.
[Substitute for House Bill No. 1174.]
[371]
AN ACT CREATING A BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS AND A
POLICE DEPARTMENT IN THE TOWN OF CLINTON.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Assembly convened
SECTION 1. There is created a board of police commissioners for the Town
of Clinton. Said board shall consist of three resident electors of said Town
to be appointed by the board of selectmen thereof within thirty days after
the passage of this act. One of said police commissioners shall be appointed
to serve until July 1, 1939, one to serve until July 1, 1940, and one to serve
until July 1, 1941. In the month of June, 1939, and annually thereafter,
said board of selectmen shall appoint one police commissioner for the term
of three years from the first day of July succeeding his appointment. Said
commissioners shall serve until their successors shall be appointed and
shall have qualified. Each of said commissioners shall be sworn to the
faithful performance of his duties. At no time shall all three commissioners
be members of the same political party. Said board shall elect annually a
chairman and secretary from their number. Meetings may be called by the
chairman or by a majority of the members of the board. A majority of the
members of the board shall constitute a quorum. Said board shall make an
annual report to the selectmen, which report shall be included with and
published by the selectmen in the annual report of said Town.
SEC. 2. All vacancies occurring in said board shall be filled by the board of
selectmen.
SEC. 3. The members of said board shall serve without compensation, but
the necessary expenses of said board, including cash disbursements or
actual expenses incurred by any member thereof in the performance of any
duty imposed upon him by direction of said board shall be paid by said
Town.
SEC. 4. Said board shall organize, maintain and have the general
management and control of a police department of the Town of Clinton.
All apparatus, equipment and buildings owned and used by said Town for
police purposes shall be under said board's control and management. Said
board shall requisition all equipment for the department; shall annually
prepare a budget; shall appoint, remove, suspend, discipline and prescribe
the duties of the police officers whether regular, supernumerary or call
members and fix their compensation and shall make all rules and
regulations governing the department which it may deem necessary
consistent with the provisions hereof.
§ A601-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A601-1
1:215
SEC. 5. Said board shall fix the number and designation of all members of
the police department, one of whom shall be a chief of police, who shall be
the chief administrative officer in the department and responsible to the
board of commissioners for its efficiency and for the execution of all laws,
rules and regulations prescribed by said board.
SEC. 6. The officers appointed by said board shall be known as policemen
and shall have the authority and shall perform all the duties delegated to
Town constables in criminal matters. All fees for services rendered by such
officers in any criminal matter shall be paid to the Town.
SEC. 7. After this act shall be in effect, constables in the Town of Clinton
shall no longer have the authority to serve criminal process.
SEC. 8. Any person appointed a policeman by said board under the
provisions of this act shall serve as such from the date of such appointment
unless sooner removed for cause by said board. If any charge shall be filed
against a policeman appointed by said board, the same shall be in writing,
and such policeman may file any proper answer thereto and action shall
not be taken upon such charges until after reasonable notice thereof and
opportunity afforded such policeman to appear before the board and be
heard concerning the same. After such hearing, any policeman aggrieved
thereby may appeal to the next or next but one following return day of the
superior court for Middlesed county.
Approved, May 29, 1939.
General Assembly — January, 1939.
Special Acts, 1939 — p. 273.
[Substitute for House Bill No. 1125.]
[547]
AN ACT PROVIDING FOR BIENNIAL ELECTIONS IN THE TOWN OF
CLINTON
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Assemble convened.
SECTION. 1. At the annual Town election of the Town of Clinton to be held
on the first Monday of October, 1939, and biennially thereafter, there shall
be elected three selectmen, two registrars of voters, seven constables, six
grand jurors, two auditors, a collector of taxes, a Town treasurer and an
agent of the Town deposit fund, each of whom shall hold office for two
years from the date of his election and until his successors shall be elected
and shall have qualified. There shall also be elected at said election, and
biennially thereafter, a Town Clerk, who shall hold office for two years
from the first Monday in January next succeeding his election and until his
successors shall be elected and shall have qualified.
§ A601-1 CLINTON CODE § A601-1
1:216
SEC. 2. There shall also be elected at said election on the first Monday
of October, 1939, and biennially thereafter, one member of the board of
assessors and one member of the board of tax review, each for a term of
six years. The term of office of the member of the board of assessors and
the term of office of the member of the board of tax review elected on the
first Monday of October, 1937, shall be extended until the first Monday of
October, 1943.
SEC. 3. There shall also be elected at said election on said first Monday of
October, 1939, three members of the board of education for a term of four
years. The terms of office of the members of the board of education elected
on the first Monday of October, 1937, shall be extended until the first
Monday of October, 1941. At the election to be held on the first Monday
of October, 1941, and biennially thereafter, there shall be elected members
of the board of education for a term of four years to succeed those whose
terms expire at such time.
SEC. 4. If the number of officers to be elected under the provisions of this
act shall be even, no person shall vote for more than one-half of the number
and, if the number to be elected shall be odd, no person shall vote for more
than a bare majority of the number.
SEC. 5. This act shall take effect upon its approval by the electors of the
Town of Clinton at a special Town meeting to be held on or before the first
Monday of August, 1939.
Approved, June 20, 1939.
General Assembly — January, 1939.
Special Acts, 1939 — p. 615.
ELECTIONS
RESOLVED: That an Act of the Legislature of the State of Connecticut
entitled an "Act Providing for Biennial Elections in the Town of Clinton" be
approved.
Special Town Meeting — June 22, 1939.
TM — v. 4, p. 238.
SPECIAL ACTS
- Beach Associations -
[House Joint Resolution No. 153.]
[304]
AMENDING THE CHARTER OF THE GROVE BEACH IMPROVEMENT
ASSOCIATION
BE IT RESOLVED BY THIS ASSEMBLY:
Summary: Amend the charter of the Grove Beach Improvement
Association, approved April 3, 1895, by adding two sections to be known as
sections 16 and 17.
§ A601-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A601-1
1:217
SEC. 16 gives the association full and complete power to construct and
maintain a system of sewerage and drainage within its limits and to levy
and collect assessments with respect thereto.
SEC. 17 provides that the sanitary board of the association shall have
authority to order and direct the connections with the sewerage system.
Approved, May 27, 1903.
General Assembly — January, 1903.
Special Laws — Vol. XIV, p. 237.
[Substitute for House Bill No. 69]
[170]
AN ACT AMENDING THE CHARTER OF THE GROVE BEACH
IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATION.
Be it Enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Assembly Convened:
Summary: Amends the charter of the Grove Beach Improvement
Association, approved May 27, 1903, by striking out the words "sanitary
board" wherever they appear and inserting in lieu thereof the words
"governing board." Also authorizes the governing board to enact by-laws
or ordinances for various specified purposes, including travel over the
highway, removal of debris and obstructions, control of garbage and waste
material disposal, and to affix penalties. Also provides for basis of
assessment of property.
Approved, May 1, 1919.
General Assembly — January, 1919.
Special Laws — Vol. XVIII, p. 134.
[Senate Bill No. 736.]
[526]
AN ACT CONCERNING THE INCORPORATION OF THE BEACH PARK
POINT ASSOCIATION.
§ A601-1 CLINTON CODE § A601-1
1:218
SECTION 1. The owners of record of land within the limits specified in
section 2 of this act, in the locality known as Beach Park Point, Beach
Park, in the Town of Clinton, shall be, while they continue to be owners
of such land, a body politic and corporate by the name of Beach Park
Point Association, and by that name they and their successors shall be
a corporation in law, capable of suing and being sued, and pleading and
being impleaded in all courts, and shall be vested with the powers
hereinafter specified. Each member of the association, of the age of twentyone
years or over, not otherwise prohibited by law from voting, so long as
he shall continue to own real estate in said territory, shall be entitled to
vote at any meeting of said association and shall be eligible to hold any
office therein. All owners of any interest in any lot or parcel of real estate
shall be considered as one owner for the purpose of voting and shall be
entitled collectively to cast one undivided vote. Husbands and wives of said
owners shall be members of said association but shall not be empowered
to vote at any meeting of said association except in the absence of said
owners.
SEC. 2. The limits of said association shall be that part of the Town of
Clinton known as East Walk and West Walk, Beach Park, Connecticut,
consisting of Lots numbers 1 to 35, inclusive, on East Walk and Lots
numbers 1 to 34, inclusive, on West Walk, as shown on a certain map
entitled "Property of R. B. Jacobs, Beach Park, Conn., Scale 1 foot =
40 inches, Raymond B. Jacobs, maker, who also certified that map was
substantially correct," which map is on file in the office of the Town Clerk
of Clinton, Connecticut, together with the beach between Lots numbers 31,
32, 33 and 34 on West Walk and Lots numbers 33, 34, and 35 on East Walk
to the mean high-water line of Long Island sound. Said territory is bounded
as follows: Beginning at a point in the south line of the highway at a point
marked "Bound" on said map; thence running southerly along the easterly
boundary of the road, and opposite Lots numbers 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14,
16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 32 and 34, to the mean high-water line of
Long Island sound; thence following the shore line in a general westerly
direction along the mean high-water line of said Long Island sound, to the
westerly boundary of Lot number 31, extended; thence northerly along the
westerly boundary of the road and opposite Lots numbers 31, 29, 27, 25,
23, 21, 19, 17, 15, 13, 11, 9, 7, 5, 3, 1 to a point in the southerly boundary
line of the highway; thence easterly along the highway to the point or place
of beginning.
SEC. 3. The object of said association shall be to provide for the
improvement of the land within its limits and for the health, comfort,
protection and convenience of the inhabitants thereof.
SEC. 4-16. — [Text omitted — Generally provides for meetings, officers, bylaws,
powers, and taxation.]
Approved, July 26, 1949.
General Assembly — January, 1949.
Special Acts, 1949 — p. 1307.
§ A601-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A601-1
1:219
[House Bill No. 195.]
[615]
AN ACT INCORPORATING THE BEACH PARK ROAD ASSOCIATION
SECTION 1. The owners of record of land within the limits specified in
section 2 of this act, in the locality known as Beach Park road, Beach
Park, in the Town of Clinton, shall be, while they continue to be owners
of such land, a body politic and corporate by the name of Beach Park
Road Association, and by that name they and their successors shall be
a corporation in law, capable of suing, being sued, pleading and being
impleaded in all courts, and shall be vested with the powers hereinafter
specified. Each member of the association, of the age of twenty-one years
or over, not otherwise prohibited by law from voting, so long as he shall
continue to own real estate in said territory, shall be entitled to vote at
any meeting of said association and shall be eligible to hold any office
therein. All owners of any interest in any lot or parcel of real estate shall
be considered as one owner for the purpose of voting and shall be entitled
collectively to cast one undivided vote. Husbands or wives of said owners
shall be members of said association but shall not be empowered to vote at
any meeting of said association except in the absence of said owners.
SEC. 2. The limits of said association shall be that part of the Town of
Clinton known as "Beach Park Road, Beach Park," consisting of lots one
to twenty-four, inclusive, and lot five A as shown on "Map of property of
Elizabeth S. Blake, made by John S. Dickinson, surveyor" and filed in the
office of the Town Clerk in the Town of Clinton, Connecticut, on August 5,
1899, together with the beach between the bulkhead shown on said map
and tide water. Said territory is bounded as follows: Beginning at a point
in the southerly boundary line of Hammock road and the northeastern
boundary of lot 23; thence in a southerly direction along the easterly
boundaries of lots 23, 21, 19, 17, 15, 13, 11, 9, 7, 5A and 5, 3 and 1, to
the mean high water line of Long Island sound; thence following the shore
line in a generally westerly direction along the mean high water line of said
Long Island sound to the southwesterly boundary of lot 2 extended; thence
northerly along the westerly boundaries of lots 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16,
18, 20, 22 and 24 to the southerly boundary line of Hammock road and
the northwestern boundary of lot 24; thence easterly along the southerly
boundary line of Hammock road to the point of place of beginning.
SEC. 3. The object of said association shall be to provide for the
improvement of the land of said territory and for the health, comfort,
protection and convenience of the inhabitants thereof.
SEC. 4-17. — [Text omitted — Generally provides for meetings, officers, bylaws,
powers, and taxation.]
Approved, July 2, 1953.
General Assembly — January, 1953.
Special Acts, 1953 — p. 1208.
§ A601-1 CLINTON CODE § A601-1
1:220
[Modified House Bill No. 2561.]
[271.]
AN ACT CONCERNING INCORPORATION OF THE CLINTON BEACH
ASSOCIATION.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Assembly convened:
SECTION 1. The owners of record of any land within the limits hereinafter
specified in the Town of Clinton shall be, while they continue to be owners
of such land, a body politic and corporate, under the name of "The Clinton
Beach Association," and by that name they and their successors shall be
a corporation in law with all the powers and privileges of corporations as
set forth in the general statutes and with the rights, powers, privileges
and duties hereinafter set forth. Each such landowner who is twenty-one
years of age or over shall, while he continues to own land within said
limits, be a member of The Clinton Beach Association and entitled to vote
at any meeting of said association and shall be eligible to hold any office
in said association. All owners of fractional or undivided interests in any
land shall be considered as one member for the purpose of voting and
for purposes of the assessment under section 5 of this act and shall be
entitled collectively to one vote to be cast as the majority in interest shall
determine. No member shall have more than one vote.
§ A601-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A601-1
1:221
SEC. 2. The territory of said association shall be that part of the Town
of Clinton known as Clinton Beach, Clinton, Connecticut, consisting of
all lots on the north and south sides of Shore road and Causeway from
that property known as Ridgewood on the west to the Grove Beach
Improvement Association limits on the east end of Shore road, and shall
include the meadowland north to the Tidal river also known as Hammock
creek or Hammock river and bounded on the north by the Hammock
creek or Hammock river and an imaginary line from a point two hundred
feet from the southerly edge of the Post road, United States route 1,
and the filum of the Hammock creek or Hammock river, castorly to the
westerly boundary of the Grove Beach Improvement Association, as shown
on certain maps entitled Areal Map CLI-1-25, No. 79 and CLI-1-4, No. 86
each dated 4-21-65 which maps are on file in the office of the Town assessor
of Clinton, Connecticut, together with the beach on the south side along
the mean highwater line of Long Island sound. Said territory is bounded as
follows: Commencing at a point two hundred feet from the southerly edge
of a road known as the Post Road, United States route 1, and the filum
of a stream in the marsh land, there located, known as Hammock creek
or Hammock river; thence easterly about five hundred seventy-five feet to
a point two hundred feet from the Post road, United States route 1, on
the west boundary of the Grove Beach Improvement Association; thence
running due south to the mean high-water mark of Long Island Sound,
said line being the westerly border of the Grove Beach Improvement
Association; thence westerly along the mean high-water mark of Long
Island sound to the westerly border of property now or formerly of
Elizabeth W. Dorsch, and formerly of Lilla Woolley, and more particularly
described at Volume 29, Page 477 of the Clinton Land Records; thence
northerly along said border to the southerly side of the shore road; thence
westerly along the southerly edge of shore road about fifty feet to an
imaginary point formed by extending the westerly border of land now or
formerly of Charles Burton, and more particularly described at Volume
51, Page 83 of the Clinton Land Records, in a southerly direction to the
southerly edge of Shore road; thence northerly along the said imaginary
line and westerly border of said land past the northerly border of said
land along an imaginary line, formed by extending said westerly line of
said land in a northerly direction, to the point where it reaches the filum
of a stream in the marshland there located known as Hammock creek or
Hammock river; thence easterly along the filum of the said Hammock creek
or Hammock river to the point of beginning. It is bounded: Easterly by
the westerly line of the Grove Beach Improvement Association; Southerly
by Long Island sound; Westerly by the westerly borders of land now or
formerly of Elizabeth W. Dorach and of land now or formerly of Charles
Burton, and by above described extensions of the westerly borders of said
lands; Northerly by the Tidal river, also known as Hammock creek or
Hammock river and an imaginary line from a point two hundred feet from
the southerly edge of the Post road, United States Route 1, and the filum of
the Hammock creek or Hammock river, easterly to the westerly boundary
of the Grove Beach Improvement Association.
§ A601-1 CLINTON CODE § A601-1
1:222
SEC. 3. The object of said association shall be to provide for the
improvement of the land and adjacent waters of said territory as a
residential and resort area and for the health, safety, welfare, comfort,
protection and convenience of the inhabitants thereof.
SEC. 4. At any time hereafter any parcel of land which is contiguous to
the territory in said association as above defined may become a part of
the territory of said association in the following manner: The owners may
make a written application that such contiguous land bounding the same
be added to the territory of the association. The officer receiving such
application shall cause same to be considered and acted upon by the board
of directors within ninety days. If a majority of the whole membership
of such board favor such annexation, they may call a special meeting of
the association to consider said matter. Such meeting shall be warned
as special meetings of the associations are warned. If a special meeting
is not called to consider said matter, that matter shall be acted upon at
the next annual meeting. Notification of said business will be given to
the membership pursuant to section 10 of this act. If a majority of the
members present vote in favor of such annexation, then the territory in
question shall be annexed to the territory of the association and such
property and the owners thereof shall thereafter have the same rights and
be subject to the same liabilities as if the same had been an original part
of the territory of said association. The owners of said contiguous territory
or their representatives shall be fully responsible for compliance with
chapter 105 and other applicable provisions of the general statutes, and
The Clinton Beach Association shall in no way become liable for defending
any actions which may be brought in any connection with the annexation of
said contiguous territory to said Clinton Beach Association, nor shall said
Clinton Beach Association be subject to any liability whatsoever of said
annexed territory either as a unit or in any of or all of its parts. Upon the
annexation of any territory to the said association as herein provided, the
Clerk shall within one month provide appropriate notation thereof on the
Clinton Land Records.
SEC. 5-20. — [Text omitted — Generally provides for meetings, officers, bylaws,
powers, and taxation.]
SEC. 21. This act shall take effect upon its approval by a majority vote of
the qualified members of the association as defined in section 1 of this act
attending a meeting held for the purpose, duly warned.
Approved June 20, 1967.
Approved: Date of vote, July 14, 1967. Vote for, unanimous.
General Assembly — January, 1967.
Special Acts, 1967 — p. 259.
[House Bill No. 3664.]
[97.]
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE TOWN OF CLINTON TO ADOPT PENSION
PLANS AND VALIDATING EXISTING PLANS.
§ A601-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A601-1
1:223
The Town of Clinton, acting by vote of its board of selectmen, may, from
time to time, establish, amend and modify pension and retirement systems
for any or all employees of the Town, provided that such action shall not
impair, abridge or abrogate any rights vested in any such employee under
any pension or retirement system established prior to the effective date of
this act, without the consent of such employee. The action of the board of
education of the Town of Clinton in establishing, on November 10, 1965,
the "Pension Plan—Custodial Staff of Clinton School System," and the
action of the Clinton Town meeting of December 13, 1966 in establishing
"The Clinton Police Pension Plan" and the retirement pension for the chief
of police, are hereby authorized, ratified and validated.
Approved May 26, 1967.
General Assembly — January, 1967.
Special Acts, 1967 — pp. 100-101.
§ A601-1 CLINTON CODE § A601-1
1:224

ZONING REGULATIONS
OF THE
TOWN OF CLINTON, CONNECTICUT
CLINTON PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Adopted on: June 15, 1965
Revised through: January 1, 2018
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON TABLE 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section
References
Page
1
Title and Jurisdiction
101
1.1
Title
101
1.2
Jurisdiction
101
1.3
Penalties
101
1.4
Purpose
101
1.5
Temporary & Limited Moratorium
101
2
Amendments and Validity
201
2.1
201
2.2
201
2.3
201
2.4
201
3
Definitions
301
3.1
General
301
3.2
“A”
301
3.3
“B”
302
3.4
“C”
302
3.5
“D”
304
3.6
“E”
305
3.7
“F”
305
3.8
“G”
306
3.9
“H”
306
3.10
“I”
307
3.11
“J”
307
3.12
“K”
307
3.13
“L”
307
3.14
“M”
309
3.15
“N”
309
3.16
“O”
310
3.17
“P”
310
3.18
“Q”
311
3.19
“R”
311
3.20
“S”
312
3.21
“T”
313
3.22
“U”
314
3.23
“V”
314
3.24
“W”
314
3.25
“X”
314
3.26
“Y”
314
3.27
“Z”
315
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON TABLE 2
4
Application Requirements, Procedures and Decision Process
401
4.1
Purpose
401
4.2
Pre-Application Conference
401
4.3
Preliminary Review
402
4.4
Information Required for a Complete Application
402
4.5
Statement of Use
402
4.6
Site Plan Specifications
403
4.7
Architectural Plans
406
4.8
Lighting Plan
406
4.9
Traffic Study
406
4.10
Landscaping Plan
407
4.11
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
407
4.12
Shopping Cart Management Plan
409
4.13
Site Access Plan
409
4.14
Viewshed Analysis
410
4.15
Plot Plan
410
4.16
Additional Information for Special Exceptions
410
4.17
Reports
410
4.18
Fees
411
4.19
Digital Data
411
4.20
Additional Information for Petitions to Amend the Regulations of Map
411
4.21
Contents of a Sign Permit Application
412
4.22
Contents of a Temporary Sign Permit Application
413
4.23
Contents of a Sign Design Plan
413
4.24
Flood Hazard Area
413
4.25
Coastal Site Plan Review
413
4.26
Design Review
413
4.27
Aquifer Protection Regulations
413
4.28
Materials Required for Formal Submission of all Applications to the Commission or Board
413
4.29
Referral to the Design Review Board
414
4.30
Referral to the Water Pollution Control Commission
415
4.31
Formal Submission of Applications to the Planning and Zoning Commission
416
4.32
Formal Submission of Applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals
416
4.33
Formal Submission of an Appeal of the Zoning Enforcement Officer’s Decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals
417
4.34
Formal Submission of Applications to the Zoning Enforcement Officer
417
4.35
Establishing a Date of Receipt
417
4.36
Site Inspection as a Part of Application Review
418
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON TABLE 3
4.37
Applications Involving Parcels with Inland Wetlands or Watercourses
418
4.38
Referrals and Review by Others
419
4.39
Public Hearings
421
4.40
Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals Decisions
424
4.41
Post-Approval Procedures
425
4.42
Termination of Approval
426
4.43
Revisions
427
4.44
As-Built Plans
427
5
Zoning Enforcement Officer
501
5.1
Zoning Enforcement Officer
501
5.2
Violations
501
5.3
Lot Line Revisions
502
6
Design Review Board
601
6.1
Statement of Purpose
601
7
Fees
701
7.1
701
8
Bond Procedures and Bond Agreement
801
8.1
801
8.2
801
8.3
Bond Requirements
801
8.4
Term
802
8.5
Bond Reduction
802
9
Zoning Permits
901
9.1
901
9.2
901
9.3
Application
901
9.4
Additional Requirements
901
9.5
Certificate of Zoning Compliance
902
9.6
Demolition
903
10
Site Plan Review
1000
10.1
General
1000
10.2
Construction and Development Standards
1000
10.3
Sanitation
1001
10.4
Wetlands
1002
10.5
Underground Utility Lines
1002
10.6
Special Standards
1002
11
Special Exceptions
1100
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON TABLE 4
11.1
General
1101
11.2
General Conditions
1101
12
Standards for Special Exceptions
12001
12.1
Standards
12001
12.2
Two-Family Dwellings
12002
12.3
Multiple Dwelling Units in Commercial Structures
12003
12.4
Reserved for Future Use
12008
12.5
Common Interest Community Development (CICD)
12009
12.6
Accessory Apartments in Residential Zones
12016
12.7
Accessory Apartments – Business and Village Zones
12020
12.8
Mini-Estate Subdivision
12023
12.9
Conservation Subdivision
12025
12.10
Rear Lots
12034
12.11
Planned Residential Development (PRD)
12038
12.12
Housing Projects for the Elderly
12044
12.13
Hospitals, Clinics, Extended Care Facilities, Long- term Facilities, Nursing/Rest Homes, Sanatoriums, Intermediate Care Facilities, Homes for the Aged, Congregate Housing, Assisted Living Facilities and Boarding Homes for Sheltered Care
12050
12.14
Child Day Care Facilities
12052
12.15
Adult Day Care Facilities
12054
12.16
Bed and Breakfasts
12056
12.17
Motels
12058
12.18
Hotels
12060
12.19
Business and Professional Offices
12063
12.20
Financial Institutions
12064
12.21
Retail Establishments and Personal Service Facilities
12065
12.22
Drive-up Windows
12067
12.23
Shopping Centers
12069
12.24
Liquor Stores
12072
12.25
Massage Establishments
12074
12.26
Tattoo Parlors
12076
12.27
Adult Entertainment Businesses
12077
12.28
Restaurants and other Food Service Establishments
12080
12.29
Outdoor Seating for Restaurants and Other Food Service Establishments
12081
12.30
Take-out Restaurant
12082
12.31
Indoor Theaters and Assembly Halls over 15,000 sq. ft.
12083
12.32
Limited Recreational Facility
12084
12.33
Bowling Alleys and Billiard or Pool Halls
12087
12.34
Commercial Recreational Facilities
12088
12.35
Riding Academies and Boarding Stables
12091
12.36
Commercial Kennels
12093
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON TABLE 5
12.37
Veterinary Hospitals
12094
12.38
Farms
12095
12.39
Farmer’s Market
12097
12.40
Farm Tourism Uses
12099
12.41
Philanthropic, Educational or Religious Uses
12107
12.42
Buildings, Uses and Facilities of the town of Clinton, State of Connecticut, Federal Government and Other Governmental Agencies, over 15,000 sq. ft.
12109
12.43
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
12110
12.44
Manufacturing, Processing or Assembling of Goods
12124
12.45
Warehousing and Wholesale Businesses
12126
12.46
Self-Storage Warehouses
12128
12.47
Marinas, Docks, Wharves, Slip Basins and Landings
12130
12.48
Sale of Pleasure Boats, Marine Equipment, Engines, Supplies and Provisions
12132
12.49
Manufacturing and Rebuilding of Boats
12133
12.50
Processing Storage and Sale of Fish, Shellfish and Lobsters
12134
12.51
Marine Contractor’s Businesses, Associated Buildings and Storage Yards
12136
12.52
Contractor’s Businesses and Storage Yards
12138
12.53
Excavation, Grading and Deposit of Materials
12140
12.54
Funeral Home
12144
12.55
Research Laboratories, Associated Offices and Buildings
12146
12.56
Self-Service Cleaning Establishments (Laundromats)
12148
12.57
Printing Establishments
12149
12.58
Storage of Hazardous Materials
12150
12.59
Commercial Oil, Propane or Gasoline Storage Tanks
12152
12.60
Gasoline Filling Stations
12154
12.61
Motor Vehicle and Limited Repairer Service
12156
12.62
Establishments for the Sale of New or Used Vehicles
12158
12.63
Motor Vehicle Detailing and Car Washing Facilities
12159
13
Zoning Board of Appeals, Variances, Certificate of Location, Dealer’s and Repairer’s License
1301
13.1
1301
13.2
Variances
1301
13.3
Limitations
1302
13.4
1302
13.5
Certificate of Approval of Location, Dealers’ and Repairers’ Licenses
1302
14
Vendors
1401
14.1
Purpose
1401
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON TABLE 6
14.2
Definitions
1401
14.3
Transient Vendors
1401
14.4
Stationary Vendors
1403
14.5
Event Vendors
1405
15
Reserved for Future Use
1501
16
Historic Districts
1601
17
Flood Hazard Zone
1701
17.1
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objective
1701
17.2
Definitions
1702
17.3
General Provisions
1708
17.4
Administration
1710
17.5
Provision for Flood Hazard Reduction
1712
17.6
Specific Standards
1715
17.7
Manufactured Homes
1716
17.8
Coastal High Hazard Areas
1717
17.9
Coastal AE Zone with Moderate Wave Action
1719
17.10
Floodways
1720
17.11
Variance Procedure – Zoning Board of Appeals
1721
17.12
Enforcement
1723
18
Coastal Area Management Zone, Coastal Site Plan Review
1801
18.1
Policy
1801
18.2
Coastal Site Plan Review
1801
18.3
Coastal Site Plan Review Exemptions
1801
18.4
Application
1802
18.5
Application Fee
1804
18.6
1804
18.7
Consideration of the Application
1804
18.8
1804
18.9
1804
18.10
1805
18.11
Violations
1805
19
Reserved for Future Use
1901
20
Interchange Development Zone
2001
20.1
Purpose
2001
20.2
Definitions
2001
20.3
General Concepts
2002
20.4
Permitted Uses
2003
20.5
Prohibited Uses
2003
20.6
Public Amenity Bonus and Incentives
2004
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON TABLE 7
20.7
Design Standards
2005
20.8
Specific Site Appearance Requirements for Retail Establishments
2007
20.9
Site Access and Parking
2010
20.10
Pedestrian/Bicyclist Circulation
2012
20.11
Trash Storage and Collection
2013
20.12
Materials Required for Formal Submission for all Applications to the Commission or Board
2013
21
Floating Zones
2101
21.1
2101
21.2
Procedures to Amend the Zoning Regulations and the Zoning Map to Permit Floating Zoning Districts
2101
21.3
List of Floating Zoning Districts
2105
22
Village Zone (VZ)
2201
22.1
Statement of Purpose
2201
22.2
Permitted Uses
2201
22.3
Design Standards
2201
23
Reserved for Future Use
2301
24
Reserved for Future Use
2401
25
Reserved for Future Use
2501
26
Districts – Lot Requirements – Standards
2601
26.1
Establishment of Districts
2601
26.2
Zoning Map
2601
26.3
Zoning Schedule
2601
26.4
Setbacks
2601
26.5
Lot Area, Shape, Access and Frontage Requirements
2602
26.6
Corner Lots
2604
26.7
Coverage and Bulk
2604
26.8
Special Buffer Requirements
2604
26.9
Excavation and Grading
2606
26.10
Signs
2606
26.11
Lot Requirement Standards by District: Residential
2607
26.12
Lot Requirement Standards by District: Non- Residential
2609
27
Schedule of Uses by District
2701
27.1
Residential
2701
27.2
Non-Residential
2707
27.3
Floating Zones
2717
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON TABLE 8
28
Accessory Uses, Home Occupations and Alternate Energy Systems
2801
28.1
Accessory Uses
2801
28.2
Home Occupations
2804
28.3
Alternate Energy Systems
2806
29
Non-Conformities, Mobile Homes/Trailers
2901
29.1
Non-Conforming Lot
2901
29.2
Non-Conforming Buildings or Structures
2901
29.3
Non-Conforming Uses
2902
29.4
Subdivision
2902
29.5
Junk Yard
2902
29.6
Mobile Homes/Trailers
2902
30
Design Standards
3001
30.1
Purpose
3001
30.2
Scope
3001
30.3
Design Review Standards
3001
31
Performance Standards
3101
31.1
Performance Standards
3101
31.2
Parking and Loading
3102
32
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
3201
32.1
Statutory Authorization
3201
32.2
Exemptions
3201
32.3
Definitions
3201
32.4
Activities Requiring a Certified Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
3202
32.5
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
3202
32.6
Minimum Acceptable Standards
3203
32.7
Issuance or Denial of Certification
3204
32.8
Conditions relating to Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
3205
32.9
Inspections
3205
32.10
Amendments to Erosion Plan
3205
33
Parking
3301
33.1
General
3301
33.2
Definitions
3301
33.3
Classifications of Uses
3301
33.4
Parking in Excess of the Maximum
3301
33.5
Off-Site Parking Spaces
3302
33.6
Shared Parking
3302
33.7
Reduction in Parking Space Requirements for Shared Parking
3303
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON TABLE 9
33.8
Excusals
3303
33.9
Parking Reduction Requests
3303
33.10
Design and Construction Standards
3304
33.11
Parking Space Standards
3308
34
Signs
3401
34.1
Purpose
3401
34.2
3401
34.3
Definitions
3401
34.4
General Standards for Signs
3403
34.5
Specific Standards for Signs
3403
34.6
Special Use Categories
3406
34.7
As-of-Right Signs
3413
34.8
Temporary Signs
3414
34.9
Prohibited Signs
3416
34.10
3417
35
Storage Tanks
3501
35.1
Scope
3501
35.2
Definitions
3501
35.3
Registration of Existing Tanks
3502
35.4
New Installations
3502
35.5
Permits
3502
35.6
Tank Types
3502
35.7
Installation
3503
35.8
Piping
3503
35.9
Inspection
3503
35.10
Life Expectancy
3503
35.11
Leaks
3503
35.12
Abandonment or Removal
3504
35.13
Leak Detection
3504
35.14
Appeals
3504
35.15
Penalties
3505
Appendix A
A-A1
Appendix B
A-B1
Text Amendments
T-1
Map Amendments
M-1
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 101
Section 1
Title and Jurisdiction
1.1 Title: These Regulations shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Regulations of the Town of Clinton, Connecticut”.
1.2 Jurisdiction: No land, building or other structure shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with these Regulations.
1.3 Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the Zoning Regulations hereinafter set forth shall be subject to civil penalties or other action as set forth in Section 8-12 of the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS).
1.4 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community; to conserve the value of property and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the town; to lessen congestion in the streets; to avoid undue concentration of population; to secure safety from fire; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, recreation and other public requirements; to provide for the public health, comfort and general welfare in living and working conditions; and to regulate and restrict the location and time of operation of trades and industries and the location of buildings/structures for specific uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings/structures hereafter erected; to regulate and determine the area of yards, courts and other open spaces for building hereafter erected in the Town of Clinton; to conserve and improve the physical appearance and character of the town; and to promote the economic and operational viability of agricultural businesses, farm operations, farmland protection, and maintaining community character.
(Amended 6/1/2014)
1.5 Temporary & Limited Moratorium: The Commission shall not accept, consider or approve any application to permit the establishment of Medical Marijuana Producers and Dispensaries, as defined in CGS Section 21a-408, for a period of twelve (12) months commenced from the effective date (April 1, 2014). The moratorium will allow the Commission time to review CGS Chapter 420f (Palliative Use of Marijuana) and associated Department of Consumer Protection Regulations and to draft and adopt municipal regulations regarding the production and distribution of medical marijuana within the town of Clinton. The expiration date of said moratorium shall be March 31, 2015 unless extended, amended, or repealed by the Commission. Expired.
(Amended 4/1/2014)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 201
Section 2
Amendments and Validity
2.1 These Regulations, including the Zoning Map, which is a part hereof, may from time to time be amended or changed by the Commission on its own initiative or on petition. Any amendment or change may be adopted only after due notice and public hearing as required for adoption of these Regulations. See Section 4: Application Requirements, Procedures and Decision Process for the process to amend the Regulations or Zoning Map.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
2.2 The invalidity of any section, paragraph or provision of these Regulations shall not invalidate any other section, paragraph or provisions hereof.
2.3 These Regulations, and any amendment or change hereto, shall be in full force and effect from the date established by the Commission in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS).
2.4 The “Zoning Regulations of the Town of Clinton, Connecticut”, adopted by the Clinton Zoning Commission and made effective on June 15, 1965, and any amendments thereto, are repealed coincident with the effective date of these Regulations. The repeal of the above Regulations and any amendments thereto shall not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued, or acquired, or any liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time such appeal took effect, but the same may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if such repeal has not been affected.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 301
Section 3
Definitions
3.1 General: The words used in these Regulations shall have the meaning commonly attributed to them. Doubts as to their precise meaning shall be determined by the Commission in accordance with the purpose and intent of these Regulations.
3.2 “A”
3.2.1 Access Strip: A wholly owned portion of a building lot capable of supporting a driveway that has a common boundary with a street.
(Amended 10/1/2009)
3.2.2 Accessory Apartment: A set of rooms fitted out especially with a full bathroom, kitchen (includes a sink, refrigerator and stove), bedroom and is physically separated from the principal dwelling, used as a main dwelling (for one family), and which is a subordinate use of the main use of the building.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.2.3 Accessory Structure: A structure located on the same lot as the principal building or structure and devoted or intended to be devoted to an accessory use. Any portion of a principal structure devoted or intended to be devoted to an accessory use is not an accessory structure.
3.2.4 Accessory Use: A use of a lot, building or other structure which is subordinate to and customarily incidental to the principal use of such lot, building or other structure and which is conducted on the same lot as the principal use. (See also Section 27)
3.2.5 Agriculture: See “Farming”.
(Amended 6/1/2014)
3.2.6 Apartment Unit: One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities comprising an independent self-contained dwelling unit in a building containing more than two dwelling units.
3.2.7 Aquaculture: Except as otherwise provided herein, the term “Aquaculture” shall be defined as stated in Connecticut General Statutes, Section 1-1(q), as may be amended from time to time.
(Amended 6/1/2014)
3.2.8 Areas of Special Flood Hazard: The land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding within any given year. (See Section 17 for related definitions)
3.2.9 Assisted Living Facility: Housing or living arrangements for the elderly, infirm or disabled, in which housekeeping, meals and other assistance is available to residents as needed, but does not include nursing staff.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 302
3.3 “B”
3.3.1 Basement: That portion of a building having its floor entirely sub-grade (i.e. below ground level) on all sides.
3.3.2 Bed and Breakfast: A transient lodging in a dwelling, including service of breakfast to such visitors, and is subject to the special standards in Section 12 of these Regulations.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.3.3 Bedroom: A private room planned and intended for sleeping, separate from other rooms by a door and accessible to a bathroom without crossing another bedroom or living area.
3.3.4 Board: Clinton Zoning Board of Appeals
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.3.5 Boarding Home for Sheltered Care: A profit or non-profit boarding or other home for the sheltered care of adult persons, which in addition to providing food and shelter to four or more persons, unrelated to the proprietor, also provides any personal care or service beyond food, shelter and laundry.
3.3.6 Buffer: Land area, whether or not protected as conservation easement or deeded open space, to adequately, as determined by the Commission, visually and physically separate one use from another or from a boundary line, or to block noise, lights or other nuisances, general through the use of landscaping, structures, and/or vegetation, unless buffer is otherwise specifically defined.
3.3.7 Building: See “Structure”.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.3.8 Building Footprint: See “Footprint”.
3.3.9 Building Height: The vertical distance from the average finished grade within ten feet (10’) of the walls of the building to the highest point of flat or mansard roofs, including the top of the parapet, or to the mean level between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs. The maximum height as defined above, shall be measured within ten feet (10’) of the walls of the building from the existing grade shown on the March 16, 1987 Town of Clinton Topographic Survey, located in the Office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.3.10 Building Line: A line parallel to a street at a distance equal to the front setback line set forth in the Schedules, or at a greater distance when required by the Commission.
3.4 “C”
3.4.1 Camp: An area of one (1) acre or more, with temporary or permanent structures, designed or used to accommodate ten (10) or more individuals for educational, recreational, political, charitable or social uses. (Does not include public parks)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 303
3.4.2 Camper and Camp Trailers: Any recreational vehicle primarily equipped, designed or converted as a temporary dwelling for camping, recreational and vacation uses. Such vehicle shall be eligible for registration, licensing and insuring for general use on the public highways. This definition shall include reference to travel trailer, pickup camper, motorized camper or tent trailer.
3.4.3 Campground: An area that is occupied or intended or designed or improved for occupancy by transients using recreational vehicles, motor homes, mobile trailers, or tents for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes and is rented out as such to the public. This does not include any manufactured or mobile home parks or communities.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.4.4 CGS: Connecticut General Statutes.
3.4.5 Clinic: An establishment where patients are admitted for examination and treatment by one or more physicians, dentists, psychologists or social workers and where patients are not usually lodged overnight.
3.4.6 Club: A non-profit association or membership corporation whose object is the health and recreation of its members and which restricts the use of its premises, building or other facilities to its members and bona fide guests.
3.4.7 Commercial Recreation Facility: Any establishment whose main purpose is to provide the general public with an amusing or entertaining activity and where tickets are sold or fees are collected for the activity.
(Added 1/1/2015)
(a) Indoor Type A: A Commercial Recreation Facility with a footprint of not more than seventy thousand square feet (70,000 sq. ft.) which includes, but is not limited to, the following types of activities: indoor pools, indoor ice rinks, indoor sports fields, indoor running/jogging tracks, indoor gymnasiums, indoor archery ranges, indoor shooting ranges.
(b) Indoor Type B: A Commercial Recreation Facility with a footprint of not more than forty thousand square feet (40,000 sq. ft.) which includes but is not limited to, the following types of activities: arcades, laser tag, indoor rock climbing, roller skating rinks, indoor playscapes, skeeball.
(c) Outdoor: A Commercial Recreation Facility which includes, but is not limited to, the following types of activities: golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, go cart racing, outdoor skate parks, outdoor pools, outdoor tennis courts.
3.4.8 Commission: Clinton Planning and Zoning Commission.
3.4.9 Common Green Space: Land designated as common area within subdivisions, Common Interest Community Developments, Planned Residential Developments,
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 304
Housing Projects for the Elderly, or similar developments and set aside and used for passive and active recreation by residents of the development.
(Amended 6/1/2015 & 10/1/2015)
3.4.10 Congregate Housing: A dwelling(s) providing shelter and services that may include meals, housekeeping, and personal care assistance.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.4.11 Corner Lot: A lot having lot lines formed by the intersection of two streets, whether public or private, and where the interior angle of intersection is one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°) or less.
3.5 “D”
3.5.1 Day Care:
(a) Adult Day Care: A facility providing care for the elderly and/or functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for a portion of a twenty-four-hour day.
(b) Child Day Care: A facility operated for the purpose of providing care, protection and guidance to ten or more individuals for a portion of a twenty-four-hour day.
(c) Family Child Day Care: A facility operated for the purpose of providing care, protection and guidance for no more than nine individuals for a portion of a twenty-four-hour day, as defined in CGS Section 19a-77(a)(3).
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.5.2 Dwelling: A building containing one or more dwelling units. The residential building, together with no more than one (1) accessory building may be considered to constitute a single dwelling if designed for occupancy and so occupied by members of the same family.
(a) Dwelling, Single-Family: A building having only one (1) dwelling unit.
(b) Dwelling, Two-Family: A building having two (2) independent dwelling units. This definition does not include buildings with accessory apartments.
(c) Dwelling, Multiple Unit: A building containing three (3) or more independent dwelling units.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(d) Dwelling, Planned Neighborhood: Two or more detached or attached buildings used as dwelling units located on a lot that is in a single ownership having yards, courts or facilities in common.
(Added 2/1/2015)
3.5.3 Dwelling Unit: A dwelling, or part of a dwelling, which include both kitchen and bathroom, occupied or intended to be occupied by one family for residential purposes, with independent outside access. Accommodations for transient lodging in a hotel or motel shall not be considered a dwelling unit.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 305
3.6 “E”
3.6.1 Efficiency Unit: A dwelling unit consisting of not more than one habitable room together with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities.
3.6.2 Elderly Housing: Housing that is designed, intended and operated for older persons where at least 80% of the occupied units are occupied by at least one person who is fifty-five (55) years of age or older provided that all permanent residents are over the age of twenty-one (21); where the housing facility or community publishes and adheres to policies and procedures that demonstrate the intent to operate as housing for older persons; and complies with rules issued by the US Secretary of Housing and Urban Development for verification of occupancy. Age restrictions must be included in the property deed.
3.6.3 Extended Care Facility: A long-term care facility or a distinct part of a facility licensed or approved as a nursing home or a governmental medical unit.
3.7 “F”
3.7.1 Family: One (1) or more persons related by blood or marriage or a group of not more than five (5) persons who need not be related, plus domestic servants, who are living together as a single housekeeping unit and maintaining a common household.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.7.2 Farm: A lot or lots of contiguous land containing at least three (3) acres on which the land and buildings are devoted to farming and such other uses as are necessary thereto and may include adjacent pastures, wooded land, natural drainage access and other open space.
3.7.3 Farm Stands: A booth or stall located on a farm from which produce and farm products are sold to the general public.
3.7.4 Farm Tourism: Uses of the land that may not be integral, but nevertheless are incidental, subordinate and having a supportive relationship to the farming use. Uses that benefit the property owner without supporting the farming use do not fall under this definition.
3.7.5 Farming: Except as otherwise provided herein, the term “farming” shall be defined as stated in the Connecticut General Statutes, Section 1-1(q), as it may be amended from time to time; however, specifically excluded from the definition of farming will be medical marijuana growing establishments, commercial piggeries, livery stables and the raising of fur-bearing animals for their pelts.
(Amended 6/1/2014)
3.7.6 Farming Operation: The on-farm processing, mixing, handling or sale of organic matter that is produced by such farm operation and the on-farm processing, mixing, handling, marketing and sale of off-farm generated organic matter that is transported to such farm operation and is necessary to convert into compost, mulch or other biomass products that can be used as soil enhancers. Organic mulches are
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 306
leaves, grass clippings, peat moss, untreated wood, wood chips and woodchip mulch, bark chips, straw mulch/field hay/salt hay.
(Added 10/1/2014)
3.7.7 Financial Institutions: Establishments such as, but not limited to, banks and trust companies, credit agencies, lenders, investment companies, brokers and dealers of securities and commodities, security and commodity exchanges, and insurance agents.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.7.8 Floor Area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several stories of a building or other structure measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of party walls, excluding garages, terraces, bay windows, utility rooms for heating apparatus, earth floor cellars, attics, open porches, unheated enclosed porches and other horizontal areas not accessible by a permanent inside stairway.
3.7.9 Footprint: (Also known as a “Building Footprint”) The total horizontal projected surface of a building, measured from the outside of the exterior walls, together with the area of all attached covered or roofed areas, including canopies, arcades, porches, decks and covered storage areas, but excluding uncovered steps.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.7.10 Funeral Home: An establishment with facilities for the preparation of the dead for burial, for viewing the body and calling on the bereaved, for meditation and for funeral services. A funeral home may include accessory facilities such as offices, chapels, libraries and the like, but shall not include a crematory.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.8 “G”
3.8.1 Greenhouse: A structure whose roof and sides are made largely of glass and other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of plants, vegetables, flowers and similar materials are grown for personal enjoyment.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.8.2 Greenhouse, Commercial: A structure in which plants, vegetables, flowers and similar materials are grown for sale.
3.8.3 Guest Unit: A room providing sleeping accommodations within a bed and breakfast, hotel or motel, typically for double occupancy.
3.9 “H”
3.9.1 Home Occupation: Business or professional offices and home industries or service occupations which are carried on within the walls of a dwelling or existing accessory building, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the building for dwelling purposes and does not change the character or appearance thereof or have an adverse impact on surrounding properties. Such use shall be in conformance with the standards established in Section 28 of these Regulations.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 307
3.9.2 Hospital: An institution providing health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities.
3.9.3 Hotel: A building occupied or used as a more or less temporary abiding place of twenty (20) or more individuals with or without board and/or in which there are ten (10) or more sleeping rooms, accessed by interior corridors, where individuals pay, without public subsidy, for temporary accommodations.
(Added 2/1/2015)
3.10 “I”
3.10.1 Impervious Surface: Any material which reduces and prevents absorption of stormwater into the ground as when it was previously undeveloped land.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.10.2 Improvements: See “Work”.
3.10.3 Inland Wetlands: “Land, including submerged land, not regulated pursuant to Section 22a-28 to 22a-35, inclusive, which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial and flood plain, by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as may be amended from time to time, of the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture;” (CGS Section 22a-38(15)).
3.10.4 Intermediate Care Facility: A facility which provides, on a regular basis, health-related care and services to individuals who do not require the degree of care and treatment which a hospital or skilled nursing facility is designated to provide, but who, because of their mental or physical condition, require care and services (above room and board) which can be made available to them only through institutional facilities such as these.
3.11 “J”
3.12 “K”
3.12.1 Kennel, Commercial: Any kennel maintained as a business for boarding or grooming of cats and dogs, including a “doggie daycare”.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.13 “L”
3.13.1 Lawfully Existing: Existing or operating in fact and not merely contemplated, as of the date of adopting of the Clinton Zoning Regulations or Subdivision Regulations, or, if rendered non-conforming, pursuant to any amendment of the foregoing Regulations, existing or operating in fact on the date of adoption of such amendment.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 308
3.13.2 Limited Recreational Facilities: Any establishment whose main purpose is to provide the general public with an amusing or entertaining activity and where tickets are sold or fees are collected for the activity. Limited to athletic fields, tennis courts, golf courses, swimming pools, skateboard park and hiking and nature trails.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.13.3 Liquor Stores: Establishments engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption.
(Amended 1/1/2015)
3.13.4 Livestock: Domestic animals such as horses, sheep, cattle and poultry, kept for use or profit excluding mink, fox and other animals raised for their pelts.
3.13.5 Long-term Care Facility: An institution or a distinct part of an institution which is licensed or approved to provide health care under medical supervision for twenty-four (24) or more consecutive hours to two (2) or more patients who are not related to the governing authority or its members by marriage, blood or adoption.
3.13.6 Lot:
(a) A parcel of land meeting the requirements of these Regulations (effective as of June 15, 1965 or as amended).
(b) A parcel of land which is owned separately from any adjoining lot or lots as evidenced by deed or deeds recorded in the Clinton Land Records of the Town of Clinton.
(c) A building lot shown on a subdivision map approved by the Commission and recorded in the Clinton Land Records.
3.13.7 Lot Lines: A line of record, of a lot as defined under Section 3.13.6(b) and 3.13.6(c), bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space. “Lot Lines” and “Property Lines” are used interchangeably in these Regulations.
(a) Front: The line separating the lot from the street.
(b) Side: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
(c) Rear: The line opposite to and most distant from the front lot line, other than a side lot line.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.13.8 Lot Line Revision: Relocation of a boundary line so as not to create a building lot which was not previously approved by the Commission. Lots so modified must receive approval for Zoning Compliance from the ZEO, per Section 9 of these Regulations.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 309
3.14 “M”
3.14.1 Maximum Ground Coverage: The percent of total lot area that may be covered by buildings, outside storage areas, decks measuring less than six feet (6’) in height from the ground to the top of the deck floor, pavement and impervious surfaces. For non-residential zones, to be calculated as a percentage of lot area net of floodways, inland wetlands, tidal wetlands and watercourses.
(Amended 1/1/2012 & 2/1/2015)
3.14.2 Marina: A dock or basin providing secure moorings for waterborne vessels and often offering supplies, repair and other facilities.
3.14.3 Marine Facility: A dock, wharf, slip, basin or similar landing facility for waterborne vessels and/or open yard for the building, storing, repairing or servicing of such vessels, together with any accessory buildings or other structures necessary for the operation of the foregoing.
3.14.4 Medical Marijuana Producers and Dispensaries: All definitions found in CGS Section 21a-408(3): Marijuana Dispensary, as may be amended from time to time, shall apply.
(Amended 1/1/2015)
3.14.5 Mobile Manufactured Home: A factory-built, single-family structure, which is manufactured or constructed under authority of 42 USC Sec. 5403, Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, and is to be used as a place for human habitation, but which is not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site and which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.14.6 Mobile Manufactured Home Park: Any lot on which two or more mobile manufactured home park, occupied for residential purposes, are located.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.14.7 Modular Housing: A dwelling unit constructed on-site in accordance with all applicable state and federal codes and composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.14.8 Motel: An establishment providing transient accommodations containing six or more rooms, with a separate exterior entrance for each rental unit.
(Amended 2/1/2015)
3.15 “N”
3.15.1 Neighborhood Shopping Center: A building or group of buildings planned, built or utilized as a common facility on one lot with stores, financial institutions, restaurants or personal service establishments and with common off-street parking and loading facilities.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 310
3.15.2 Non-Conformity: A non-conforming use, lot, building or other structure which lawfully existing (as defined above) on the date of adoption of these Regulations or any amendment thereto and which fails to conform to one or more of the requirements of these Regulations. (See also Section 29)
(a) Non-Conforming Building: A building or structure which contains a permitted use, but does not meet the setback, height, floor area, projection or story requirements of these Regulations for the District in which it is located.
(b) Non-Conforming Lot: A lot which does not comply with the requirements of these Regulations, or any amendment thereto, as to area, shape and/or frontage and which, on June 15, 1965, or the effective date of any amendment to these Regulations if rendered non-conforming thereby, was owned separately from any contiguous parcel as evidenced by deed or deeds recorded in the Clinton Land Records.
(c) Non-Conforming Use: The use of a lot, building or structure which does not conform to the requirements of these Regulations for the District for which such use is made.
3.15.3 Nursing Home: An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves.
3.15.4 Nursery: Any place where hardy trees, shrubs and vines are propagated or grown for commercial purposes. Such stock shall be regarded as “nursery stock”.
3.16 “O”
3.16.1 Outdoor Wood-burning Furnace: An accessory structure or appliance designed to be located outside living space ordinarily used for human habitation and design to transfer or provide heat, via liquid or other means, through the burning of wood or other solid fuel for heating spaces other than where such structure or appliance is located, any other structure or premises, or for heating domestic, swimming pool, or Jacuzzi water. “Outdoor wood-burning furnace” does not include a fire pit, wood-fired barbeque or chiminea.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.17 “P”
3.17.1 Pavement:
(a) Brick, stone, concrete or asphalt placed on the surface of the land;
(b) That part of a street having an improved surface.
3.17.2 Personal Services: Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her apparel, including but not limited to cleaning
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 311
services, garment pressing, linen supply, diaper service, photographic studios, beauty shops, barber shops, shoe repair, hat cleaning, funeral services, steam baths, reducing salons and health clubs, clothing rental, etc.
3.17.3 Plainly Audible: Any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. By way of example, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of music is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible sound; it is not necessary that the title, specific words, or artist of the song be identifiable.
(Amended 4/1/2010)
3.17.4 Principal Activity: A use accounting for more than twenty percent (20%) of a business’ stock in trade, display space or floor space or movie display time per month.
3.17.5 Principal Building/Dwelling: The portion of a single-family dwelling which contains an accessory use such as an accessory apartment.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.17.6 Professional Office: An office of recognized professions with or without staff, including, but not limited to doctors, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers, planners, landscape architects, artists, musicians, designers, teachers and other similar professions which are qualified to perform services of a professional nature.
3.17.7 Projection: Any structure attached to a principal or accessory building and extending beyond the face of a building foundation wall, including roofs, cornices, chimneys, bay windows, shading devices, areaways, balconies, fire escapes, outside stairways and steps. See Section 26.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.18 “Q”
3.19 “R”
3.19.1 Rest Home: See Nursing Home.
3.19.2 Restaurant: An establishment where food and drink is prepared, served and consumed primarily within the principal building.
3.19.3 Restaurant, Carry-out: An establishment which by design of physical facilities or by service or by packaging procedures permits or encourages the purchase of prepared ready-to-eat foods intended primarily to be consumed off the premises and where the consumption of food in motor vehicles on the premises is not permitted.
3.19.4 Restaurant, Fast-food: An establishment whose principle business is the sale of pre-prepared food or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer is a ready-to-consume state for consumption within the restaurant building or off-premises.
3.19.5 Retail Establishment: A commercial enterprise that provides goods and/or services directly to the consumer, where such goods are available for immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 312
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.19.6 Retaining Wall: A structure constructed to hold back or support an earthen bank.
3.19.7 Roofline: The intersection of the roof and the perimeter wall of the structure.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.20 “S”
3.20.1 Sanatorium: A hospital used for treating chronic and usually long-term illnesses.
3.20.2 Satellite Dish Antenna: A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include, but not be limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth station, TVRO’s and satellite microwave antennas. For the purposes of these Regulations, a satellite dish shall be considered a structure and an accessory use and shall be subject to the setback standards of Section 26 of the district in which it is located.
3.20.3 Setbacks: The distance that buildings and/or structures are set back from front, rear or side property lines.
3.20.4 Shopping Center: A building or group of buildings planned, built or utilized as a common facility on one lot or adjacent lots with common off-street parking and access.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.20.5 Sign: Any display of lettering, logos, colors, lights, illuminated neon tubes or other graphic representation visible to the public from outside of a building or from a traveled way, which either conveys a message to the public or intends to advertise a use conducted, goods, products, services or facilities available, either on the lot or any other premises, excluding window displays and merchandise. Interior signs, if located in a window and visible from the exterior, shall be considered a sign. The term “sign” shall also include any natural object or objects which are painted or arranged so as to represent or display any graphic representation, as well as any building feature which serves to identify the use or occupancy of any building or site through a recognized motif or symbol, including roof or other special illumination, special colors or effects, or building or roof lines.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.20.6 Skateboard Park: A building, structure or open area containing or developed with slopes, hills, passageways and other challenges where people using skateboards may practice the sport.
3.20.7 Story; That portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor, ceiling or roof next above. Attics not designed or arranged for human occupancy shall not be considered a story. When the ceiling of a basement or cellar
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 313
is five feet (5’) or more above the average ground level within ten feet (10’) of the building or other structure, the basement or cellar shall be considered a story.
3.20.8 Street: The term “street” shall include “road” and shall be any street accepted by the Town of Clinton, any State Highway except a limited access State Highway, or any street shown on a Record Subdivision Map approved by the Commission and recorded in the Clinton Land Records.
3.20.9 Streetscape Rendering: A drawing of the proposed project with the primary visual focus of the site being the view of the building drawn in perspective as seen from the street. The drawing, at a minimum vertical scale of 1”=10’ at the nearest point, shall be sufficient to provide the Commission with a ready comparison of the scale of the new building(s) with the existing structures on the lot and adjacent lots.
3.20.10 Structure: Anything constructed or erected, including a building, which is placed on a lot, or anything attached to something having a permanent location on or beneath the ground, including swimming pools and retaining walls greater than three feet (3’) in height, but excluding walls or fences less than six feet (6’) in height. “Structure” and “Building” are used interchangeably in these Regulations.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.20.11 Swimming Pool: A swimming pool, above-ground or below-ground, with a gross water surface area of greater than eighty square feet (80 sq. ft.), or a depth at any point of twenty-four inches (24”) or more of water, shall, for the purposes of these Regulations, be considered a structure and an accessory use and shall be subject to the setback standards of Section 26 for the District in which such swimming pool is located. See also Section 28: Accessory Uses.
3.21 “T”
3.21.1 Temporary Structure: A structure that is not permanently affixed to the property, including membrane structures which include, but are not limited to, hoop houses and tents. Temporary structures shall be permitted for a period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days from the date of issuance of a building permit. Structures which are not permanently affixed but which are to remain more than sixty (60) days are considered permanent.
3.21.2 Tidal Wetlands: Those areas which border on or lie beneath tidal waters, such as, but not limited to, banks, bogs, salt marshes, swamps, meadows, flats or other low lands subject to tidal waters, and whose surface is at or below an elevation of one foot above local extreme high water; and upon which may grow or be capable of growing some, but not all, of those specific plant species listed in CGS Section 22a-29(2), as may be amended.
3.21.3 Tract: A parcel of land which has not been divided or subdivided since October 5, 1964.
(Amended 6/1/2015)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 314
3.21.4 Transient Lodging: A room, or rooms, comprising a single guest unit, for overnight occupancy, not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days in the 90-day period commencing with the first day of occupancy.
(Amended 7/1/2009)
3.21.5 Travel Trailer/Camper: See “Camper and Camp Trailers”.
3.21.6 Towers, Communication: A structure erected and used for the receipt, relay or transmission of communication signals which may include a control building required for the facility. See Section 10 for further definitions pertinent to communication towers.
3.21.7 Towers, Wind Generators: A structure erected and used for the generation of electricity by a means of a windmill, which may include a control building required for the facility.
3.21.8 Trailer: A temporary home or office equipped with facilities for use as a temporary residence or office that is temporarily on a site.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.22 “U”
3.22.1 Uplands: All lands not designated as inland or tidal wetlands or flood hazard area.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
3.23 “V”
3.23.1 Vehicles, Registered: Vehicles which display a vehicle registration plate and carry a vehicle registration certificate in good standing with the Connecticut Department of Motor Vehicles, or equivalent agency from another jurisdiction. Additionally, all required personal property taxes for the vehicle shall be current.
(Amended 3/1/2017)
3.24 “W”
3.24.1 Wetlands, Inland: See “Inland Wetlands”.
3.24.2 Wetlands, Tidal: See “Tidal Wetlands”.
3.24.3 Watercourses: “Rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon this state or any portion thereof, not regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 to 22a-35, inclusive. (CGS Section 22a-38(16))
3.24.4 Work or Improvement(s): All physical improvements required by an approved Site Plan or Special Exception, and includes, but is not limited to, the construction of roads or driveways, storm drainage facilities, water and sewer lines, installation or telephone and electric services, planting of trees or other landscaping and installation of retaining walls or other structures. “Improvements” and “work” are used interchangeably in these Regulations.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 315
3.25 “X”
3.26 “Y”
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 316
3.27 “Z”
3.27.1 ZEO: Clinton Zoning Enforcement Officer.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 401
Section 4
Application Requirements,
Procedures
and
Decision Process
4.1 Purpose: This Section covers the recommended and required procedures for applications to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals, and the Design Review Board. It also explains the permitting process, including:
? Pre-application procedures
? Information required for a complete application
? Formal application procedures
? Decision-making process, and
? Post-approval requirements
The Planning and Zoning Commission (hereinafter, “the Commission”) acts upon:
? Coastal Site Plan Review (CAM)
? Site Plans (SP)
? Special Exceptions (SE),
as noted in Section 27 of these Regulations.
The Zoning Board of Appeals (hereinafter, “the Board”) acts on:
? Variances
? Certificates of Approval of Locations, as required by the Connecticut General Statutes
? Appeals of decisions by the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO)
The Design Review Board (hereinafter, “the DRB”) reviews:
? All new construction, exception single-family homes located outside a Village Zone
? All signs
? Any project requiring review by either the Commission or the Board that involves changes to the façade of an existing structure.
4.2 Pre-Application Conference - Recommended for all Applications: Pre-application conferences with the Land Use Staff (Zoning Enforcement Officer, Land Use Technicians, etc.) are optional, but at least one is strongly recommended for all applications to the Commission, Board, or DRB. Such conference allows early identification of issues before an applicant incurs the expense and effort required for a formal application. Proceeding to a formal application without such a conference increases the likelihood of an unfavorable review. However, no comments made by staff during the pre-application conference shall be deemed to substitute for any portion of the formal review, or to be construed as a decision, prejudgment, or determination of the final formal application.
No fee is required for a pre-application conference. Such conferences are arranged by appointment with the Land Use Staff.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 402
4.3 Preliminary Review - Recommended for all Applications to the Commission: Applicants are strongly encouraged to present a preliminary conceptual plan for review by the Commission prior to incurring costs for detailed engineering and other reports required for a final application. A preliminary plan will be reviewed with a clear understanding that preliminary plans enjoy no official status, and that the Commission’s consensus on feasibility of approval of a preliminary plan does not necessarily imply approval of the formal application.
No fee is required for Preliminary Review. The Land Use Staff will schedule a preliminary review for a regular meeting of the Commission, subject to the deadline set by resolution of the Commission. The applicant shall provide preliminary materials by this deadline for Commission.
4.4 Information Required for a Complete Application: The following Sections (4.5 through 4.30) set forth the information required for a complete application. The Sections also provide procedures for when an applicant may be excused from providing the information in whole or in part.
4.5 Statement of Use: A written statement describing the proposed use in sufficient detail to indicate compliance with the use provisions of these Regulations and the District, Performance Standards of Section 31. The following information shall also be included in the statement, if applicable:
4.5.1 Hours of operation
4.5.2 Such information as necessary for the Commission to determine the appropriate number of parking spaces for the proposed use, such as number of employees, number of rooms, etc. [See Section 33]
(a) If there are multiple uses on the property, existing or proposed, the applicant must provide a sufficient description of the uses and the calculation for compliance with parking requirements for all uses, existing and proposed.
4.5.3 The section number from the Schedule of Uses (Section 27)
4.5.4 The scope of the project including the size of the building, proposed infrastructure, etc.
4.5.5 Any structures that are to be moved or demolished
4.5.6 Any variances that have been granted for the property, whether they apply to this application or not, including the date, application number and a brief summary of the decision.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 403
4.6 Site Plan Specifications: A site plan that is submitted with an application needs to meet the following specifications:
4.6.1 The plan should be drawn on a sheet no larger than twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24”x36”) and at a minimum scale so that the plan fits on a single page.
4.6.2 Boundary Survey Plan: All boundary and survey information contained on the site plan shall meet the requirements for accuracy to Class A-2 standards unless reference can be made to a previous A-2 survey on file in the Office of the Town Clerk or in the Land Use Office.
(a) An electronic or hard copy of such previous A-2 survey shall be provided to the Commission or Board.
4.6.3 All site plans must show the following information, or have a note stating that the following features are not present or proposed on the site, or do not apply to the application:
(a) Location Map: A Location Map of the site at a scale of at least one inch equals eight hundred feet (1” =800’) but not more than one inch equals two thousand feet (1” =2,000’) showing the following information within eight hundred feet (800’) of the perimeter of the subject site, in such a way as to show the relationship of the site to the surrounding neighborhood and the street pattern:
(1) All the land in the lot together with any adjacent or contiguous parcels in the same ownership
(2) All lot lines
(3) Zoning districts
(4) Public ways
(b) Accurate location and size of all existing buildings and structures on the site
(c) A scaled, complete parking area layout showing the following:
(1) The location and size of all off-street parking and loading spaces
(2) Location of fire lanes
(3) Location of all traffic islands and barriers
(4) A diagram of the following:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 404
(i) Traffic flow
(ii) Traffic signs
(iii) Road markings
(iv) Provisions for safe pedestrian movement
(d) The location and design of all sanitary disposal systems
(e) Location of all outdoor fixed trash receptacles, enclosures and facilities
(f) Location, size and design of all signs (a digital photograph of an existing sign can be provided in lieu of a diagram depicting the design)
(g) Location, size and design of all lighting (a digital photograph of existing lighting can be provided in lieu of a diagram depicting the design)
(h) The names of all current property owners abutting, or across a public or private access right of way, shall be shown on the plans.
4.6.4 Site plans for applications which involve alterations to the site shall include the following information, or have a note stating that the following features are not present or proposed on the site, or do not apply to the application:
(a) Existing and proposed grades at two foot (2’) intervals, referenced to an existing or established published benchmark.
(1) Topographical information shall meet the requirements for accuracy of Class T2 standards as contained in the Standard for Surveys and Maps in the State of Connecticut.
(b) Accurate location and size of all proposed buildings and structures on the site.
(c) Approximate location and size of all existing buildings and structures, wells and septic systems on the abutting properties, or across a public or private access right of way, which are within seventy-five feet (75’) of the common lot line.
(d) Proposed new street(s), street geometry and any improvements to existing streets.
(e) All existing and proposed driveway entrances and exits including widths and curve radii.
(f) Location of all existing trees eighteen inches (18”) or greater, in diameter, measured at a point four feet (4’) from the ground.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 405
(1) Such trees are to be indicated if it is to be removed.
(g) Location of the clearing limit line (if appropriate) and the limit of disturbance line beyond which existing vegetation and terrain is to be left undisturbed.
(h) Location of all tidal and inland wetlands, watercourses, Aquifer Protection Areas, Needs Areas as determined by the Clinton Water Pollution Control Commission (WPCC), Natural Diversity Database, Coastal Resources and Flood Hazard Areas, where applicable.
(i) Location of the Coastal Jurisdiction line (CGS Section 22a-359(c)) and mean high water line data where a property is located adjacent to tidal, coastal and navigable waters of the state and to tidal wetlands, both as defined in the Connecticut Coastal Management Act (CCMA).
(j) The proposed stormwater drainage system, including the location and elevations of all existing and proposed highway drainage facilities within one hundred feet (100’) of the subject site.
(k) Location of all water supply wells and water supply lines serving the site.
(l) Location of all soil tests performed on-site.
(m) Existing and proposed docks, wharfs, bulkheads and/or jetties.
(n) Location of special site features such as vernal pools, ledge outcroppings, and the like which may impact the proposed use and site improvements.
(o) The location, delineation and type of any existing or proposed easements or covenants running with the land.
(p) Location and description of any known cultural resources on the site
4.6.5 The Commission may excuse the requirement for professionally prepared site plan, or deem acceptable drawings prepared by a designer, builder, building supplier, applicant or other, as may be appropriate to the proposed use, upon written request of the applicant.
4.6.6 Additionally, the Commission may excuse an element(s) in Sections 4.6.2, 4.6.3, 4.6.4 and 4.6.5, above, if it is not required to determine compliance with the Standards of Sections 10, 11, and 12, upon written request from the applicant.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 406
4.7 Architectural Plans:
4.7.1 Architectural plans of all proposed buildings, structures and signs shall be submitted for all applications.
(a) If the application is for a change of use, only floor plans showing the existing use and the proposed use shall be submitted.
4.7.2 Such plans may be in preliminary form but shall include exterior elevation drawings with dimensions, generalized floor plans and perspective drawings, prepared, except for signs, by an architect or professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut.
4.7.3 If Design Standards apply, the drawings should include information which will demonstrate that the proposed design will have similar and compatible design characteristics to the existing development in the surrounding area of such building/structure.
(a) Such characteristics shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of building bulk size, architectural features including windows/doors and façade lengths and heights as well as building finishes, lighting fixtures design and signage; and overall site design including landscaping.
4.7.4 The Commission may excuse the requirement for professionally prepared architectural plans, or deem acceptable drawings prepared by a designer, builder, building supplier, applicant or other, as may be appropriate to the proposed use, upon written request of the applicant.
4.8 Lighting Plan: When required to be submitted, shall conform to the following standards:
(Amended 6/1/2014)
4.8.1 The Lighting Plan shall show all exterior lighting fixtures and their photometric characteristics and certification that lighting impacts on adjacent properties will be eliminated or minimized to the greatest extent possible.
4.8.2 The Commission may excuse the requirement for a lighting plan if it is not required to determine compliance with the applicable Standards in Sections 10, 11, and 12, upon written request from the applicant.
4.9 Traffic Study: When required to be submitted, shall conform to the following standards:
(Amended 6/1/2014)
4.9.1 The analysis shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut who is also a recognized Traffic Engineer. At a minimum it shall indicate the expected average daily vehicular trips, peak hour volumes, seasonal peak volume, access conditions at the site, distribution of traffic, types of vehicles expected and the effect upon the level of service of intersections along and the street or streets giving access to the site.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 407
(Amended 6/1/2014)
4.9.2 The Commission may excuse the submission of a Traffic Study entirely, or may require a traffic generation study only, or may excuse the submission of both, if the Commission determines that a traffic study or traffic generation study, or both, is not required to determine compliance with the applicable Standards in Sections 10, 11 and 12.
4.10 Landscaping Plan: When required to be submitted, shall conform to the following standards:
(Amended 6/1/2014)
4.10.1 The Landscaping Plan shall, at a minimum, include the following information:
(a) The location, type, size and species of all existing and proposed shrubs, trees, and other plantings, screening or landscaping materials as required in Section xx, Off-Street Parking and Loading, or such other section as may be applicable.
(Amended 6/1/2014)
(1) Proposed plantings, or existing plantings, to be integrated into the plan, are to be numbered, and described in terms of common name, botanical name and whether they are on the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection list of invasive species in a landscaping table on the plan.
(2) Additionally, the plan should indicate the minimum size as is appropriate in terms of caliper, spread, pot size or root ball diameter, of the plantings at the time of installation.
4.10.2 A statement which indicates that any plantings which die, or with 75% or more die-back, within the first year following planting shall be replaced by the property owner at their cost if not covered by a bond required, received and held by the referring authority.
4.10.3 The Commission may excuse the requirement for a Landscaping Plan if it is not required to determine compliance with the applicable Standards in Sections 10, 11, 12 and 33, upon written request from the applicant.
4.11 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan: When required to be submitted, the plan shall conform to the following standards:
4.28.1 Said Erosion Plan shall show the name and address of the proposed use, the name and address of the owner/agent of the property, and the name and address of the developer, if different from the owner, and shall contain, but not be limited to:
(a) Narrative:
(1) Proposed alteration of the area to be developed.
(2) The schedule for grading and construction activities, including:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 408
(i) Start and completion dates
(ii) Sequence of grading and construction activities
(iii) Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures
(iv) Sequence for final stabilization of the project site
(3) The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities.
(4) The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities.
(5) The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities.
(6) The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities.
(7) A contingency or revisited Erosion Plan when inspection of the site indicates unforeseen erosion or sedimentation problems.
(8) The name and address of the engineer or contractor responsible for the monitoring of operational and maintenance procedures for erosion and sediment control. Provided it is practical to do so, the narrative may be printed on the site plan.
(b) Site Plan Map: Drawn at a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1”=40’), showing the name and address of the owner of the lot, the name and address of the developer, if different from the owner, date and scale and including, without being limited to, the following:
(1) The location of the proposed development and adjacent property owners.
(2) Existing structures on the project site, if any.
(3) Contours at two-foot (2’) intervals.
(4) Existing and proposed topography, including soil types, wetlands, watercourses and water bodies.
(5) Proposed area alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads and, if applicable, new property lines.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 409
(6) Location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities.
(7) Sequence of grading and construction activities.
(8) Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures.
(9) Sequence for final stabilization of the development site.
(c) Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the applicant or requested by the Commission or ZEO.
4.12 Shopping Cart Management Plan: When required to be submitted, shall conform to the following standards:
(Added 6/1/2014)
4.12.1 The Shopping Cart Management Plan shall specify the retail operation’s shopping cart management program to prevent accumulation of carts in the parking lot, including the provision that carts cannot be stored outside overnight.
4.12.2 The Commission may excuse the requirement for a Shopping Cart Management Plan if it is not required to determine compliance with the applicable Standards in Sections 10, 11, 12, 20 and 31, upon written request from the applicant.
4.13 Site Access Plan: When required to be submitted, shall conform to the following standards:
(Added 6/1/2014)
4.13.1 The Site Access Plan shall address the following:
(a) Limiting the number of driveways or curb cuts;
(b) Locating the driveway or curb cut so as to reduce conflicts;
(c) Designing the driveway or curb cut so as to reduce conflicts and the severity of conflicts;
(d) Including roadway improvements that reduce or control conflicts if use will adversely impact off-site roadways; and
(e) Providing areas for loading and unloading of bus riders.
4.13.2 The Commission may excuse the requirement for a Site Access Plan if it is not required to determine compliance with the applicable Standards in Sections 10, 11, 12, 20 and 33, upon written request from the applicant.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 410
4.14 Viewshed Analysis: When required to be submitted, shall conform to the following standards:
(Added 6/1/2014)
4.14.1 The Viewshed analysis shall address the following:
(a) The range of the area which will be able to see the subject structure; and
(b) The analysis of existing views that may be blocked or impaired by the subject structure.
4.14.2 The Commission may excuse the requirement for a Viewshed Analysis if it is not required to determine compliance with the applicable Standards in Sections 10, 11, 12, and/or 20, upon written request from the applicant.
4.15 Plot Plan: A plot plan is required to be submitted with each application for a Zoning Permit.
4.15.1 The area of the lot and the dimensions of all lot lines;
4.15.2 The location of all existing or proposed structures;
4.15.3 The height, dimensions, use, floor area of all proposed structures;
4.15.4 The existing and proposed ground coverage calculations;
4.15.5 The location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage disposal systems, leaching field expansion area and water supply wells or lines;
4.15.6 The location, area and dimensions of any off-street parking and loading spaces, signs and other facilities and improvements that are subject to these Regulations; and
4.15.7 Such additional information as may be necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of these Regulations.
4.16 Additional Information for Special Exceptions: All applications for Special Exceptions shall include the following information:
4.16.1 A current Certificate of Zoning Compliance demonstrating that there are no zoning violations existing on the property as of the date of the application.
4.16.2 The Commission may request the applicant to submit additional information that it deems necessary in order to decide on the Special Exception.
4.17 Reports:
4.17.1 A report from the Fire Marshal with respect to compliance with applicable Fire Codes.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 411
4.17.2 A report from the Fire Chief.
4.17.3 A report from the Director of Health, or the authorized agent, with respect to compliance of the design of the subsurface sewage disposal system with the State of Connecticut, Public Health Code, where applicable.
4.17.4 A report from the Design Review Board, per Section 4.29, where applicable.
4.17.5 A report from the Water Pollution Control Commission, per Section 4.30, where applicable.
4.17.6 A report from the Inland Wetlands Commission, per Section 4.37, where applicable.
4.17.7 A report from any of the agencies or officials listed in Section 4.38, as may be applicable.
4.18 Fees: Fees in accordance with the Section x: Fees and Appendix A: Land Use Applications Ordinance shall be submitted with the application.
4.19 Digital Data:
4.19.1 Applicants shall submit plan data in electronic format conforming to the “Clinton Geospatial (GIS) Data Standard” (available in the Land Use Department) in addition to the required hard copies.
4.19.2 Applicants shall submit .pdf files of all applications and information submitted in addition to the required hard copies and the GIS Data Standard.
4.20 Additional Information for Petitions to Amend the Zoning Regulations or Map:
4.20.1 For petitions concerning the text of the Regulations, the existing and proposed text of the Regulations shall be submitted with the appropriate application.
4.20.2 For petitions concerning the Zoning Map, a map shall be submitted, drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals two hundred feet (1”=200’), covering the area of the proposed change and all areas within five hundred feet (500’) of the proposed change and includes the following information:
(a) The existing and proposed zoning district boundary lines;
(b) The existing property lines;
(c) The names of the current property owners from the records of the Clinton Tax Assessor.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 412
4.21 Contents of a Sign Permit Application:
(Amended 11/1/2012)
4.21.1 A complete sign permit application shall be submitted on the required sign permit application form and separate from other pending zoning applications.
4.21.2 The following materials shall include scale drawings and photographs as follows:
(a) Elevations View Drawings
(1) Proposed sign or signs with dimensions
(2) Lettering style
(3) For a freestanding sign, the height of the sign and sign support structure above grade and, for projecting signs attached to a wall, the façade or wall to which the sign is attached and the clearance from pedestrian areas below the sign
(4) Notes indicating proposed materials and colors
(5) Notes indicating the method of sign mounting
(6) Title block which includes:
(i) Name of applicant
(ii) Name of designer
(iii) Property location
(iv) Zoning district
(v) Date of submission
(vi) Graphic scale
(b) Plan View Drawings
(1) Property lines for the proposed site
(2) Existing and proposed on-site structures, existing and proposed signs, parking areas, curbed and non-curbed islands and sidewalks
(c) Photograph(s): Photographs of the proposed site showing area where the proposed sign(s) will be located.
4.21.3 A report from the Design Review Board must be submitted with the Sign Permit application.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 413
4.22 Contents of a Temporary Sign Application:
4.22.1 In addition to information required pursuant to Subsection 4.22 above, an application for a temporary sign shall include specific information regarding the dates the sign is to be erected and removed and the name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for erecting and removing the sign.
4.22.2 The ZEO may at his/her discretion require less information than outlined in Subsection 4.21.2 for a temporary sign application if the ZEO finds that some or all of the information is not necessary in order to determine compliance with these Regulations.
4.23 Contents of a Sign Design Plan:
4.23.1 An overall design plan of all proposed exterior shopping center signs which are to be attached in full view of a public street or right-of-way and all freestanding signs.
4.23.2 Elevation view drawings as specified in Section 4.21.2 above.
4.23.3 The applicant shall submit fifteen (15) copies of the design plan and elevations.
4.23.4 A report from the Design Review Board must be submitted with the Sign Design Plan.
4.24 Flood Hazard Areas: For all proposed developments that contain flood hazard areas and/or a regulated floodway, the site plan shall include information required under Section 17 of these Regulations.
4.25 Coastal Site Plan Review: An application and coastal site plan in accordance with Section xx of these Regulations shall be provided for all sites lying partly or fully within the Coastal Boundary as delineated on the Coastal Boundary Map for the Town of Clinton.
4.26 Design Review: In accordance with Section 6, Design Review, all applications under these regulations shall have to demonstrate that the design of the site and/or buildings being proposed have achieved compliance with the general principles of design and required design review criteria.
4.27 Aquifer Protection Regulations: Application for development proposed in areas delineated as Aquifer Protection Areas on the Zoning Map of the Town of Clinton, Connecticut shall comply with the requirements of the Town of Clinton Aquifer Protection Regulations.
4.28 Materials Required for Formal Submission of all Applications to the Commission or Board: Applicants should begin the process necessary to obtain the reports of the agencies identified below prior to submitting a formal application to the Commission and Board for all applications. The applicant shall submit the following information for all applications, except for Appeals to the Board of the decision of the ZEO. The applicant shall ensure that all reports shall be in writing and include the project title, date prepared, and latest revision date of the
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 414
plans or reports reviewed. These agencies may require more time than anticipated and compliance with the codes, regulations or policies they enforce may dictate plan changes.
4.29 Referral to the Design Review Board (DRB) Mandatory: The following applications are required to be reviewed by the DRB:
? New construction, except single family homes located outside the Village Zone;
? Any projects to be reviewed by the Board or Commission that changes the façade of an existing structure(s); and
? Signs except temporary signs and signs within Special Use Categories that have an approved Sign Design Plan.
4.29.1 Preliminary DRB Review Meeting - Recommended: It is recommended that the following is initiated at least two months prior to formal application to the Board, Commission or ZEO.
(a) At the earliest point in the design process, the applicant should meet with the Land Use Staff, obtain the Design Review Regulations and Recommended Guidelines, and schedule a preliminary review with the DRB.
(b) Three (3) copies and a digital file of the following information should be submitted at least two (2) days prior to the preliminary review:
(1) Photographs of existing site conditions, including properties within five hundred feet (500’), or more if needed to show the character of the surrounding area.
(i) Photographs of the site showing all approaches on streets or public ways and from the site towards relevant streetscapes and adjacent structures.
(2) Conceptual or schematic sketches of the proposed building plans, building elevations, and plans of proposed site developments, demonstrating an understanding of the design compatible with the surrounding area.
(3) Historical information where appropriate, such as old photographs.
(c) At the Preliminary DRB Review Meeting, the DRB will review the proposed design and discuss any design modifications that may be necessary in order for the development to better conform to the criteria and guidelines and will determine if additional meetings are recommended before plans are ready for submission for the final review meeting of the DRB.
4.29.2 Required DRB Review Meeting: It is required that the applicant meet with the DRB prior to submitting an application to the Board, Commission or ZEO. In order to meet statutory time requirements:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 415
(a) The applicant shall submit to the DRB for final review and report on the compliance with the criteria and guidelines at least forty-five (45) days prior to the submission of an application to the Board, Commission or ZEO.
(b) Eight (8) copies and a digital file of all the information listed under the Preliminary and Subsequent Review shall be submitted, if it had not been previously submitted.
(1) Additional Information: Eight (8) reduced scale copies are desirable, but only one full scale copy and a digital file is necessary:
(i) Artist’s rendering of proposed structure and/or sign.
(ii) If available, a model or photographs of a model of the proposed structure.
(c) The DRB shall make a final review and submit a written report to the Board, Commission or ZEO and to the Land Use Staff on the applicant’s compliance with the criteria and guidelines in accordance with this Section and Sections 6 and 30.
4.29.3 Report: Prior to the first Regular Monthly Meeting at which the referring agency or official may consider the application, the Design Review Board shall report to the referring agency or official, whether it has conducted a review of the project, and if it has done so, the evaluation and recommendations which it has made.
(a) The DRB shall make recommendations which are consistent with specific standards or design criteria as set forth in the Clinton Zoning Regulations.
(b) The DRB report to the Board, Commission or ZEO is advisory but the Board, Commission or ZEO shall consider the DRB report prior to taking action on the application.
(c) Failure of the DRB to make a timely review and report shall eliminate the requirement of consideration of the DRB report prior to taking action, and shall not require a delay in the action on the application by the Commission, Board or ZEO.
(d) Failure to submit an application to the DRB in such timeliness that would allow the applicant to receive a report from them prior to the submission of an application to the Board, Commission or ZEO shall be an incomplete application.
4.30 Referral to the Water Pollution Control Commission (WPCC): If a property is located within a “Structural Needs Area” and the proposed use increases the flow to the subsurface
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 416
wastewater septic system, the applicant shall present the application to the WPCC for review at a public meeting attended by the applicant. The WPCC shall make a written report to the Board or Commission.
4.31 Formal Submission of Applications to the Planning and Zoning Commission: All applications for Site Plan or Special Exception, together with plans, documents and data required by these Regulations shall be submitted by mail or hand delivery to the Office for the Planning and Zoning Commission (also referred to herein as the “Land Use Department”).
4.31.1 An application will be considered complete when the application form, fee, plans and other materials conforming to the requirements in this Section and any other applicable Sections of these Regulations (e.g. parking, soil erosion and sediment control, Special Exceptions, etc.) have been received. See Sections 4.5 through Section 4.30.
4.31.2 The applicant shall provide the Commission with a list of the professional evidence by way of oral testimony, written report or by certification that it intends to submit as part of, or in support of, the application.
(a) In accordance with the current application fee schedule, applicants may be responsible for fees in addition to the base fees in order for the Commission to obtain additional technical assistance in reviewing and evaluating the application. (See Appendix A)
(b) Failure to provide the statement required or to pay the additional fee(s) required may render the application incomplete and may be cause for denial.
4.31.3 In order to receive prompt consideration of an application, the complete application shall be submitted by the deadline prior to the next regular meeting date as set by resolution of the Commission to allow sufficient time for staff review for completeness. Applicants should confirm with the Land Use Staff the deadline set by the current resolution.
4.31.4 The Commission, or its delegated agent, shall determine that the information submitted is complete in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations.
4.31.5 Applications shall be officially received by the Commission in accordance with the Connecticut General Statute, but failure to submit a complete application may be cause for denial based on insufficient information upon which to make an informed decision.
4.32 Formal Submission of Applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals: All applications for Variance, Certificate of Location, or Dealer’s and Repairer’s License, together with plans, documents and data required by these Regulations for such applications shall be submitted by mail or hand delivery to the Office for the Zoning Board of Appeals, also known as the Land Use Office.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 417
4.32.1 An application will be considered complete when the application form, fee, plans and other materials conforming to the requirements in this Section and any other applicable Sections of these regulations (e.g. parking, soil erosion and sediment control, etc.) have been received. See Section 4.5 through Section 4.30.
4.32.2 The applicant shall provide the Board with a list of the professional evidence by way of oral testimony, written report or certification that it intends to submit as part of, or in support of, the application.
(a) In accordance with the current application fee schedule, applicants may be responsible for fees in addition to the base fees in order for the Commission to obtain additional technical assistance in reviewing and evaluating the application. (See Appendix A)
(b) Failure to provide the statement required or to pay the additional fee(s) required may render the application incomplete and may be cause for denial.
4.32.3 In order to receive prompt consideration of any application, the complete application shall be submitted no later than twenty-eight (28) calendar days prior to the public hearing to allow sufficient time for staff review and proper noticing.
4.32.4 The Board, or its designated agent, shall determine that the information submitted is complete and in accordance with all the requirements of these Regulations.
4.32.5 Applications shall be officially received by the Board in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, but failure to submit a complete application may be cause for denial based on insufficient information upon which to make an informed decision.
4.33 Formal Submission of an Appeal of the Zoning Enforcement Officer’s Decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals: An appeal of the decision of the ZEO under CGS Section 8-6 shall be submitted on the ZBA form Appeal from the Decision of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The appeal must be filed within fifteen (15) days of the notice of the decision of the ZEO, per the “Rules of the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Clinton, Connecticut”, which Rules has been established by the ZBA. A copy of the Rules is available in the Land Use Office.
4.34 Formal Submission of Applications to the Zoning Enforcement Officer: Applications for Zoning and Sign Permits, together with plans, documents and data required by these Regulations shall be submitted by mail or hand delivery to the Office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer (also referred to herein as the “Land Use Office”).
4.35 Establishing a Date of Receipt: In accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes, the official date of receipt of an application shall be the date of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board or Commission immediately following the date of submission of the application to the appropriate office, or 35 days after submission, whichever is sooner.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 418
4.36 Site Inspection as a Part of Application Review: Submission of an application confers the right to the Board, Commission and its authorized agent(s) to visit the site to review the physical characteristics of the site to assist in the determination of its suitability for the proposed use.
4.37 Applications Involving Parcels with Inland Wetlands or Watercourses: It is in the interest of the Town of Clinton to preserve wetlands and watercourses in their natural state to the greatest extent possible and to maintain purity and integrity of such wetlands and watercourses. In making its decision, the Commission shall give due consideration to the report and any recommendations of the Inland Wetlands Commission.
4.37.1 Recommended: Due to the potential for revisions to site design resulting from the Inland Wetlands Commission review or permit process, it is strongly recommended that applicants defer application to the Commission until they have obtained a Report from the Inland Wetlands Commission, including approval of such regulated activities as may be involved in the Application to the Board, Commission or ZEO.
4.37.2 Application for Inland Wetland Permit: When an application involves land regulated as an inland wetland or watercourse under the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, the applicant must file an application with the Inland Wetlands Commission as required under the Connecticut General Statutes.
(a) At the time of formal application to a Board, Commission or the ZEO, evidence of submission to the Inland Wetlands Commission or approval of the Inland Wetlands Commission, if required, shall be provided by the Applicant.
4.37.3 Referrals to the Inland Wetland Commission: Applications for activities outside the Review Zone, but within proximity to, inland wetland and watercourse resources, including those inland wetlands and watercourses located on adjacent parcels may be referred to the Inland Wetlands Commission (IWC) for their comment even if such a referral is not required under the Connecticut General Statutes. The IWC may provide comment prior to the statutory time for the Commission to render a decision.
4.37.4 Timing of Decision:
(a) Where a report from the Inland Wetlands Commission is required, the Commission shall not render a decision on the application until the Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted a report with its final decision to the Commission pursuant to CGS Section 8-7d(e).
(b) The Commission shall render its decision within thirty-five (35) days of the date of decision of the Inland Wetlands Commission or within the statutory time limits for a Commission, whichever is later.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 419
4.38 Referrals and Review by Others:
4.38.1 Transmittal of Application Materials: Where the applicant is required by law or the provisions of these Regulations to transmit application materials to other officials and agencies, the applicant shall:
(a) Submit a copy of the transmittal letter to the Commission or Board as part of the application.
(b) When directed by Land Use Staff, the Commission or Board, submit the specified application materials to the following officials or agencies. Additional information may be requested or additional technical experts may need to review the application. The officials or agencies to whom application materials may need to be transmitted include:
(1) Town Engineer: Building and site plans, with engineering details for review in accordance with the “Town of Clinton, Connecticut, Construction and Development Standards”, as may be amended and generally accepted engineering practices.
(2) Town, Board or Commission Attorney: Site plans, easements, deeds, agreements and other legal documents.
(3) Connecticut Department of Transportation: Location maps and plans with engineering details with particular regard to street and utility connections, or work within, State highways.
(4) Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, Land and Water Resources Division (CTDEEP/LWRD): Location denoted on Coastal Resources Map and plans with engineering details, with particular regard to coastal resources.
(5) Notice to the Connecticut Water Company: In accordance with CGS Section 8-3i, any application within the watershed of a water company, written notice of the application must be provided to the water company.
(6) Notice to the State of Connecticut, Department of Public Health: In accordance with CGS Section 8-31, whenever Notice is made to the Connecticut Water Company, notice is required to be sent to the State of Connecticut’s Department of Public Health.
(7) Department of Public Works: Site plans with engineering details, drainage calculations, when new streets or improvements to existing streets, new driveway curb cuts, drainage systems that are anticipated to tie into the existing catch basins are proposed.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 420
(8) Tree Warden: Site plans, landscaping plans, when trees in the public right of way are proposed or are proposed to be removed.
(9) Other persons or agencies as appropriate: Including, but not limited to:
(i) Police Department;
(ii) Traffic Commission;
(iii) Municipal Historian;
(iv) Emergency Services Personnel;
(v) Other CT DEEP divisions;
(vi) Lower Connecticut River Valley Council of Governments (RiverCOG), in addition to that required under Section 4.38.2 of these Regulations;
(Amended 6/1/2014)
(c) For a Certificate of Location (CAL) or the approval of a Dealer’s or Repairer’s License, the applicant shall also transmit a copy of the application to the Chief of Police. Prior to the decision by the Board, the Chief of Police shall review and approve the application for dealing in or repairing motor vehicles.
(d) As a result of the foregoing review, the Commission or Board, or its designated agent, may determine that clarification materials may be necessary in order for them to reach an informed decision.
(1) If this material is of a more technical or legal nature than Commission members consider themselves capable of analyzing, additional experts may be required to provide review and comment.
(2) The fee(s) for such additional experts, based on a predetermined hourly rate set in the Fee Ordinance (See Appendix A), shall be borne by the applicant.
(3) Failure to pay said fee(s) may result in the application being rendered incomplete, and may be denied.
4.38.2 Referral to Lower Connecticut River Valley Council of Governments (RiverCOG) and South Central Regional Council of Governments (SCRCOG):
(Amended 6/1/2014)
(a) Amendments to the Zoning Regulations or Map: Any application to amend the Zoning Regulations or the Zoning Map that would establish or change a zone
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 421
or any regulation affecting the use of a zone or any portion thereof, which is within five hundred feet (500’) of the boundary of another municipality located within the area of operation of a regional planning agency, the Commission shall give written notice of the proposal to RiverCOG and/or SCRCOG, if necessary, in accordance with CGS Section 8-3b.
(Amended 6/1/2014)
(b) Notice shall be given not later than thirty-five (35) days before the public hearing to be held in relation thereto.
4.38.3 Notice to Adjoining Municipalities:
(a) Notice shall be given by the Commission or Board to the Town Clerk of any adjoining municipality in accordance with CGS Section 8-3h, 8-7b and 8-7e for any application where required.
4.38.4 Notice to Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, Office of Long Island Sound Programs: Any application for a parcel of land fully or partially within the Coastal Area Management boundary, as indicated on the Clinton Zone Map, shall be forwarded to the DEEP/LWRD for comment.
4.13.5 Other Notices or Referrals: The above list is to assist applicants, but may not be inclusive of all notices and referrals that may be required under other laws or regulations applicable to a particular proposal. The Applicant shall be responsible to provide such notices or make such referrals.
4.39 Public Hearings:
4.39.1 Site Plan Applications: The Commission may hold a public hearing on a proposed Site Plan subject to the time requirements of CGS Section 8-7d(b).
4.39.2 Special Exception Applications: The Commission shall hold a public hearing on such an Application in accordance with to the requirements of CGS Section 8-3c and CGS Section 8-7d.
4.39.3 Amendments to the Zoning Regulations or Map: The Commission shall hold a public hearing on a proposed amendment to the Zoning Regulations or Zoning Map, subject to the time requirements of CGS Section 8-3c and CGS Section 8-7d, exempts such actions initiated by the Commission from the time requirements. For the purposes of this Section, the Commission is not an applicant when it considers and acts upon changes to Zoning District boundary lines.
(Amended 6/1/2014)
(a) For the designations of Village Districts:
(1) A sign shall be posted at the proposed district boundary beginning and ending where it abuts a public road. If the district is to be located on
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 422
both sides of a public road, signs shall be posted on both sides of the road.
(i) The posting of notice shall conform to Subsections 4.39.5(a) and (b).
(ii) The sign shall contain the following text:
“This property is the boundary of a proposed Village District. A petition is before the Planning and Zoning Commission for which a public hearing is being held:
Time:
Date:
Place: Town Hall
54 East Main Street
Clinton, CT 06413
For information, call (860) 669-6133”
(iii) The sign shall also contain a map depicting the following:
(I) The boundaries of the proposed Village District; and
(II) All property lines in and within eight hundred feet (800’) of the boundaries of the Village District.
(iv) Failure to post the required notice will result in the public hearing being canceled and rescheduled at a later dated.
(2) A notice shall be sent to all property owners within the proposed Village District.
(i) The applicant shall mail notification of the scheduled public hearing, which may be in the form of the legal notice, to at least one owner of each property not more than twenty (20) days and not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of public hearing.
(ii) The applicant shall submit proof of Delivery Confirmation to the Commission prior to the commencement of the public hearing.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 423
(iii) Failure to provide the required evidence of mailing will result in the public hearing being cancelled and rescheduled for a later date.
(b) When an amendment to the Zoning Map is initiated by the Commission, a notice shall be sent to all property owners of the affected parcels.
(Amended 6/1/2014)
(1) Notification of the scheduled public hearing, which may be in the form of the legal notice, shall be mailed to at least one owner of each property not more than twenty (20) days and not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of public hearing.
(2) Proof of Delivery Confirmation shall be placed on file prior to the commencement of the public hearing.
4.39.4 Requests for Certificate of Variance, Certificate of Approval of Location, Dealer’s and Repair’s Licenses: The Board shall hold a public hearing on the proposed projects subject to the time requirements of CGS Section 8-3c.
4.39.5 For any public hearing that is held for a specific property or properties, the applicant shall post a notice of the hearing on the property for which an application has been filed.
(a) The notice shall be posted at least fifteen days prior to the date of the public hearing and shall remain posted continuously thereafter until the close of the public hearing(s).
(1) Evidence of the notice’s posting shall be provided by the applicant, in the form of photographs, to the Land Use Office.
(2) Failure to post the required notice or failure to provide the required evidence shall result in the public hearing being cancelled and rescheduled for a later date.
(3) If the required notice is removed from the site, either by natural or human forces beyond the control of the applicant, a new notice shall be posted within twenty-four hours of the removal of the original notice.
(b) Said notice shall be in the form of a sign conforming to the following:
(1) Facing the road frontage of the property in a location or locations approved by the Land Use Staff. In the event a property fronts on more than one road, a sign shall be required at each frontage in a location approved by the Land Use Staff.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 424
(2) Clearly legible from the road.
(3) Produced of weather resistant material.
(4) Professionally lettered or manufactured lettering with a minimum letter size of two inches (2”).
(5) Maximum size of twenty square feet (20 sq. ft.)
(c) The sign shall contain the following text and the applicant shall fill-in the appropriate Board or Commission, the date and time of the hearing:
(1) “Application pending on this property before the ______________ for which a Public Hearing is being held:
Time:
Date:
Place: Town Hall
54 East Main Street
Clinton, CT 06413
For information, call (860) 669-6133.”
4.40 Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals Decisions:
4.40.1 Pursuant to the Connecticut General Statutes, within sixty-five (65) days after the close of the public hearing, or within sixty-five (65) days after the receipt of such application if no public hearing is held, the Board or Commission, by the majority, or supermajority vote of members present and voting, as specified by the applicable state statues, shall render a decision on the application.
4.40.2 The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period required for commencing a public hearing, completing a public hearing or rendering a decision, provided that the total extension(s) of any such period(s) shall not be longer than a total of sixty-five (65) days, or the applicant may withdraw such petition, application, request or appeal.
4.40.3 Notwithstanding the above, where a report from the Inland Wetlands Commission is required, the Commission shall not render a decision on the application until the Inland Wetland Commission has submitted a report with its final decision to the Commission pursuant to CGS Section 8-7d(e).
4.40.4 The failure of an applicant to provide the statement required under Appendix A, regarding professional evidence to be submitted, or to pay any additional fees required under Appendix A, regarding fees in addition to base fees, shall render the
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 425
application incomplete and shall provide a basis for the Commission to deny the application.
4.40.5 Modifications and Conditions:
(a) During deliberations, the Board or Commission may require modifications of the plans and/or documents submitted, or may impose conditions to assure conformance with these Regulations.
(b) A final set of documents shall be submitted to the Land Use Office which shall include all such modifications or conditions to plans and/or documents required by the decision and shall be labeled “Final Approved Plans” with the application number and date of approval, within thirty (30) days of the decision.
4.40.6 In approving, modifying and approving, or denying an application, the Board or Commission shall state in its records the specific reasons for its action.
4.40.7 The decision of the Commission or Board shall be published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the municipality within fifteen days after such action, in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes.
(a) Additionally, a letter delivered by certified mail to the applicant, by the Secretary or Clerk of the Commission or Board, under his, or her, signature in any written, printed, typewritten or stamped form, within fifteen days after such decision.
(b) In any case in which such notice is not published within such fifteen-day period, the applicant may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter. Notice shall be given in the manner prescribed above or that required by state statutes.
4.41 Post-Approval Procedures:
4.41.1 Special Exceptions:
(a) The applicant shall submit to the Land Use Office any revised plans and/or documents as required by the Board or Commission’s decision under Section 4.40.5(b).
(b) The Special Exception shall become effective upon filing a copy of the Certificate in the Office of the Town Clerk and in the Land Records of the Town of Clinton in accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 8-3d.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 426
(1) The Certificate shall not be released for filing on the Clinton Land Records unless the applicant has submitted a final copy of the approved plans to the Office of the Commission as noted in Section 4.40.5(b), above.
(2) Any required bonds shall be posted by the applicant in accordance with Section 8 of these Regulations prior to the filing of the Certificate.
4.41.2 Variances:
(a) Once the ZBA grants a variance, the applicant must file the Certificate of Variance on the Clinton Land Records within six months of the expiration of the fifteen-day appeal period.
(1) Failure to timely file the Certificate of Variance shall render it null and void.
(2) One extension of the filing period, not to exceed an additional six (6) months may be granted by the Board for good cause.
4.42 Termination of Approval:
4.42.1 Approval of an application for a Site Plan or a Special Exception shall constitute approval conditioned upon the commencement of the proposed improvements within a period of two (2) years following the date of approval and such physical improvements, or establishment of use, shall be completed within four (4) years from the date of approval.
4.42.2 Approval of an application for change of use only where the decision did not encompass change to the structure’s footprint or to the ground coverage, shall constitute approval conditioned upon establishment of the use within one year following the date of approval of such Site Plan or Special Exception.
4.42.3 Failure to commence work within such two (2) year period or failure to complete all work within such four (4) year period shall result in automatic expiration of the approval of such Site Plan or Special Exception.
4.42.4 The proposed construction and/or use for which a variance is granted must commence within one year of the filing of the Certificate of Variance on the Clinton Land Records.
(a) Failure to commence the proposed construction and/or use within one year of the filing shall render it null and void.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 427
4.42.5 Failure to complete all work for which a variance was obtained within three (3) years from the approval date shall result in automatic expiration of the approval of such variance.
4.42.6 An extension of the commencement and completion periods, not to exceed one (1) year for each may be granted by the Board or Commission for good cause.
4.43 Revisions: Any revision materially affecting the project design, use or conditions of an approved Site Plan, Special Exception, or Variance application and any reconstruction, enlargement, extension, moving or structural alteration of an approved use of any building or structure in connection therewith shall require submission of a new application.
If the applicant and the ZEO do not agree, the determination of “materially affecting” shall be made by the Commission at a Regular Meeting. The applicant shall request such determination by letter.
4.44 As-Built Plans: When applications involve new construction, grade changes to existing sites or other site modifications, or improvements or additions to existing sites, the applicant’s land surveyor, licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut shall submit construction plans depicting the post-construction “as-built” conditions.
4.44.1 Said “As-Built” plans shall bear the live signature and raised seal of such surveyor, certifying that all the required improvements have been completed in the location and at the elevation shown thereon.
4.44.2 Two (2) sets of prints shall be provided. In addition, a digital copy in a format conforming to the “Clinton Geospatial (GIS) Data Standard,” (which is available in the Land Use Office) shall be provided.
4.44.3 The Commission, in its sole discretion, may excuse the requirement for an As-Built Plan, upon written request of the applicant for good cause.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 501
Section 5
Zoning Enforcement Officer
5.1 Zoning Enforcement Officer:
5.1.1 The Commission shall designate a ZEO who shall have the responsibility and authority to enforce the Clinton Zoning Regulations.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) The Commission shall appoint an individual or individuals who will assume the duties and responsibilities of the ZEO during his or her absence or incapacity.
(Amended 1/1/2015)
5.1.2 The ZEO, as authorized, may institute, in accordance with these Regulations, appropriate action or proceedings:
(a) To prevent unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or removal of any building or structure or the unlawful use of land;
(b) To restrain, correct or abate any violations of these Regulations;
(c) To prevent the occupancy of any such building, structure or land;
(d) To prevent any illegal act, conduct business or use in, on about the premises or to cancel any permit for cause.
5.1.3 Inspections: The ZEO is authorized to inspect, or cause to be inspected, with or without notice, any building, structure or premises to determine compliance with these Regulations.
5.1.4 Records: The ZEO shall keep records for all fees collected, all applications received, and all Zoning Permits issued, all inspections made by him and all violations and Orders to Discontinue thereon and the action taken by him.
5.1.5 Additional Procedures: The Commission, from time to time, by resolution, adopt enforcement rules, policies and procedures which it may deem advisable or necessary for the enforcement of the Zoning Regulations.
5.2 Violations: The ZEO is authorized to take whatever action necessary in accordance with the following procedures and with the provisions of CGS Section 8-12, except with respect to violations involving excavation and grading permits. When violations involve excavation and grading permits, the ZEO shall proceed in accordance with Section 12.53 of these Regulations. The ZEO shall keep written reports describing in detail all violations and the action taken thereon.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 502
5.2.1 Upon knowledge, whether by observation or complaint, that a violation exists, the ZEO shall notify the violator, in writing, of the nature of the violation, the pertinent sections of the Zoning Regulations which are violated, and stating that the violation must be corrected within ten (10) days of the receipt of such notice.
5.2.2 If the violation still exists at the expiration of the ten (10) day period, the ZEO shall deliver an Order to Discontinue, either in person or mailed postage prepaid to the owner of the property as shown on the most recent Town of Clinton Tax Assessment Records, requiring compliance within ten (10) days of receipt. Such order shall refer to the penalties, costs and attorney’s fees provide in CGS Section 8-12.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
5.2.3 In the event the violation still continues ten (10) days after the issuance of the Order to Discontinue, the ZEO may turn the matter over to Commission counsel for legal action and shall inform the Commission of such action within forty-eight (48) hours of such referrals.
5.3 Lot Line Revisions: All lot line revisions must receive approval of zoning compliance by the ZEO before any such revision can be filed on the Clinton Land Records.
5.3.1 The agent or applicant must submit the map to the ZEO for his signature no less than one week prior to the anticipated filing date.
(a) One complete fixed line photographic mylar set of plans, two (2) print copies of the plan and a digital copy in a format conforming to the “Clinton Geospatial (GIS) Data Standard,” (which is available in the Land Use Office) shall be provided.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
5.3.2 The map must be an A-2 survey, showing the existing conditions and the proposed conditions. It must also provide a signature and date block for the ZEO.
5.3.3 Monuments: Monuments shall be shown on the plan for both existing and proposed permanent monuments, which shall comply with Section 3.19(a) of the Subdivision Regulations.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 601
Section 6
Design Review Board
6.1 Statement of Purpose: The Design Review Board shall serve as an advisory group with the land use permitting process that will evaluate applications for site, building and sign development or redevelopment from an architectural and aesthetic perspective with the goal of preserving the quality of Clinton’s design heritage. The Board will work with the owners, builders and developers and the Town to foster the improvement of the town’s appearance and increase property values. The Board will seek to avoid both excessive uniformity and excessive variety in architectural styles, and strive for development that is in harmony with its surroundings.
January 8, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 701
Section 7
Fees
7.1 Pursuant to An Ordinance Concern Fees for the Processing of Land Use Applications adopted by the Town of Clinton, the Board and/or Commission shall collect application fees for the purpose of funding the approximate actual municipal administrative cost reviewing, evaluating and processing applications to the Board and/or Commission under these Zoning Regulations. See Appendix A for the text of the Ordinance setting forth the fees.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 801
Section 8
Bond Procedures
And
Bond Agreement
8.1 As part of the application, the applicant shall provide an estimate of the cost of all work to be performed, which the Commission may use to determine the amount of the bond. Prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit, the applicant shall post a bond in an amount stated in the Commission’s approval, to guarantee one of the following:
(Amended 10/1/2013)
8.1.1 Satisfactory completion of all work shown on the plan; or
(Amended 10/1/2013)
8.1.2 Restoration of the development site to a safe and attractive condition in lieu of the completion of work.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
8.2 To satisfy any bond or surety requirement in this Section, the Commission shall accept cash bonds, passbook or statement savings accounts and other financial guarantees other than surety bonds including, but not limited to, letters of credit, provided such other financial guarantee is in a form acceptable to the Commission and the financial institution or other entity issuing any letter of credit to the Commission.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
8.2.1 Such bond or surety shall be posted prior to the commencement of any activity on the site of proposed work.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
8.2.2 The bond shall be maintained until all work associated with the approved project is completed and accepted.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
8.3 Bond Requirements: When a Performance Bond is to be posted, the following provisions shall be satisfied prior to any activity taking place on the site.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
8.3.1 Amount: The amount or fee value of the Performance Bond shall be estimated prior to the approval of the application and shall take into account no less than the following:
(a) The full cost of the required work as if let-to-bid by the Town of a current date for completion within two (2) years;
(b) No less than ten percent (10%) additional compounded for each of three (3) subsequent years to cover changing cost; and
(c) Not less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the full cost to cover non-aggregated construction items in the event of default.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 802
8.3.2 Form: The applicant shall submit completed forms provided by the Commission and with proper references to all plans showing work to be done, accompanied by the bond.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
8.3.3 Bonds: Such bonds shall be cash bonds in the form of a bank or certified check made payable to the Town of Clinton, passbook or statement savings accounts listing the Town of Clinton as a co-account holder, or other financial guarantee, including but not limited to, letters of credit, provided such guarantee is in a form acceptable to the Commission and the financial institution or other entity issuing any letter of credit is acceptable to the Commission. The passbook for any savings account must remain in the possession of the Office of Director of Finance. No passbook or statement savings account shall permit any funds to be withdrawn without the signature of an authorized agent of the Town. A list of all such bonds shall be kept by the Commission and by the Director of Finance, setting forth the name and address of each obligor, the name of the project, and the disposition of the bond. Interest accruing to each such bond shall belong to the obligor and shall be remitted to such obligor when the Commission approves the final release of the bond. Such accrued interest shall be reported on an annual 1099-INT form, issued by the Office of the Director of Finance of the Town of Clinton.
(Amended January 1, 1998)
8.4 Term: Every two (2) years the cost of the remaining work shall be reviewed and the bond amount adjusted to reflect the current and projected construction and other costs.
8.5 Bond Reduction: If the applicant desires the Commission to vote to release a portion of a bond, the applicant shall submit a request in writing by the deadline set by resolution of the Commission. Applicants should confirm with the Land Use Staff the deadline set by the current resolution.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
8.5.1 Within sixty-five (65) days of the receipt of such request, the Commission shall either:
(a) Release or authorize the release of any such bond or financial guarantee or portion thereof, provided the Commission or its agent is reasonable satisfied that the site improvements for which such financial guarantee or portion thereof was post have been completed or have been completed, or
(b) Provide the person posting such bond or financial guarantee with a written explanation as to the additional site improvements that must be completed before such bond or financial guarantee or portion thereof may be released.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 901
Section 9
Zoning Permits
(Amended 1/1/2015)
9.1 No building or other structure, or part thereof, shall be constructed, enlarged, extended, moved, used or occupied or structurally altered or demolished until a Zoning Permit has been approved by the ZEO.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
9.2 In the enforcement of these Regulations, a Zoning Permit may be issued in combination with a Building Permit, and Certificate of Zoning Compliance may be issued in conjunction with a Certificate of Occupancy, as required by CGS Section 8-3(f).
9.3 Application: Applications for Zoning Permits for uses designated “P” (Permitted) in the Schedules shall be submitted to the ZEO on a form provided by the Commission prior to construction, reconstruction, extension or moving of any building or other structure. Applications for such Zoning Permits shall be accompanied by an application fee and Plot Plan.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
9.3.1 The Commission may adopt forms and procedures and collect fees relating to the issuance of a Zoning Permit.
9.3.2 The failure of an applicant to provide the statement or to pay any additional fees required under Section 7 shall render the application incomplete and shall provide a basis for the ZEO to deny the application.
(Amended 1/1/2016)
9.4 Additional Requirements: The following additional requirements shall apply to the issuance of all Zoning Permits, whether authorized as part of the approval the Commission, Board or plot plan, or as a part of an application for a Zoning Permit under Section 9.3.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
9.4.1 Staking: No Zoning Permit shall be issued by the ZEO for any new construction until the applicant has accurately placed stakes or markers on the lot indicating the location of proposed construction.
(a) The ZEO may require the applicant to place stakes or markers on the lot indicating the location of lot lines.
(b) The ZEO may required the placement of stakes or markers to be made and certified by either a land surveyor or engineer, licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut.
9.4.2 Measurements: If deemed necessary to determine compliance with these Regulations, the ZEO shall required the applicant to furnish measurements of any construction features subject to the requirements of these Regulations, including setback distances, which shall be prepared and certified by a land surveyor or professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 902
9.4.3 Whenever a well or on-site septic system is to be installed in connection with, or as a part of, any project requiring a Zoning Permit, a copy of the approval of the Director of Health or authorized agent must be submitted with the application.
(Amended 1/1/2016)
9.4.4 Other Permits: It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain all permits required by other agencies, if applicable, including other local authorities such as the Town’s Engineer, Director of Health, and the Inland Wetlands and Conservation Commission, and any department or agency of the State or federal government.
(a) The applicant shall provide evidence of application to such agency or agencies, and no Zoning Permit shall be issued until evidence of application for all other permits has been submitted.
(b) The ZEO may require evidence of approval from other authorities as a prerequisite to zoning approval, and failure to receive approval from other agencies may be grounds for denial of a Zoning Permit.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
9.5 Certificate of Zoning Compliance: No land, building or other structure or part thereof requiring a Site Plan or Special Exception shall be used or occupied, or changed in use, until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued by the ZEO certifying conformity with these Regulations and the Commission approval.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
9.5.1 As-Built Plans: The use or occupancy of any land, building or other structure involving site or plot plan approval shall not take place until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall have been issued by the ZEO. Upon completion of the project for which a Zoning Permit has been issued, the applicant shall submit to the ZEO “as-built plans” showing that the project has been completed in conformance with the requirements of the approved site or plot plan. Upon approval of such “as-built plans” the ZEO shall issue a Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
9.5.2 The applicant shall provide evidence that all conditions of approval of any other permit obtained shall have been complied with in full prior to the issuance of any Certificate of Zoning Compliance. Failure to comply with the conditions of any Inland Wetlands Permit or any required permit shall be considered a reason to deny the Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
(Amended 1/1/2016
9.5.3 Temporary Zoning Permit: Upon certification by an authorized person of the Department of Health that the public health and safety will not be impaired and there will be compliance with all other laws pertaining to health and safety, the ZEO may issue a Zoning Permit for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, renewable for another period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, for the temporary use of land, buildings, and other structures in the process of improvement and completion in accordance with an approved application for which a zoning permit has been issued.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 903
9.6 Demolition: If a building or structure that was built prior to 1945 is to be demolished, no demolition shall occur for ninety (90) days after the legal notice of demolition.
(Entire Section 7.8 revised/amended 1/1/2012)
9.6.1 Said notice shall be in the form of a sign conforming to the following:
(a) Facing the road frontage of the property in a location or locations approved by the Land Use Staff. In the event a property fronts on more than one road, a sign shall be required at each frontage in a location approved by the Land Use Staff.
(b) Clearly legible from the road.
(c) Produced of weather resistant material.
(d) Professionally letter or manufactured lettering with a minimum letter size of two inches (2”).
(e) Maximum size of twenty square feet (20 sq. ft.)
(f) The notice shall contain the following text, and the applicant shall fill in the date of demolition:
“This structure shall be demolished 90 days after ________________. For information, call (860) 669-6133.”
(1) Evidence of the notice’s posting shall be provided by the applicant, in the form of photographs, to the Land Use office.
(2) Failure to post the required notice or failure to provide the required evidence shall result in the permit being denied.
(3) If the required notice is removed from the site, either by natural or human forces beyond the control of the applicant, a new notice shall be posted within twenty-four hours of the removal of the original notice.
9.6.2 A waiver of the ninety (90) day period may be issued by the Commission if circumstances demonstrated to the Commission upon written request warrant such a waiver.
9.6.3 Nothing herein contained shall prevent the immediate demolition of any structure upon the order of the Town Building Official whenever, in his judgment, there exists a risk to public safety.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 904
9.6.4 A resident of the town of Clinton may file a letter of protest of the demolition of a building or structure with the Commission. The protest shall be heard at the next Regular Monthly Meeting of the Commission.
9.6.5 A resident of the town of Clinton may file a petition with the Commission containing twenty (20) signatures of property owners within five hundred feet (500’) of the subject property, or in the event that there are less than twenty (20) property owners within five hundred feet (500’) of the subject property, the signatures of a majority of the property owners within five hundred feet (500’) of the subject property. The Commission shall hold a public hearing within thirty days of the receipt of said petition.
(a) The owner of the structure to be demolished shall grant access to Town representatives to the property and structure to evaluate the structure’s condition and significance. Said evaluations may include, but not be limited to:
(1) Architectural design
(2) Construction technique, framing method, framing materials
(3) Foundation and chimney materials
(4) Nature and era of former alterations
(5) Consideration of relationship if adjacent to structures of historical significance
(b) The owner/applicant for the structure to be demolished shall provide building plans for the proposed replacement structure, if any, at least seven days prior to the public hearing. In addition, the owner/applicant shall state if the structure to be demolished is located within the Historic District or is a contributing structure on the National Registry of Historic Places.
9.6.6 After the close of the public hearing or discussion of a letter of protest, the Commission shall determine if the demolition of the building or structure is in the best interest of the town of Clinton. The following criteria shall be considered by the Commission:
(a) The demolition of the building or structure shall not change the characteristics and harmony of the neighborhood.
(b) The building or structure to be demolished shall not be of distinctive architecture or of a significant historical nature.
(c) The report of the Town’s representative that inspected the subject structure.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1001
Section 10
Site Plan Review
10.1 General: Within the context of Site Plan Review, it is intended that the site plan for each use be prepared with due consideration for the purpose and intent of these Regulations, coordination with and improvement of systems for vehicular and pedestrian access, drainage, water supply, sewage disposal, lighting, landscaping, wetlands, watercourses, buildings and other features that support the neighborhood; and protection of the public health, safety, welfare, property values and the environment.
“The designation of a particular use of property as a permitted use establishes a conclusive presumption that such use does not adversely affect the district and precludes further inquiry into its effect on traffic, municipal services, property values or the general harmony of the district.” [Connecticut Land Use Law and Practice, Fuller, pg 193, 2007] Under Site Plan Review, this applies unless a use also requires a Special Exception. For those uses, there is a presumption that there will not be an adverse effect on the district only if they meet the additional standards in the section that applies. If the requirements below that are limited to on-site impacts conflict with those in the Special Exception or Special Permit, the latter prevail for uses requiring approval under those sections.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
10.2 Construction and Development Standards: The construction of driveways, parking areas, drainage, and other site improvements shall conform to the applicable provisions of the “Construction and Development Standards of the Town of Clinton, Connecticut” (hereinafter referred to as the “Construction Standards”, together with the following additional standards:
10.2.1 Driveway Access: The proposed access shown on the site plan shall meet the requirements of the Construction Standards and the following:
(a) Vehicular access to the lot shall be made in such manner as to safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians in the street and on the lot and to avoid traffic congestion on any street.
(b) The site shall be designed so as to minimize the impact of any additional traffic created by the site.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(c) If the frontage or other physical features of the site do not provide optimal conditions for traffic, then traffic controls within the street, such as turning lanes, may be proposed by the applicant.
(d) Access driveways shall be designed to avoid back-up of entering vehicles within any street.
(e) Where appropriate, provisions shall be made for continuation and improvement of streets terminating at the lot where the use is to be located.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1002
(f) The site plan shall provide adequate access to the site and all structures located on the site for fire protection purposes and emergency vehicles.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
10.2.2 Existing Streets: Where the lot fronts on an existing street, adequate provision shall be made for slope and drainage rights, for improvement of shoulders and sidewalks within the right-of-way of the street and for the provision of curbs and sidewalks in accordance with the Construction Standards as approved by the Board of Selectmen.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
10.2.3 Drainage:
(a) Storm drainage shall be planned and designed to conform to the Construction Standards where applicable.
(b) Provision shall be made for the collection and discharge of stormwater on the lot in such manner as to assure the usability of off-street parking and loading spaces and to avoid stormwater flow across sidewalks and other pedestrian ways.
(c) The applicant shall demonstrate to the Commission that all necessary easements exist or have been obtained where stormwater will not be managed on-site.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(d) The applicant shall provide easements, in locations deemed proper by the Town’s Engineer, for town drainage and drainage facilities existing on the subject site or constructed as a result of development of the site.
10.2.4 In the event that there is a conflict between the Regulations and the technical requirements of the Construction Standards, the Commission shall determine the appropriate standard after consultation with the Town’s Engineer.
10.3 Sanitation:
10.3.1 The site plan shall provide for the sewage disposal requirements of the proposed use.
10.3.2 On-site sewage disposal and water supply systems shall be designed and constructed with due regard for applicable Town or State laws. If approval by the Town and/or State Health agencies cannot be obtained prior to a decision on the application by the Commission, an approval by the Commission may be conditioned upon approval by the Town and /or State health agencies.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
10.3.3 Provision shall also be made for the collection, storage and disposal of solid wastes accumulated in connection with the proposed use and for control of litter by means of receptacles, fences or other means approved by the Commission.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1003
(a) For residential property of more than three living units and all commercial/industrial uses, a dumpster placed on private property for the purpose of any solid or liquid waste material shall be shielded on three sides by a fence, or similar barrier, so that the dumpster is not visible from any Town or private roadway by passing vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) Only one entrance or access to the dumpster will be permitted, with the other three sides sufficiently shielded from view.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(c) The dumpster must be located on private property and not on the public highway or on the Town’s property.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
10.4 Wetlands:
10.4.1 The site plan shall provide for the protection of inland wetlands and watercourses on the lot in accordance with the recommendations of the Inland Wetlands Commission.
10.4.2 The site plan shall also provide for the protection of tidal wetlands on the lot in accordance with the recommendations of the Office of Long Island Sound Programs/DEEP and the Town of Clinton.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
10.5 Underground Utility Lines:
10.5.1 New electric and telephone wires on the lot shall be installed underground when the distribution system that is on the street and serving such lot is located underground.
10.5.2 New wires on the lot that are fed by the overhead distribution in the street shall be installed underground unless the Commission determines, based on a written report from the applicant, that such underground installation is inappropriate or not feasible for all or part of such lot, taking into account:
(a) The type of service existing on other lots in the neighborhood;
(b) Topographic and construction conditions; and
(c) The extent of building construction proposed under the site plan.
10.5.3 If the application is for a change of use and there is to be no change to the structure’s footprint or to the ground coverage, new wire on the lot already fed by overhead lines may also be run overhead.
10.6 Special Standards: The following Special Standards shall apply to uses permitted in Business District B-2 subject to approval of a Site Plan:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1004
(Amended 1/1/2012)
10.6.1 Any addition to, extension or alteration of an existing building originally designed as a house shall preserve the character of the existing building as a house.
10.6.2 Any new building or other structure shall be of such character as to be consistent with the historic architecture prevalent in the District and to harmonize with existing buildings in the District originally designed as houses.
10.6.3 The entire area of the lot required for a setback from a street line shall be landscaped, except for necessary access drives, with lawns and shrubs and trees.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1101
Section 11
Special Exceptions
11.1 General: In accordance with the procedures, standards and conditions hereinafter specified the Commission may approve a Special Exception for the establishment of one or more of the uses for which a Special Exception must be secured from the Commission as required by these Regulations in the Schedule of Uses by District. All requirements of this Section are in addition to other requirements applicable in the District in which the Special Exception use is to be located.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
11.2 General Conditions: The Commission may approve a Special Exception if it determines that the proposed buildings, structures and/or use will conform to the following general conditions, in addition to any special standards hereinafter specified:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
11.2.1 That the location, type, character and size of the use of any building or other structure in connection therewith shall be in harmony with and conform to the appropriate and orderly development and use of adjacent property or impair the value thereof.
11.2.2 That the nature and location of the use and of any building or other structure in connection therewith shall be of such that there will be adequate access to it for emergency vehicles and fire protection purposes.
11.2.3 That the streets serving the proposed use are adequate to carry prospective traffic, that provision is made for entering and leaving the property in such a manner that no undue hazard to traffic or under traffic congestion is created and that adequate off-street parking and loading facilities are provided.
11.2.4 That the lot on which the use is to be established is of sufficient area and adequate dimension to permit construction and use of buildings, other structures and facilities in such a manner that will not be detrimental to the neighborhood or adjacent property.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
11.2.5 That the property will be suitably landscaped to meet the Performance Standards in Section 31.1 of these Regulations.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
11.2.6 That the use, site plan and architectural design shall be in conformance with the purpose and intent of any Plan of Conservation and Development adopted by the Commission for the area in which the use is located.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
11.2.7 That the site plan provides for connection, continuation and appropriate improvements of street in accordance with any future transportation, road, and/or circulation plan which is a part of a Plan of Conservation and Development adopted by the Commission where the use is to be located.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1102
11.2.8 That the architectural plans of buildings and other structures shall be of a character as to harmonize with the neighborhood, to accomplish a transition in character between areas of unlike character, to protect property value.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12001
Section 12
Standards
For
Special Exceptions
12.1 Standards: The following additional standards shall apply to particular uses permitted in a District subject to approval of a Special Exception by the Commission. These uses have been determined compatible with other allowed uses in a zone, when they comply with the standards that follow. It is the responsibility of the Commission to assure these standards are met.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
[This space is intentionally left blank]
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12002
12.2 Two-Family Dwellings:
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.2.1 Purpose: It is the purpose of these Regulations to permit two-family dwellings within specific residential zones in a way that is compatible with the overall character of existing residential areas and so as to not degrade the natural environment or negatively impact the public health, safety, and property values.
12.2.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a two-family dwelling may be granted provided that:
(a) The lot must be served by public water.
(b) Area:
(1) Any lot other than a rear lot must have an area one and one-half (1½) times the required area for the zone in which it is located.
(2) A rear lot must have an area two and a quarter (2¼) times the required area for the zone in which it is located.
12.2.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the Commission determines the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) The two-family dwelling shall be served by public water.
(b) The required setbacks for a two-family dwelling shall be the required rear setback for the zone in which the structure is located.
(c) There shall be only one residential structure per lot.
(d) The building exterior shall be consistent with the single-family characteristics of the neighborhood. Design characteristics shall include, but are not limited to, placement of entrance doors, mailboxes, electric meters and garages.
(e) The lot design shall be consistent with the single-family characteristics of the neighborhood. Lot design characteristics shall include, but are not limited to, parking arrangements and exterior lighting.
12.2.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12003
12.3 Multiple Dwelling Units in Commercial Structures
(Added 6/1/2015 & Amended 4/1/2016)
12.3.1 Purpose: The Town of Clinton adopted the following special exception regulation to allow multiple dwelling units in commercial structures. The goal and purpose of this regulation is to craft a procedure for more flexible uses of land, while still remaining consistent with (a) the adopted Plan of Conservation and Development; (b) the zoning laws and standards of the State of Connecticut; and (c) the administrative standards set forth in these Regulations as a whole.
A Multiple Dwelling Unit development in Commercial Structures shall consist of both residential and commercial uses, as hereinafter permitted, in a balance that recognizes that these developments are designed to be integrated neighbors, encouraging access to commercial and recreational services provided within the village setting while limiting the need to travel by vehicle. Unlike the accessory apartment regulations, the goal of this regulation is to allow a mixture of commercial and residential uses to reflect the needs of the specific location, with the possibility of the residential use having a greater percentage of the square footage of the structure than the commercial use.
12.3.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception may be granted for a Multiple Dwelling Unit in a Commercial Structure provided that:
(a) The structure must be serviced by the exclusive public water supplier.
(b) The first story of the structure facing the street and completely above grade must be designated exclusively for commercial use, consistent with allowing access to the residential uses on other floors. Residential uses may be accessed from both the front and rear of the structure and may be provided with a separate entrance. In the case of a structure with direct exterior access to a sub-grade level from the front, the sub-grade level may be either residential or commercial.
(c) None of the commercial uses in the structure can be: adult entertainment (Section 12.27) or tattoo parlors (12.26). If a ventilation system is required to be installed for a retail or restaurant use, it shall be designed so that it does not affect any residential units above that space or elsewhere in the building.
12.3.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted for a Multiple Dwelling Unit may be granted provided that the following standards are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) All residential units within each structure shall have a gross floor area of no less than six hundred fifty square feet (650 sq. ft.)
(b) The average number of bedrooms located within the Multiple Dwelling Unit development shall not exceed 1.75 per unit.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12004
(c) Transient lodging shall not be permitted. The minimum length of stay shall be 180 days. The applicant shall provide a copy of the written lease agreement or other rental agreement, inclusive of the specified duration, that will be required of tenants, as part of the application documentation. Upon the sale of the property, the new property owner shall file an updated model lease within thirty (30) days of the change in ownership.
(d) Provisions for removal of trash shall be provided. Trash collection areas shall be screened from the public right-of-way.
(e) While dedicated parking spaces for each commercial and residential unit are not required, the applicant shall demonstrate that there is adequate convenient available parking.
(f) Lighting shall be located in a manner which minimizes glare or direct lighting into residential units. All commercial lighting shall be extinguished within one hour of the close of business, except for security, street lighting or safety lighting.
(g) All new buildings shall conform to the design standards for the underlying zoning district, if any or the overall Design Standards.
(h) Open Space: A minimum of one hundred square feet (100 sq. ft.) per dwelling unit shall be dedicated as usable open space. This open space shall be located within the area dedicated for the Multiple Dwelling Units within Commercial Structures.
12.3.4 Amenity Bonus and Incentives:
(a) Purpose: In the interest of promoting public amenities, innovative site design and a community-friendly neighborhood on land subject to this permit, the Commission, at the applicant’s request, may approve any combination of incentives listed within this Section.
(1) The application must demonstrate conformance to the principle of this Regulation and the intent of this Section and each request must be submitted as a separate request for Commission determination.
(2) Approval will be based on whether or not the applicant demonstrates adherence to this Section, complies with the intent of the Plan of Conservation and Development, all other regulations required by the Town and State and must be in the interest of public health, safety and welfare.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12005
(3) If the Commission determines that the applicant has not satisfied this burden of proof or compliance with this Section, the Commission may deny the request.
(b) Existing Amenities: The developer shall utilize any existing amenities in order to minimize the development footprint and maximize the amount and quality of the open space.
(c) Recommended Amenities:
(1) Public Amenities shall include, but are not limited to: window boxes, awnings, balconies, outdoor seating, “green” roofs, usable outdoor spaces, public seating and other outdoor furniture or reduction in impervious surfaces.
(2) Best management practices promoted by the US Green Building Council.
(3) For properties with waterfront access, the following public amenities shall include, but are not limited to: boat slips, beach access for the residents of the development and viewing platforms.
(4) For properties with wetlands, the following improvements shall be considered amenities eligible for bonuses:
(i) Restoration, enhancement or creation of productive wetland or watercourse resources;
(ii) Preservation of existing native vegetation, including shrubs and trees;
(iii) Removal of invasive species and replacement with native species;
(iv) Elimination and/or minimization of mowing to encourage a variety of native species including shrubs and trees; and
(v) Planting of native vegetation.
(d) Bonuses: Upon adequate demonstration of conformance to the purposes set forth in Section 12.3.4(a) above, the Commission shall grant the following incentives:
(1) A reduction in the front setback to allow for rear parking, or to otherwise create a sense of “street front” consistent with adjacent uses and setbacks.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12006
(2) An increase in the maximum height consistent with allowing three (3) stories while creating a greater opportunity for: compliance with flood elevation requirements, sound buffering between commercial units and upper story residential units and more flexible architectural styles.
12.3.5 Public Waterfront Access (PWA): The public will be allowed unimpeded access to the waterfront as deemed appropriate by the Commission either through a deeded restriction satisfactory to Commission Counsel or by donating a piece of property to either the Town of Clinton or a non-profit organization as approved by the Commission.
(a) Examples of access include but are not limited to:
(1) Public walkways, aesthetically consistent with the overall development;
(2) Common green space and waterfront areas (if available); and
(3) Outdoor furniture and fixtures which encourages pedestrian and bicycle use, such as bicycle racks and benches.
(b) The PWA must provide the following:
(1) Adequate public parking availability; and
(2) Maintained road access to the public parking area(s).
12.3.6 Water Dependent Uses: All prior public water dependent uses shall be protected and access maintained consistent with the standards set forth in the Connecticut Coastal Management Act.
12.3.7 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The following plans shall be submitted:
(1) Lighting Plan
(2) Sign Design Plan
(3) For developments located in the Marine (M) Zone, a traffic study.
(b) The following additional materials shall be submitted:
(1) A streetscape rendering of the proposed front of the structure
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12007
(2) A model lease for the residential units
(3) A Parking Analysis prepared by a Professional Engineer or Traffic Engineer which addresses the following:
(i) Demonstration that the parking provided is adequate for all combined uses
(ii) Calculation methods
(iii) Indication whether shared parking is being utilized
(iv) Provisions for reserve parking
(4) Public Waterfront Access plan which shows the following:
(i) Proposed public access
(ii) Proposed public parking availability
(iii) Proposed road access to the public parking area(s)
(5) An Amenities Plan which shows in detail all proposed public amenities which are eligible for bonuses.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12008
12.4 (Reserved for Future Use)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12009
12.5 Common Interest Community Development (CICD)
12.5.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to allow for the arrangement of multiple dwelling units (units) on larger properties in a way to focus development in one or more groupings or clusters of units, and protect open space and common areas so as to create a village atmosphere, while still remaining consistent with the Plan of Conservation and Development, and promoting the health, safety and welfare of the town of Clinton.
12.5.2 Qualifications: A Special Exceptions for a Common Interest Community Development (CICD) may be granted provided that:
(a) The minimum area of the tract of land to be considered for a CICD shall be no less than ten (10) acres.
(b) The tract must have a minimum frontage of twenty-five feet (25’) on an accepted Town road, State road, a road in an approved subdivision or to a road which is part of a proposed subdivision.
(c) The tract shall be served by public water or a community water system approved by the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection and the Department of Public Health.
12.5.3 Standards: A Special Exception for a Common Interest Community Development (CICD) may be granted provided that:
(a) Area, Bulk and Height:
(1) Any area to be developed within a CICD shall have a minimum area of forty thousand square feet (40,000 sq. ft.).
(i) A limited common element, exclusive use area or other restriction on the use or portion of land created through the declaration of a common interest community and not as a division of land through the subdivision process or otherwise shall not be considered a “lot” for the purposes of this Section.
(2) Each area to be developed shall include a minimum square of one hundred ten feet by one hundred ten feet (110’ x 110’) within and upon which multiple units may be constructed.
(3) The maximum ground coverage shall not exceed eighty percent (80%).
(4) The maximum building height shall not exceed the maximum permitted in the underlying zoning district.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12010
(5) Lots must remain under a unified ownership as part of a master common interest community, but may contain units that are separately and individually owned.
(6) Setbacks:
(7) Perimeter setback: The setback for the underlying zoning district shall apply to each developed area within a tract.
(b) Building Standards:
(1) Each unit shall be served by a public water supply or a community water system approved by the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection and the Department of Public Health.
(2) Utilities serving the unit shall be buried underground as feasible.
(3) The minimum floor area for each unit shall be eight hundred fifty square feet (850 sq. ft.).
(c) Parking: The provisions of Section 33.11 do not apply. The applicant must demonstrate that parking is adequate for the proposed use.
(d) Stormwater Management: The CICD shall provide for the maintenance or reduction of pre-development level stormwater runoff from the site upon completion.
(e) Landscaping:
(1) To the greatest extent possible, mature trees shall be retained on-site. The Commission may require street trees (minimum three inch [3”] caliper) be planted on thirty foot (30’) centers.
(2) Utility terminal boxes and connections placed above ground shall be adequately landscaped to screen them from view and shall be shown on initial and final residential plans. The Commission recognizes that the utility companies have the final decisions as to locations and therefore the locations shown on the plans are the suggested locations.
(3) Trees shall be planted adjacent to parking areas, if feasible.
(i)
Minimum setback from front lot line
Ten feet (10’)
(ii)
Minimum setback from any lot line other than a front or rear lot line
Fifteen feet (15’)
(iii)
Minimum setback from rear lot line
Twenty feet (20’)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12011
(f) Open Space
(1) A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the tract shall be preserved as open space, through deed or conservation easement.
(2) Wherever possible, open space shall be located so as to preserve existing woodlands, farmland, unique natural features, stonewalls and sites of historic, archeological or scenic value. Due to the unique and fragile coastal environment, the primary public good of open space within the Coastal Area Management Review Zone is anticipated to be for conservation.
(3) Open space shall be located to provide linkage with reserved open space on adjacent properties whenever possible.
(g) Common Green Space: Usable common green space is encouraged in addition to the required open space. Desirable features for green space include:
(1) Walking paths, open fields, picnic areas and other park-like features.
(2) Landscaped and outdoor furnished spaces including playground, exercise course, picnic, amphitheater, player table, court, field and reflective areas.
(3) Bicycle, walking and information paths and where they may be appropriate, viewing platforms.
(4) Garden plots, and public swimming pools.
(5) Community notice boards and commemorative monuments within the common green spaces listed above.
(h) Street Standards:
(1) All streets within the CICD shall be constructed in accordance with these Regulations, town ordinance and the Town of Clinton Construction and Development Standards.
(2) All internal roadways and driveways shall be private roads and shall be maintained by the owner or Home Owners Association.
(3) Emergency Vehicle Access
(i) All streets must provide adequate fire truck and emergency vehicle access.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12012
(ii) Developers are encouraged to design roads and accesses that minimize the expanse of pavement through the employment of “natural” roadside surfaces that accommodate the turning radii and clearances necessary for the maneuvering of emergency vehicles.
(I) Examples of natural roadside surfaces include but are not limited to, grass over a road base, grass paver blocks, granite cobblestones and concrete brick pavers.
(i) Sidewalks, Pedestrian and Bike Paths: These may be provided as deemed necessary by the Commission and consistent with the proposed aesthetic concepts.
(1) Concrete, brick pavers, and pervious cinder walkways area examples of acceptable sidewalk construction. Asphalt is not an acceptable material for sidewalks but asphalt may be used for pedestrian and bike paths.
(2) Where appropriate pedestrian paths shall be lighted at night consistent with the principles of the International Dark Sky Association.
(j) All provisions of the Subdivision and Zoning Regulations which have not been modified or eliminated by this Section shall pertain to CICD areas, together with the requirements of Section 11, Special Exceptions.
12.5.4 Special Requirements for Marine Zone: If the development is located in a Marine Zone, a plan must be submitted showing that the following additional requirements have been met:
(Added 8/15/2016)
(a) There shall be a minimum of four (4) additional dwelling units per building.
(b) Public Waterfront Access (PWA): The public will be allowed unimpeded access to the waterfront as deemed appropriate by the Commission either through a deeded restriction satisfactory to Commission counsel or by donating a piece of property to either the Town of Clinton or a non-profit organization as approved by the Commission.
(1) Examples of access include, but are not limited to:
(i) Public walkways, aesthetically consistent with the overall development;
(ii) Common Green Space and waterfront areas (if available);
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12013
(iii) Existing beachfront areas. In areas where there is no beachfront access, a scenic waterfront viewing area will be provided for public use; and
(iv) Outdoor furniture and fixtures which encourages pedestrian and bicycle use, such as bicycle racks and benches.
(2) The PWA must provide the following:
(i) Adequate public parking availability; and
(ii) Maintained road access to the public parking area(s).
(iii) In the event of traffic congestion and/or limited parking availability, a shuttle service shall be considered.
(c) Water Dependent Uses:
(1) All prior water dependent uses shall be protected and access maintained consistent with the standards set forth in the Connecticut Coastal Management Act (CCMA).
(2) The proposal shall not foreclose the possibility of future water dependent uses.
(d) Innovative Stormwater/Wastewater Design:
(1) Energy and environmentally responsible and energy efficient stormwater and/or wastewater facilities must be considered in the design of the proposal.
(2) If the stormwater and/or wastewater facilities are determined to be feasible, the Commission may require that they are implemented.
(e) Compliance with the Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan is required.
12.5.5 Requirements: A Special Exception for a CICD shall not be approved until the Commission finds that the following requirements have been met:
(a) The proposed units are clustered in a manner that is in harmony with the natural site so as to promote the preservation of natural resources, unique natural and manmade site features, and scenic views.
(b) The proposed unit layout contributes to the convenience of residential living and has a relationship to adjoining properties and neighborhoods that is harmonious with their character and serves to protect their values.
(c) The purposes, qualifications and standards for a CICD have been met.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12014
(d) The provisions for traffic, water, stormwater and usable open space are adequate, do not overburden the existing streets, water and stormwater drainage facilities on- and off-site and do not create water problems off-site.
(e) The site drainage and layout in terms of location of buildings and locations of residential uses provides for the safety of the residents.
(f) The development and design of the CICD will not have a significant adverse effect on surrounding properties or property values in the area.
(g) The proposed development will not have an adverse effect on the environment and, in particular, wetland and watercourse areas. In making this finding, the recommendations of the Inland Wetlands Commission regarding the development will be taken into account.
(h) Where appropriate, the applicant has providing for continuing maintenance of parking areas, stormwater drainage facilities, open space and other infrastructure or amenities not to be accepted by the Town of Clinton.
(i) The CICD is found to be consistent with the health, welfare and public safety needs of the community.
(j) Performance standards and soil erosion control measures have been met.
(k) The proposed development must demonstrate its proximity to state highways and/or locations of mass transit access and be serviced by a public water supply.
(l) Additional Findings Required for Proposals located within the Marine Zone: A Special Exception for a CICD located within the Marine Zone shall not be approved until the Commission finds that the following requirements have been met:
(1) Appropriate Public Waterfront Access has been provided and the method of designate such access (e.g. deed restrictions) is satisfactory to the Commission and its counsel.
(2) All prior water dependent uses have been protected and the proposal does not foreclose the possibility of any future water dependent uses.
(3) Innovative stormwater/wastewater designs were considered and have been implemented to the satisfaction of the Commission if feasible.
12.5.6 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12015
(a) If the tract is being subdivided into lots, the approval of a CICD is a two-part process. An applicant must obtain Special Exception approval under these Regulations and must receive approval of a subdivision under the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations. A tract need not be subdivided into separate lots.
(1) The applicant shall submit all the required applications concurrently.
(2) The Commission may hold a single, combined public hearing on the application(s) for Special Exception and the application for subdivision approval.
(3) In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, the Commission must vote separately on the applications for Special Exception(s) and for subdivision.
(b) The following plans shall be submitted:
(1) Lighting Plan
(2) Landscaping Plan
(3) For developments located in the Marine Zone, a traffic study which includes traffic management, circulation and minimization of traffic flow.
(i) If shuttle services are to be provided, the traffic study shall also provide details on the operation of said service.
(c) The following materials shall be submitted:
(1) Parking analysis prepared by a Professional Engineer or Traffic Engineer which demonstrates that the parking provided is adequate for the use.
(2) Sample common interest community documents, easements and/or shared driveway agreement documents.
(3) Maintenance agreement documents.
(d) Public Waterfront Access plan which shows the following:
(1) Proposed public access
(2) Proposed public parking availability
(3) Proposed road access to the public parking area(s)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12016
12.6 Accessory Apartments in Residential Zones:
12.6.1 Purpose: This Section is intended to aid the general welfare of the Town by:
? Benefitting elderly persons by promoting the availability and maintenance of housing;
? Benefiting persons of moderate income by increasing the supply of affordable rental housing in the Town; and
? Helping to preserve older houses that give the Town much of its attractive character.
Accessory apartments, as permitted in this Section, represent a viable way to create and integrate such housing throughout the Town.
12.6.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for an accessory apartment in Residential Zones may be granted provided that:
(Amended 7/1/2015)
(a) Accessory apartments shall only be permitted on lots that are in conformance with all the Zoning Regulations of the zoning district within which they are located with regards to frontage, area and shape.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) A Certificate of Occupancy must have been issued no less than five (5) years prior to the date of the application.
(c) Detached Accessory Apartments: The following Qualifications are for detached accessory apartments located within accessory buildings only:
(1) Lots must be a minimum of forty thousand square feet (40,000 sq. ft.) or greater in zones in which the minimum lot size is thirty thousand square feet (30,000 sq. ft.) or greater.
(2) The accessory building must be conforming with respect to location and use.
12.6.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following standards and criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) A total of only one (1) apartment shall be permitted to exist on any lot.
(b) All accessory apartments shall meet the following design criteria:
(Amended 7/1/2015)
(1) The residential character of a structure is not changed.
(2) A dormer does not extend in height beyond the roof ridge line and does not extend in depth beyond the first floor exterior wall. The pitch of
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12017
its roof and character of the dormer emulates the building, or make the building more compatible with surrounding residential structures.
(3) There shall not be a second front door.
(c) No portion of the living area of any accessory apartment shall be located in a basement area, vehicle bay area of a garage or third floor space of any structure.
(d) The principal dwelling and the accessory apartment shall not contain more than a total of five bedrooms.
(e) Both the accessory apartment and the principal dwelling shall meet the requirements of the Building, Public Health and Fire Codes.
(f) Either the principal dwelling or the accessory apartment shall be permanently occupied by a person who is the sole owner, or one of the joint owners of the property, or a relative of an owner.
(Amended 1/1/2012 & 7/1/2015)
(g) Transient lodging shall not be permitted. The minimum length of occupancy shall be 180 consecutive days.
(h) The accessory apartment shall provide a kitchen and complete bathroom, separate from the principal dwelling unit, as well as two (2) means of egress, in accordance with the applicable Building Codes, including a separate outside door. Both means of egress shall provide direct access to the building exterior.
(i) No new curb cuts may be created to serve an accessory apartment. The access from the road shall serve both the principal dwelling and the accessory apartment, and shall not be distinguishable as separate facilities.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(j) All required off-street parking shall conform to Section 33 of these Regulations.
(k) Attached Accessory Apartments:
(1) Accessory apartments may be part of an existing principal structure, within and/or as an addition to the existing structure.
(2) The building to which an accessory apartment may be added can be no less than one thousand square feet (1,000 sq. ft.) before the addition of the accessory apartment.
(3) The maximum floor area of the accessory apartment shall not exceed eight hundred square feet (800 sq. ft.) or one-third (1/3) of the total
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12018
combined area of the principal structure plus the accessory apartment, whichever is less.
(4) Stairways leading to an accessory apartment above the first floor of the primary residential building may be added outside of the existing exterior walls, except at the front of any building.
(5) Such stairway shall be entirely enclosed to the ground level by permanent walls and a roof and shall be consistent with the style of the architecture of the building.
(6) Separate access to any accessory apartment shall not be located on the building’s front façade unless two (2) doors existed at the time of conversion and the resulting building emulates the character of the existing street-side appearance of the principal structure or makes the structure more compatible with the surrounding residential structures.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(l) Detached Accessory Apartments:
(1) The original accessory use cannot be eliminated by the addition of the accessory apartment into, or onto, an accessory structure.
(2) A minimum total floor area space of eight hundred square feet (800 sq. ft.) is required for an accessory structure within which an accessory apartment is proposed.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(3) An accessory apartment shall have a minimum floor area of four hundred square feet (400 sq. ft.). The maximum floor area of the accessory apartment shall not exceed seven hundred fifty square feet (750 sq. ft.) or one-half (½) of the accessory structure, plus the accessory apartment, whichever is less.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(4) Stairways leading to an accessory apartment above the first floor of an accessory structure must be contained within the exterior walls of the building.
(m) Any other appropriate or more stringent conditions deemed necessary by the Commission to protect public health, safety, welfare, and the single-family character of the neighborhood.
12.6.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) An affidavit of ownership signed by the owner of the premises and affirming the intent that either the accessory apartment or the principal dwelling is to be occupied (except for bona fide temporary absences such as military service)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12019
by an owner of the premises (or persons as otherwise noted above) as the principal place of residence.
(b) The required floor plan shall list the total floor area of both dwellings and the percentage of difference between them.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(c) Suitable sketches, architectural elevations or photographs sufficient to show the character and extent of exterior building and façade construction including any alterations. The depictions should also allow for visualizing the building within the context of the neighborhood.
(d) Required Renewal:
(1) Every two years, starting with the year of approval, and biannually on March 1st thereafter, the owner of the premises shall file with the ZEO a new Affidavit of Occupancy of the premises and certify that either the accessory apartment or the principal dwelling is occupied by an owner (or other eligible occupant) of the premises as required by these Regulations.
(Amended 7/1/2015)
(2) Failure to provide the affidavit within sixty (60) days from the date specified above shall constitute a violation, which shall be grounds for institution of enforcement actions that may result in the revocation of the approval such that it may be null and void.
(Amended 7/1/2015)
(3) Upon sale of a property containing an accessory apartment, the new owner of said property shall file with the ZEO no later than thirty (30) days of the transfer of title to such property, the Affidavit of Occupancy with the eligibility requirements of these Regulations. Failure to timely provide the Affidavit shall constitute a violation, which shall be grounds for the institution of enforcement action that may result in the revocation of the accessory apartment for the property.
(4) Upon initial approval, the property owner shall file on the Land Records a copy of the Affidavit of Occupancy stating that one of the units shall be owner occupied in accordance with this section. The initial document shall include additional text stating that within thirty (30) days of the sale, the new owner must file a notice of intent to continue the accessory apartment use in compliance with all original conditions of approval with the ZEO. Failure to timely provide the Affidavit shall constitute a violation, which shall be grounds for the institution of enforcement action that may result in revocation of the accessory apartment approval for the property.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12020
12.7 Accessory Apartments – Business and Village Zones
12.7.1 Purpose: The intent of this section is to permit the mix of commercial and residential uses on the same property:
? Promote a village center concept of development where appropriate.
? Maximize the potential of a site when the property and surrounding uses are suitable and compatible.
? Provide pedestrian access to commercial activities.
? Provide housing units for varying income levels.
12.7.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for an Accessory Apartment in Business and Village Zones may be granted provided that:
(Amended 7/1/2015)
(a) Accessory apartments may not be created in structures in which adult entertainment businesses (Section 12.27), tattoo parlors (Section 12.26) or uses that require special ventilation systems to remove fumes or other harmful substances, are located.
(b) Each building shall contain an active commercial operation. When a commercial operation is vacated from a building, leaving only the residential use as tenant(s), the Permit granted for that residential accessory use shall terminate twelve (12) months from the date of commercial activity being vacated, unless commercial use is resumed within that time period.
12.7.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided the following standards and criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) Accessory apartments in accessory structures will only be allowed on lots of forty thousand square feet (40,000 sq. ft.) or greater.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) Accessory apartments may be within the footprint, or an addition to a building, provided they meet the following design criteria:
(1) The character of the building is enhanced so that it is appropriate for the zone in which it is located.
(2) The lot coverage of the building is not increased by more than six hundred square feet (600 sq. ft.) and still conforms to the standards for the zone in which it is located.
(3) A dormer does not extend in height beyond the roof ridge line and does not extend in depth beyond the first floor exterior wall.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12021
(c) A minimum total floor space of one thousand square feet (1,000 sq. ft.) is required for a principal structure or seven hundred fifty square feet (750 sq. ft.) for an accessory structure, within which an accessory apartment is proposed. No portion of the living area of any accessory apartment shall be located in a basement area, vehicle bay area of a garage or third floor space of any structure.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(1) An accessory apartment shall have a minimum gross floor area of four hundred fifty square feet (450 sq. ft.). The maximum floor area of an accessory apartment shall not exceed one thousand square feet (1,000 sq. ft.) or one-third (1/3) of the total combined area of a principal structure, or one-half (½) of an accessory structure, plus the accessory apartment, whichever is less.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(d) No more than eight (8) bedrooms will be permitted in a building, except in the Village Zone, where no more than four (4) bedrooms may be located on a single lot.
(e) Transient lodging shall not be permitted. The minimum length of stay shall be 180 consecutive days. The applicant shall provide a copy of the written lease or other rental agreement, inclusive of the specified duration, that will be required of tenants, as part of the application documentation.
(f) No apartment shall have more than two (2) bedrooms.
(g) The total residential floor area in each structure shall not exceed forty-eight percent (48%) of the total floor area of that structure.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(h) All required off-street parking shall conform to Section 33 of these Regulations.
(i) Provisions for the collection and removal of trash shall be provided. Trash collection areas shall be screened.
(j) Any other appropriate conditions deemed necessary by the Commission to protect public health, safety, welfare and the character of the neighborhood.
12.7.4 Application Procedures: Application for a Special Exception for an Accessory Apartment shall be made to the Commission in accordance with Section 11: Special Exceptions and Section 4: Application Procedures and Approval Process, of these Regulations and shall include the following additional materials:
(a) The required floor plan shall list the total floor area of the dwelling and the commercial operation and percentage of difference between them.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12022
(b) Suitable sketches, architectural plans, or photographs sufficient to show the character and extent of exterior building and façade construction include any alterations.
(c) Required Renewal:
(1) Every two years, starting with the year of approval, and biannually on March 1st thereafter, the owner of the premises shall file with the ZEO a new affidavit of ownership of the premises and certify that tenants are being required to occupy accessory apartments for more than 180 days as required by these Regulations. Copies of the lease, or mutually signed written rental agreements, for all units shall satisfy this requirement.
(Amended 7/1/2015)
(2) Failure to provide the affidavit within sixty (60) days from the date specified above shall constitute a violation, which shall be grounds for the institution of enforcement actions that may result in the revocation of enforcement actions that may result in the revocation of the approval such that it shall be null and void.
(Amended 7/1/2015)
(3) Upon initial approval the property owner shall file on the Land Records a copy of the Affidavit stating ownership of the premises and that tenants are required to occupy accessory apartments for more than 180 days. Failure to timely provide the Affidavit shall constitute a violation, which shall be grounds for the institution of enforcement action that may result in revocation of the accessory apartment approval for the property.
(4) Upon sale of a property containing an accessory apartment, the new owner of said property shall file with the ZEO no later than thirty (30) days of the transfer of such title to such property, the Affidavit of Occupancy with the eligibility requirements of these Regulations. Failure to timely provide the Affidavit shall constitute a violation, which shall be grounds for the institution of enforcement action that may result in revocation of the accessory apartment approval for the property.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12023
12.8 Mini-Estate Subdivision:
12.8.1 Purpose: It is recognized that there exist in the town of Clinton tracts of land, which because of configuration, topography and other difficulties, do not lend themselves to conventional subdivision development. In order to allow development of such tracts, to preserve as far as possible natural features such as rock outcroppings, steep slopes and vernal pools, and to safeguard against pollution of ground water by over-development in areas of ledge, high water table, et cetera, the creation of mini-estates as hereinafter described is permitted by Special Exception in accordance with the following standards, together with the pertinent requirements of the Subdivision Regulations.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
12.8.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a mini-estate subdivision may be granted provided that:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) The tract of land shall be no less than thirty (30) acres.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) There shall be no intermingling of mini-estates lots with conventional lots.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
12.8.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria, and conditions stated in Section 11:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) Frontage requirements may be modified from those set forth in Section 26.4 (Lot Standards) and rear lot requirements as set forth in Section 12.10 of the Zoning Regulations to the extent that the Commission and the applicant agree that they are appropriate for the site conditions.
(b) The area of each mini-estate lot shall not be less than seven and one-half (7½) acres and each mini-estate subdivision shall consist of at least three such lots.
(c) There shall be no subsequent subdivision of any mini-estate that would result in the creation of any lot less than seven and one-half (7½) acres or that violate the access provisions below.
(d) The requirement for open space dedication as set forth in the Subdivision Regulations shall be met.
(e) The provisions of Section 26.4 (Lot Standards) and 12.10 (Rear Lots) of the Zoning Regulations notwithstanding, access to mini-estate lots may be by private driveway serving up to but not more than four (4) such mini-estate lots and shall consist of a twenty-five foot (25’) right-of-way to an accepted town road, state highway, subdivision road approved by the Commission and recorded in the Clinton Land Records or a road that part of the proposed subdivision.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12024
(1) Within such right-of-way there shall be maintained an all-weather roadway at least eighteen feet (18’) wide, built and surfaced as specified in Subsection 80, Road Construction Standards, as amended.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(f) All provisions of the Subdivision Regulations which have not been modified or eliminated by this Section shall pertain to mini-estate lots, together with the requirements of Section 11, “Special Exceptions”.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
12.8.4 Procedures: The approval of a Mini-Estate Subdivision is a two-part process. An applicant must obtain a Special Exception under these Regulations and must receive approval of a subdivision application under the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall submit a table of calculation used in determining the maximum number of building lots that may be approved as part of a Mini-Estates Subdivision.
(b) The area to contain a house, water supply system and septic facilities must be shown with two foot (2’) contour intervals. The commission may, at its discretion, allow for the remainder of the tract to be shown with five foot (5’) intervals.
(Amended 1/1/2012
(c) Where this and other methods of subdivision are applies to the same parcel, a line of demarcation between that portion to be developed in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations and that portion to be developed in accordance with these Mini-Estate Regulations shall be clearly indicated on the subdivision maps.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12025
12.9 Conservation Subdivisions:
12.9.1 Purpose: These Regulations are intended to allow the arrangement of individual subdivision lots in such a way as to focus development in one or more groupings or clusters of lots, while retaining the remainder of the property as permanent open space. Recognizing that the Town of Clinton contains both a shoreline residential area, containing smaller lots, and an inland residential area, containing generally larger lots, this Section encourages creative designs, allowing a variety of lot sizes so that proposed layouts maintain the harmony of the immediately surrounding areas.
An acceptable Conservation Subdivision will utilize the additional flexibility allowed under this Section to maximize the preservation of natural resources and scenic quality of the land, and to facilitate adequate and economical provision of streets and utilities in a manner that reduces the overall costs of the subdivision development.
12.9.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a Conservation Subdivision may be granted provided that:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) Minimum Land Area for Consideration: The tract must be at least ten (10) acres.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
12.9.3 Standards: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) Determination of Maximum Number of Building Lots: The maximum number of lots which shall be allowed in any Conservation Subdivision shall be determined as follows:
(1) From the total acreage of the subject parcel, the following shall be subtracted:
(i) Ten percent (10%) of the total acreage;
(ii) Ninety percent (90%) of all land that has been classified as inland wetlands, tidal wetlands, or floodway. Where land is classified in more than one category, the larger area shall prevail;
(iii) The area of significant steep slopes (greater than 20% over a horizontal distance of seventy-five feet (75’) perpendicular to the contour).
(2) The total acreage remaining from 12.9.3(a)(1) above shall be divided by the minimum lot size for the zone in which the tract is located, in
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12026
accordance with Section 26 – Lot Requirements – Standards. The largest divisible whole number, plus ten percent (10%), is the maximum number of lots that may be approved. If the tract is located in more than one zoning district, the maximum number of lots that may be approved for the Conservation Subdivision as a whole shall be the sum of the total for each zone when calculated individually.
(b) Lot and Building Standards: The following standards shall be met for each new building lot:
Standard by Lot Size (Sq. ft.) 10,000 – 15,000 15,001 – 25,000 25,001 – 35,000 Over 35,000
Maximum aggregate ground coverage as percent of lot area as defined in Section 3:
30%
25%
15%
10%
Maximum floor area as a percent of lot area including all stories (See Section 3):
40%
30%
20%
20%
(1) For Conservation Subdivisions, wholly or partially within the CAM Review Zone:
(i) Each lot shall include a minimum of ten thousand square feet (10,000 sq. ft.) of lot area, with the minimum average lot area of all the lots in the proposed subdivision of fifteen thousand square feet (15,000 sq. ft.). Larger minimum lot areas may be required by the Commission as a result of individual soil and topographic conditions.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(ii) Each lot shall include a minimum square of seventy feet by seventy feet (70’ x 70’).
(iii) Setbacks for lots shall be as follows:
(I) Front setback: Thirty feet (30’)
(II) Side setback: Fifteen feet (15’)
(III) Rear Setback: Thirty feet (30’)
(IV) Each lot shall have a minimum of one hundred twenty-five feet (125’) frontage.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(c) Open Space:
(1) At least fifty percent (50%) of the total acreage for the subject parcel shall be dedicated as permanent open space.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12027
(2) Due to the unique and fragile coastal environment, the primary public good of open space within CAM Review Zone is anticipated to be for conservation.
(3) Open space shall be located to provide linkage with reserved open space on adjacent properties wherever possible.
(4) Wherever possible, open space shall be located so at to preserve existing woodlands, farmland, unique natural features, stone walls and site of historic, archaeological or scenic value.
(5) Open space in Conservation Subdivisions shall be subject to all provisions of the Subdivision Regulations, include disposition of open space.
(6) At least 30% of the land being used to meet the minimum open space requirements must be uplands. (This supersedes the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations)
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(d) Common Green Space is defined land used for passive and active recreation by residents of the Conservation Subdivision.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(1) Desirable features for green space include:
(i) Walking paths, open fields, picnic areas and other park-like features.
(ii) Landscaped and outdoor furnished spaces including reflective, playground, exercise course, picnic, amphitheater, playing table, court and field areas.
(iii) Bicycle, walking and informational paths and where they may be appropriate, platforms.
(iv) Garden plots, public swimming pools and skateboard parks.
(v) Open piazzas, plazas, courtyards and commons.
(vi) Community notice boards and commemorative monuments within the open spaces listed above.
(2) The minimum Common Green Space per lot will be five thousand square feet (5,000 sq. ft.) and its area, use, maintenance, and permanent prohibition of construction shall be clearly defined and established.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12028
(3) The Commission may, at its discretion, accept Common Green Space as contributing up to 25% of the open space requirement (12.5% of the total parcel) as long as such space is consistent with the goals and objectives of open space as required in the Clinton Subdivision Regulations.
(4) The Common Green Space areas shall be coordinated throughout the development as part of a unified system. This system shall serve to integrate the entire development visually and functionally, providing adequate recreation space and visual separation for all dwellings or clusters of dwellings.
(5) The Common Green Space cannot be used for the construction of dwellings, supporting facilities, parking, vehicular circulation or private yards.
(e) Buffers and Perimeter Setbacks:
(1) Open space shall be located so as to provide a buffer area that will screen new subdivision lots from adjacent properties and from existing public roads to the maximum extent possible. The Commission may also require the establishment of a conservation easement or conveyance of an open space buffer along existing road for purposes of retaining the character of the road.
(2) Coastal Buffer: A one hundred foot (100’) wide “greenway” buffer, where buildings or roads are not permitted, is required along all tidal wetlands contained within or bordering the property. The buffer may contain a walking path, dock, small gazebo or other similar structures and private septic systems.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
The width of this buffer can be reduced in certain areas at the discretion of the Commission. In no instance is the Coastal Buffer to be reduced to less than seventy-five (75’) at any point.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(3) Inland Wetlands Buffer: A one hundred foot (100’) buffer is required along all inland wetlands contained within or bordering the property, where clearing, building or any activities that disturb the ground are not permitted. The buffer may be open space or area contained within lots with permanent deed restrictions.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(4) Perimeter Setbacks: Where proposed Conservation Subdivision lots are adjacent to a different zone, the greater of the side and rear lots line setbacks of the two zones shall be applied to the proposed, abutting Conservation Subdivision lots.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12029
(f) Streets, Access and Parking:
(1) Interior streets, driveways and circulation systems are to be designed to achieve the following basic goals:
(i) Minimize paved areas.
(ii) Reduce traffic speeds.
(iii) Discourage through traffic.
(iv) Encourage road connections.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(v) Integrate paved areas into the existing landscape as much as possible.
(vi) Optimize the scenic and aesthetic quality of the circulation experience.
(2) All streets and roads that are intended to be submitted for acceptance by the Town as public roads must comply with the standards as required in the Town of Clinton, Construction and Development Standards, as may be amended.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(3) All streets and roads that are intended to be private roads shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Section 80: Road Construction Standards, Section 90: Drainage Design Criteria, Section 100: Drainage Construction Standards, Section 110: Soil and Erosion Control and Sediment Control Criteria, and Section 120: Final Grading, Stabilization and Landscaping Criteria of the Town of Clinton, Construction and Development Standards, as may be amended.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(i) The applicant’s engineer shall provide a letter to the ZEO certifying that all roads were constructed in accordance with the standards listed above.
(ii) Private streets and roads must be owned and maintained by a corporate entity or homeowner’s association. Such non-profit organization will be a private, non-profit, non-stock organization that has as a purpose the maintenance of the roads within the subdivision.
(iii) In no instance are privately maintained streets to have gates or any other physical barrier that restrict access to any portion of the road owned and maintained by a corporate entity, association or abutting land owners.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12030
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(4) Emergency Vehicle Access: All streets must provide adequate fire truck and emergency vehicle access. Developers are encouraged to design roads and accesses that minimize the expanse of pavement through the employment of “natural” roadside surfaces that accommodate the extraordinary turning radii and clearances necessary for the maneuvering of emergency vehicles. Examples of natural roadside surfaces include but are not limited to, grass over a road base, grass paver blocks, granite cobblestones and concrete brick pavers.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(5) Street Width: The following alternative design standards may be utilized under Section 5.1.6 of the Clinton Subdivision Regulations for the purpose of achieving the goals of item 12.9.3(f)(1) above. All streets shall be maintained in good condition.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(i) The minimum roadway widths of interior one-way streets with parking permitted on one side shall be twenty feet (20’).
(ii) The minimum roadway width of two-way streets with parking permitted on one side shall be twenty-eight feet (28’).
(iii) The minimum width of two-way streets without parking permitted shall be twenty feet (20’).
(iv) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five feet (125’) shall be avoided.
(v) The minimum centerline radii of curved streets shall be as follows:
(I) Local Road: One hundred fifty feet (150’).
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(II) Collector/Arterial Streets: Three hundred feet (300’).
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(III) Business/Industrial Streets: Five hundred feet (500’).
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(vi) All reverse curves on business/industrial and collector/arterial streets shall be separated by a tangent at least one hundred feet (100’) long.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(vii) Streets shall be laid out so at to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No street shall intersect any other street at less than sixty degrees (60º). The minimum number of ways at an intersection shall be kept to four (4) with the centerline of said street intersection at one common point.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12031
(viii) Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a street line radius of not less than one half of the wider right-of-way.
(ix) The intersection of centerlines of streets shall occur not less than two hundred feet (200’) apart.
(x) Drainage: Street curbs can be omitted at slopes that are less than 5% and are part of a comprehensive drainage concept that minimizes curbing, pollution runoff, flow velocities and other concentrated storm water flows.
(xi) Lighting: At the discretion of the Commission, roads and streets shall be lighted at night.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(xii) Parking: It shall be convenient to common areas and provided when necessary in accordance with Section 33 of these Regulations. Where appropriate, common driveways, parking areas, walks and steps shall be provided, maintained, and lit for night use. Screening of parking and service area shall be required through use of trees, shrubs, hedges and screening walls.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(xiii) Sidewalks, Pedestrian and Bike Paths: These may be provided as deemed necessary by the Commission and consistent with the proposed aesthetic concepts. Concrete, brick pavers and pervious cinder walkways are examples of acceptable sidewalk construction. Where appropriate, pedestrian paths shall be lighted at night.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(g) Utilities: The following standards are acceptable to water supply, sewage disposal and other utilities within the Conservation Subdivision:
(1) Water Supply: The Conservation Subdivision shall be served by a public water supply system or a water supply system as approved by the Town Engineer and the Town Director of Health.
(i) When a Conservation Subdivision is located within any area served by a public water supply or when any part of the land being subdivided is located within the distance prescribed in the Public Health Code of the nearest existing public water supply service line, such public water service supply service shall be extended to serve the Conservation Subdivision.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12032
(ii) If public water supply cannot be extended to all, or part of, the subdivision, each individual dwelling to which it cannot be extended shall have its own potable water supply well.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(2) Fire Suppression: The water supply system shall be so designed and constructed as to provide adequate fire protection with hydrants where there is sufficient capacity and pressure.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(i) Where public water supply does not exist or it is insufficient for fire suppression, a supply of water shall be achieved utilizing storage tanks, fire ponds or such methods, as approved by the Town Fire Marshal.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(3) Sewage Disposal: The Conservation Subdivision shall be served by an on-site community sewage disposal system or on-site systems for each dwelling unit.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(i) Each system shall meet Town and State Department of Health regulations, and as applicable, regulations of the State Department of Environmental Protection.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(ii) Each system shall be approved by the Town Director of Health, State Department of Health or the State Department of Environmental Protection, as applicable.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(iii) Community systems shall be approved by the Town Water Pollution Control Commission and state agencies, as the same have jurisdiction.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(h) All provisions of the Subdivision and Zoning Regulations which have not been modified or eliminated by this Section shall pertain to Conservation Subdivision lots, together with the requirements of Section 11, “Special Exceptions”. (See Section 6.2, Clinton Subdivision Regulations.)
(Amended 1/1/2012)
12.9.4 Requirements: A Special Exception for a Conservation Subdivision shall not be approved until the Commission finds that the following requirements have been met:
(a) The proposed lots are clustered in a manner which is in harmony with the natural site so as to promote the preservation of natural resources, unique natural and manmade site features, and scenic views.
(b) The proposed lot layout contributes to the convenience of residential living and has a relationship to adjoining properties and neighborhoods that is harmonious with their character and serves to protect their values.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12033
12.9.5 Procedures: Approval of a Conservation Subdivision is a two-part process. An applicant must obtain a Special Exception under these Regulations and must receive approval of a subdivision application under the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations. The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) The applicant shall submit all the required applications concurrently. In addition to the requirements for all subdivision applications, the applicant shall also submit the following information:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(1) A map showing the location and acreage of all inland wetland and tidal wetland areas and all areas which have been mapped as flood hazard areas.
(2) A table of calculation used in determining the maximum number of building lots that may be approved as part of a Conservation Subdivision (See Section 12.9.3(a) above)
(b) The Commission may hold a single, combined public hearing on the application(s) for Special Exception and the application for subdivision approval.
(c) In accordance with the requirements of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Commission must vote separately on the applications for Special Exception and for Subdivision.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12034
12.10 Rear Lots:
12.10.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to allow development of land that has minimal frontage on a town road while still maintaining a rural character.
12.10.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a Rear Lot may be granted provided that:
(a) Area and Shape: The area of each rear lot shall be at least one and one half (1½) times the minimum area for the district in which such lot is located and shall have a minimum width equal to at least the minimum frontage requirements of the applicable district. Access strips shall not be included in the area calculation of rear lot area.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) In accordance with Section 130, Design and Construction of Driveways, Town of Clinton Construction and Development Standards it must be demonstrated that a driveway meeting current standards is feasible for every proposed lot regardless of whether the eventual intent is to utilize a shared driveway.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(c) All approvals required prior to the Commission being able to act, such as Inland Wetlands, Zoning Board of Appeals, etc., as necessitated by the design and location of a driveway within an access strip shall have been obtained from other Town of Clinton boards and/or commissions prior to the submission of an application to the Commission for a rear lot.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
12.10.3 Standards: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) In a subdivision layout, the maximum number of rear lots shall not exceed those required in Section 6.1 of the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Clinton, Connecticut.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) On any rear lot, setback distances from all lot lines shall be equal to the rear line setback for the district in which such lot is located.
(c) Access:
(1) Each rear lot shall have a solely owned access strip as part of the lot for which it has been demonstrated that a driveway conforming to the applicable provision of the Construction and Development Standards of the Town of Clinton is feasible and for which permits required before the Commission may act from other Town boards and commissions, as necessitated by the proposed design and location, have been granted.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12035
(2) The access strip shall be a minimum width at all points of twenty-five feet (25’). Conformance with the Town of Clinton, Connecticut Construction and Development Standards may necessitate a wider access strip under certain sharing arrangements and slope conditions.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(3) The number of adjoining access strips shall not exceed two (2).
(4) Each access strip shall extend to an accepted Town road, State road, to a road in an approved subdivision, or to a road which is part of the proposed subdivision, as shown on the current Connecticut Department of Transportation Map TR-27 or as recorded in the Clinton Land Records.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(5) The minimum distance between any access strip and any intersection of Town, State, approved subdivision or private roads shall be equal to the minimum frontage requirements of one front lot as indicated in Section 26: Lot Requirements, for the zone in which such access strip is located.
i. Distances between access strips, except adjoining access strips, measured from their closest points, shall be equal to the frontage requirement of one front lot as indicated in Section 26 for each access strip.
ii. Adjoining access strips shall be counted as two strips whether or not a common driveway is used.
(6) The length of an access strip shall be defined as the length from its intersection with the street to the point at which the lot width equals or exceeds that of the minimum frontage requirement for the zone in which the rear lot was located.
Minimum and maximum lengths of access strips shall be:
District Minimum Maximum
R-80
160 feet
500 feet
R-60
160 feet
400 feet
R-40
125 feet
320 feet
R-30
100 feet
300 feet
R-20
80 feet
250 feet
VZ
100 feet
300 feet
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12036
(7) Each access strip shall be of sufficient width to accommodate a driveway that conform to the “Construction and Design Standards of the Town of Clinton, Connecticut”, and the construction and development standards of Section 12.2 of these Regulations.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(8) Access to each rear lot must be through the same district or a district in which the use planned for the rear lot is also permitted.
(9) When a proposed lot is located in more than one zone, the length of any access strip shall conform to the requirements of the zone in which the street frontage is located.
(d) Driveways:
(1) All driveways shall meet the applicable requirements of the “Construction and Development Standards of the Town of Clinton, Connecticut” as amended.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(2) Driveways shall not exceed a grade of ten percent (10%). The grade of the driveway shall not exceed five percent (5%) within fifty feet (50’) of its intersection with an improved road or street.
(3) A single driveway may provide access to adjacent rear lots provided ownership of a minimum twenty-five foot (25’) access strip to each lot is maintained as set forth in Subsection 12.10.3(c).
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(e) The non-access strip portion of a rear lot shall not be separated from a Town, State or approved subdivision road by more than one (1) lot.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(f) Rear lots of record at the time of adoption of these Regulations shall not be divided or otherwise altered in area or dimensions except in conformance with these Regulations. The use of a right-of-way as access to such rear lots of record shall establish such lots as non-conforming.
(g) All Zoning Regulations as set forth in Section 26: Lot Requirements – Standards, except for lot frontage, and the lot area and setback requirements as modified by Section 12.10.3, must be met.
12.10.4 Requirements: A Special Exception for a Rear Lot shall not be approved until the Commission has made a Finding that the following requirement has been met:
(a) The land characteristics and physical conditions make such rear lot development practical, appropriate and in harmony with the purpose and intent of the Clinton Zoning Regulations.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12037
12.10.5 Procedures: the applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) Approval of a subdivision with a rear lot(s) is a two-part process. An applicant must obtain a Special Exception under these Regulations and must receive approval of a subdivision application under the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(1) An application for a rear lot shall be submitted concurrently with a Subdivision application, along with the following information:
(Amended 1/1/2012
i. All prior approvals shall be submitted to the Commission, in timeframes as required in Section 12.10.2(c) above.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
ii. A plan(s), demonstrating that a driveway for each proposed rear lot that complies with Section 130, Design and Construction of Driveways, Town of Clinton Construction and Development Standards is feasible, shall be submitted with the application.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) The Commission may hold a single combined public hearing on the application(s) for Special Exception(s) and the application for subdivision approval.
(Amended 1/1/2012
(c) In accordance with the requirements of CGS Chapters 124 and 126, respectively, the Commission must vote separately on the application(s) for Special Exception(s) and for Subdivision.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12038
12.11 Planned Residential Development (PRD)
12.11.1 Purpose: The purpose of the Planned Residential Development (PRD) regulations is to encourage the provision of affordable housing as per CGS 8-2 and 8-30g, by providing opportunities for a diversity of housing types and sizes, especially for elderly and young families, consistent with soil types, terrain, infrastructure capacity and available services.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
12.11.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a Planned Residential Development (PRD) may be granted provided that:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) The minimum size of the lot to be considered for a PRD shall be three (3) acres.
(b) The lot must have a minimum frontage of twenty-five feet (25’) on an accepted Town road, State road, a road in an approved subdivision, or to a road with is part of a proposed subdivision.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(c) The lot shall be served by a public water supply.
12.11.3 Standards: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) Each dwelling unit in the PRD shall be served by a public water supply.
(c) Each unit in the PRD shall be served by individual or community on-site sewage disposal systems meeting Town and State Department of Health Regulations, and as applicable, regulations of the State Department of Environmental Protection.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(d) A maximum of ten (10) acres on any one Lot may be utilized for dwelling units and all associated site improvements, septic systems, driveways, etc.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(e) There shall be a three hundred foot (300’) separation distance between parcels containing PRD units. This separation distance is in addition to all other buffers, landscaping and yard requirements.
(f) Each PRD dwelling unit shall be comprised of single-family detached dwellings or two-family dwellings.
(g) Planning and Design Standards:
(1) Height, Area and Bulk:
(i) The maximum building height shall not exceed thirty-five feet (35’) above the pre-development existing grade as further
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12039
defined under the definitions for Building Height in Section 3 of these Regulations.
(ii) The maximum ground coverage for the site shall not exceed sixty percent (60%).
(iii) The maximum floor area as a percent of the lot shall not exceed thirty percent (30%).
(2) Building Setbacks:
(i) Residential dwelling units may not be located within two hundred feet (200’) of a non-residential building or non-residential parking lot.
(ii) No PRD improvements shall be located within five hundred feet (500’) of a municipal boundary.
(iii) The PRD must meet the minimum setbacks for the district in which it is located.
(iv) The PRD must provide a minimum twenty-five foot (25’) landscaped buffer at each property line, where the Commission determines it to be required. The buffer area may be located within the setbacks.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(v) Residential dwelling units must be a minimum of twenty-five feet (25’) from any PRD roads or access driveways.
(3) Building Standards:
(i) No more than forty (40) dwelling units may be built on one site.
(ii) The minimum floor area for each dwelling unit shall be one thousand square feet (1,000 sq. ft.).
(iii) A minimum of sixty-six percent (66%) of the dwelling units shall consist of efficiency and one-bedroom units. The balance may be two- or three-bedroom units.
(Amended 1/1/2012
(iv) Residential buildings shall be separated by at least thirty-five feet (35’) from any other residential building on the site.
(I) If, however, any facing walls contain a window or door, such distance shall be increased by one foot for each
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12040
two feet of height facing at an angle of thirty degrees (30º) or less shall be considered facing walls.
(II) Enclosed stairwells and similar architectural appurtenances shall be considered as part of the facing wall for the purposes of setbacks.
(v) Deed restricted affordable dwelling units shall be substantially similar to non-price-restricted units in terms of building design, materials and finish quality.
(vi) Utilities shall be buried underground (where feasible, as determined by the Commission.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(4) Parking: The parking shall conform with Section 33: Off-Street Parking and Loading, in addition to the following requirements:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(i) Any open parking area, excluding driveway pads, shall be at least fifteen feet (15’) from all sides of the dwelling.
(ii) Parking which serves more than one unit may not have its only egress backing out into a public street.
(iii) Adequate, unobstructed space shall be provided for snow clearance of parking spaces. Provision shall be made for adequate storage of cleared snow.
(iv) All parking areas shall comply with the landscaping provisions of these Regulations. In addition, parking areas will be screened from the street and adjoining neighbors by a landscaped treatment of at least four feet (4’) in height.
(v) Garages shall not constitute parking space in determining conformance to parking standards.
(5) The proposed housing design will not require upgrading of the existing on-site or off-site public water or drainage systems. The PRD provides for the maintenance or reduction of pre-development level drainage runoff from the site upon completion, unless the Commission finds that off-site drainage facilities or systems have been designed to handle the project drainage and the anticipated future drainage requirements of the area, and that any required easements or approvals have been obtained to use such systems or facilities.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(6) Landscaping and Open Space Requirements:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12041
(i) A landscaping plan must be submitted.
(ii) All PRD areas shall contain a buffer strip at least twenty-five feet (25’) wide planted to substantially screen the perimeter buildings and parking in the planned residential area from neighboring areas.
(iii) To the greatest extent possible, all mature trees should be retained on-site. The Commission may require street trees (minimum three inch (3”) caliper) be planted on thirty foot (30’) centers. The street trees shall be planted outside of the right-of-way.
(iv) Utility terminal boxes and connections placed aboveground shall be adequately landscaped to screen them from view and shall be shown on the initial and final residential plans.
(v) Existing mature vegetation on the site shall be retained in areas not disturbed by construction. In areas disturbed by construction, or in areas where existing vegetation is sparse, new plant material (trees, shrubs) shall be provided as follows:
(I) Shade trees, evergreen trees and flowering trees shall be planted in, or adjacent to, parking areas. At least one tree shall be planted for every three spaces, or fraction there, in locations approved by the Commission.
(II) Trees and shrubs shall be planted around foundations and between structures in a manner approved by the Commission.
(III) All landscaped areas shall be served by underground water sprinklers where the Commission determines is feasible.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(vi) Usable Open Space:
(I) A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the total lot area shall be established for outside recreational purposes to serve the residents of the PRD. The area devoted to this purpose shall be in one piece and shall not be less than sixty-five feet (65’) in width. The recreation area shall be level with slopes not to exceed four percent (4%) and shall be landscaped primarily as lawn.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12042
(II) Usable open space must include at least one contiguous area with the smallest dimension being at least sixty-five feet (65’).
(h) Requirements for Maintenance of Common Land and Facilities: In order to ensure the long-term maintenance of common land and facilities and to prevent maintenance expenditures by the town, the following shall be required and submitted at the time of application:
(1) PRD projects shall be approved subject to the submission, at the time of application, of a legal instrument setting forth a plan or manner of permanent care and maintenance of open spaces, recreational areas, common parking areas and other communally owned facilities. No such instrument shall be accepted until approved by the Commission’s attorney as to legal form and effect; and
(2) Any homeowner’s association (HOA) created shall be organized as a not-for-profit corporation or unincorporated association under the Connecticut Common Interest Ownership Act with automatic membership in the HOA when property is purchased in the PRD.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(i) This shall be specified in the covenants which run with the land and which bind all subsequent owners. Covenants for maintenance assessment shall also run with the land. Included in the maintenance covenants shall be procedure for changing them at stated intervals.
(ii) Deeds shall specify the rights and responsibilities of property owners to the HOA.
(iii) The HOA shall also be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes and the maintenance of all commonly held facilities through the use of a pro rata share formula for all property owners.
(i) Street Standards:
(1) All streets within the PRD shall be constructed in accordance with these Regulations, and town ordinances and the Town of Clinton Construction Development Standards.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(2) All internal roadways and driveways shall be private roads.
12.11.4 Requirements: A Special Exception for a PRD shall not be approved until the Commission finds that the following requirements have been met:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12043
(a) The purposes, qualifications and standards for a PRD have been met.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) The provisions for traffic, water, septic systems, storm water and usable open space are adequate, do not overburden existing streets, water and storm water drainage facilities on- or off-site and do not create water problems off-site.
(c) The site design and layout in terms of location of buildings and locations of residential uses provides for the safety of the residents.
(d) The development and design of the PRD will not have a significant adverse effect on surrounding properties or property values in the area;
(e) The proposed development will not have a significant adverse effect on the environment and, in particular, wetland and watercourse areas. In making this finding, the recommendations of the Inland Wetlands Commission regarding the development will be taken into account.
(f) Where appropriate, the applicant has provided for continuing maintenance of parking areas, stormwater drainage facilities, open space and other infrastructure or amenities not to be accepted by the Town of Clinton.
(g) The PRD is found to be consistent with the health, welfare and public safety needs of the community.
(h) Performance standards and soil and erosion control measures have been met.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12044
12.12 Housing Projects for the Elderly
12.12.1 Purpose: Provision for Housing Projects for the Elderly as set forth in this Section is an effort to meet the special and unique needs of the elderly and to provide for their housing, safety, health and general welfare.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
12.12.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a Housing Project for the Elderly may be granted provided that:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) Minimum lot area for housing projects for elderly persons shall not be less than three (3) acres.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) A lot that is to be utilized for a Housing Project for the Elderly shall have a minimum frontage of sixty feet (60’).
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(c) Each lot or lots being utilized for housing project(s) for elderly persons shall be served by a public water supply under the control of a public utility company.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(d) The street or streets providing access to the proposed Elderly Housing site shall be classified as either arterial or collector roads as shown in the Clinton Town Plan of Development, “Future Land Use and Circulation Plan,” effective July 3, 1978.
12.12.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) The housing units shall be deed restricted for residents fifty-five (55) and older in accordance with applicable state and federal law.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) Maximum size shall be no more than forty-eight (48) bedrooms per project, or twelve (12) bedrooms per forty thousand square feet (40,000 sq. ft.) of lot area, whichever is less.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(c) The maximum number of elderly dwelling units per structure shall not be more than eight (8).
(d) Each unit in an elderly housing project shall contain no more than two (2) bedrooms and every room other than a kitchen, living room or bathroom shall be deemed a bedroom.
(1) Open air or screened porches shall not be considered a room.
(e) The following lot and building standards shall govern the design of housing projects for elderly persons :
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12045
(1)
Minimum setback from street line:
Forty Feet (40’)
(2)
Minimum setback from side property line:
Thirty Feet (30’)
(3)
Minimum setback from rear property line:
Thirty Feet (30’)
(4)
Maximum number of stories:
Two (2)
(5)
Maximum height:
Thirty-five feet (35’)
(6)
Maximum aggregate lot coverage as a percent of lot area:
Twenty percent (20%)
(7)
Minimum floor area:
(i)
One bedroom dwelling:
Six hundred square feet (600’)
(ii)
Two bedroom dwelling:
Seven hundred square feet (700’)
(f) All electric, telephone and cable television utility wires shall be installed underground where feasible as determined by the Commission.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(g) Open Space:
(Section added 1/1/2012)
(1) Purposes: Land for parks, playgrounds, recreational areas or open spaces will be provided and reserved in each elderly housing development as deemed necessary and in locations deemed proper by the Commission. The land reserved will be of such size, location, shape, topography and general character appropriate for the anticipated occupants of a housing project for the elderly as determined by the Commission. The needs may include, but are not limited to:
(i) Provision of landscaped and outdoor furnished spaces, including reflective, playground, exercise course, picnic, amphitheater, playing table, court and field areas;
(ii) Provision of bicycle, walking and informational paths and platforms;
(iii) Provision of garden plots, public swimming pools and skateboard parks;
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12046
(iv) Provision of open piazzas, plazas, courtyards and commons;
(v) Provision of community notice boards and commemorative monuments within the open spaces listed above;
(vi) Preservation of natural resources such as, but not limited to, unusual topography, wetlands, aquifers, agricultural land, wildlife habitat, visual corridors or vistas;
(vii) Retention of natural drainage ways;
(viii) Establishment of coherent urban form to break up undifferentiated sprawl patterns, provide edges, focal points or centers to enable people to relate to their surroundings or to integrate or separate various types of uses or activities.
(ix) Provision for passive or active recreation.
(x) Enhancement of historic or cultural activities or location;
(xi) Maintenance of scenic quality, specifically including creation or retention of public views and vistas of natural resources, including Long Island Sound; and
(xii) Provision of linkage with reserved open space on adjacent properties wherever possible.
(2) The reservation of land will conform to the greatest extent possible to the Plan of Conservation and Development of the Town of Clinton, as may be amended from time to time, or plans which have been formally adopted by other Town agencies having authority to plan for parks, playgrounds, recreational land, conservation or open space.
(3) Dedication Requirement: In determining the need for reservation of open space, the Commission will be guided, but not limited to, a standard of ten percent (10%) of the land area of the incentive housing development. The Commission may determine that a lesser area is sufficient to satisfy the need for such open space or that such reservation is not feasible because:
(i) Adequate existing parks, playgrounds, recreation areas or open space are available in the neighborhood; or
(ii) There is no land or insufficient land in the elderly housing development suitable for such reservation, and landscaped
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12047
areas are deemed sufficient to substitute for active open space areas.
(4) Access and Location: Open spaces will be easily accessible to those anticipated to use it, and will be situated to preclude open spaces in the extremities of the tract. Proper pedestrian and vehicular access will be provided for each reservation. In Coastal Area Management areas, the Commission may require public accessibility to open space.
(5) Condition of Land: Land received for open space will not be used for the storage of equipment or the deposit of debris. The land so reserved will not be excavated, filled or regarded and the trees will not be removed, except in accordance with a grading/landscaping plan approved by the Commission.
(6) Conditions for property/rights reservation: All open space or supporting facilities and systems will comply with applicable law and provide for maintenance, liability, financing or rights of access and use by residents of the elderly housing development as is acceptable by the Commission.
(7) Method of Dedication: Open space area will be permanently reserved in accordance with the sections below or such other means acceptable and approved by the Commission, such as, but not limited to:
(i) Deeded to the Town: Where open space areas are to be conveyed to the Town, the applicant shall convey them at the stage and in the condition agreed upon in connection with the processing and approval of the application for elderly housing development.
(ii) Deeded to a Non-Profit Organization Acceptable to the Commission: Such non-profit organization will be a private, non-profit, non-stock corporation that has as its purpose the preservation of open space land.
(I) The deed to such organization will contain language satisfactory to the Commission requiring that the land be held in perpetuity as open space land for the use of the public.
(II) If open space is to be conveyed to a non-profit organization, the Commission may require that a copy of the organization’s Certificate of Incorporation be submitted for its review.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12048
(III) The deed to the organization will contain provision that in the event of the dissolution of the corporation, the property will be conveyed to the Town, or subject to the approval of the Commission, to another non-profit corporation.
(IV) The Commission will have the right to reject any proposal for the transfer of open space land to a private non-profit organization if the Commission determines that such conveyance would not be in the best interest of the Town.
(iii) Held in Common Corporate Ownership by Owners of Units within the Development: Open space may be conveyed by warranty deed to a homeowner’s association within the development upon such terms and conditions as specified by the Commission.
(I) When tracts are conveyed in this manner, a copy of the Certificate of Incorporation or Articles of Association, as applicable, and the by-laws of the homeowner’s association will be submitted as part of the application for the elderly housing development.
(II) Membership in such corporation or association will be mandatory for all unit owners within the development.
(III) Each deed conveyance to unit owners will include the membership provisions, the beneficial right in use of the open space and/or all other pertinent restrictions and will be recorded in the Clinton Land records.
(IV) Wording on the documentation including each deed with state that such open space is reserved for use only as open space in perpetuity.
(iv) Perpetual Restriction: A deeded covenant and restriction if in form and content acceptable to the Commission permanently restricting the open space uses approved by the Commission, which restriction shall be enforceable by the residents of the elderly housing development and the Town acting through its Planning and Zoning Commission.
(8) Conditions of Open Space Land Conveyance: Title to the open space land will be unencumbered, except as approved by the Commission, and will be transferred at the time specified in the approval by the
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12049
Commission. No certificates of occupancy can be issued by the ZEO prior to all titles being transferred in accordance with the conditions of approval.
(9) Deed Guarantees: Regardless of the method employed, the instrument of the open space conveyance must include provisions suitable to the Commission and its legal counsel for guaranteeing the following:
(i) Continuity of proper maintenance for those portions of the common open space requiring maintenance;
(ii) When appropriate, the availability of funds required for such maintenance; and
(iii) Recovering of loss sustained by casualty, condemnation or otherwise.
12.12.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) The application shall include draft deed documents restricting residents to being age fifty-five (55) or older, in accordance with applicable state and federal laws.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) The application shall include draft language of the Home Owner’s Association documents.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12050
12.13 Hospitals, Clinics, Extended Care Facilities, Long-term Facilities, Nursing/Rest Homes, Sanatoriums, Intermediate Care Facilities, Homes for the Aged, Congregate Housing, Assisted Living Facilities and Boarding Homes for Sheltered Care:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
12.13.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to permit the development of facilities for the care of persons who cannot care for themselves, in a way that is compatible with the overall character of existing residential areas and so as to not degrade the natural environmental or negatively impact the public health, safety and property values.
12.13.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for may be granted provided that:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) Minimum lot area shall not be less than the district requirement.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) The lot shall be served by a public water supply.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
12.13.3 Standards & Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided the Commission finds that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) The maximum number of units shall be equivalent to not less than two thousand square feet (2,000) of land for each bed.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) The facility shall be served by a public water supply.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(c) There shall be access from the facility to Interstate 95 during a flood with a one percent chance of occurring in any given year (a/k/a the 100 year flood).
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(d) The facility shall have a backup power source for the event of extended loss of power.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(1) The generator or other alternate power source shall be screened from view of any existing residentially zoned abutting properties and public streets.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(e) An emergency action plan in accordance with the necessary components specified in 29 CFR 1910.38(a) shall be submitted with the application.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
12.13.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) An emergency evacuation plan shall be submitted with the application demonstrating compliance with the sections above.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12051
(b) The applicant shall submit a report from the Town Emergency Manager on the emergency operation implications of the proposed site location and layout.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12052
12.14 Child Day Care Facilities
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.14.1 Purpose: Child Day Care Facilities provide care, protection, supervision and guidance for children. The purpose of these Regulations is the protection of the health, safety and well-being of children who receive services in day care centers for more than nine children.
12.14.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a Child Day Care Facility may be granted provided that:
(a) The minimum lot size for a child day care facility for more than nine children shall be thirty thousand square feet (30,000 sq. ft.).
(b) Lots located within the R-10, R-15, R-20, R-30, VZ, Business, Marine or Industrial Zones shall be served by public water.
12.14.3 Standards: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) Any facility located in the R-10, R-15, R-20, R-30, VZ, Business, Marine or Industrial Zones shall be served by public water.
(b) The facility shall be limited to daytime hours not to exceed 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(c) There shall be an outdoor fenced play area providing a minimum of seventy-five square feet (75 sq. ft.) per child.
(1) The play area shall be connected to and have direct access to the day care facility.
(2) The fence around the play area shall be at least four feet (4’) high and constructed to prevent the passage of children through it.
(3) There shall be a buffer of at least ten feet (10’) between the play area and the side and rear property lines to act as a visual and auditory barrier.
(i) The buffer area shall be planted with non-deciduous trees, minimum height of six feet (6’), at a maximum of eight feet (8’) off-center. Existing vegetation may remain to assist with the purpose of the buffer.
(4) There shall be a twenty-five foot (25’) buffer between the play area and any abutting roadways.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12053
(d) Every facility shall provide a secure area where vehicles may park or stop for the purpose of dropping off children.
(1) Such area shall permit direct access to the principal building without having to pass through across any parking area, driveway or other area occupied by vehicles.
(2) Such area shall be designed as to preclude vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the site to have adequate capacity to minimize the need for double parking during peak drop off periods.
12.14.4 Requirements: A Special Exception for a Child Day Care Facility shall not be approved until the Commission finds that the following requirement has been met:
(a) That the surrounding properties and their uses shall not endanger the well-being of the children through the emission of noxious fumes, noise, traffic or other hazards.
12.14.5 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The application shall specifically state the maximum capacity of the Child Day Care Facility and the age range of the children to be cared for.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12054
12.15 Adult Day Care Facilities
12.15.1 Purpose: Adult Day Care Facilities constitute an important part of the continuum of care for our seniors, filling a growing niche between independent living and nursing home placement. By utilizing the cost-effective, high-quality professional care (not overnight care) provided by Adult Day Care Facilities, seniors can often be maintained at home for a longer period of time.
12.15.2 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) The design of the facility shall take into account the special needs of frail and mobility impaired patrons and shall include the following in order to facilitate the patron’s movements throughout the center and involvement in activities and services.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) The facility shall have at least two clearly identified exits with battery operated emergency exit lights at exit doors.
(c) The maximum number of patrons permitted shall not exceed on patron for every sixty square feet (60 sq. ft.) of activity space, not including office, bathrooms, kitchens, quiet rooms, closets and vestibules.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(d) Locked storage space shall be provided for medications. All controlled substances shall be double locked.
(e) Shielded outside lighting must be supplied to provide safe lighting levels at all entrances and exits.
(f) The facility shall meet all applicable federal, state, and local requirements including licensing, sanitation, fire, building and safety requirements. The more stringent requirement of these regulations or the said other applicable requirements shall prevail.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(g) If the Adult Day Care Facility is located in a residential structure, the following standards must be applied in addition to those stated above:
(1) The facility shall have its own separate identifiable space from the residential/office area and designated bathrooms located within the space utilized for the facility.
(2) The facility shall provide office space for use by the facility.
12.15.3 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12055
(a) The applicant shall submit a copy of their certification from the Connecticut Association of Day Care Centers, to operate an adult day care facility.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12056
12.16 Bed and Breakfasts
12.16.1 Purpose: The intent of this Section is to allow the development of Bed and Breakfasts in the town of Clinton, so as to foster economic development and encourage tourist traffic, in a way that is compatible with the overall character of the existing neighborhoods and so as to not degrade the natural environment or negatively impact public health, safety and property values..
(Amended 1/1/2012)
12.16.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a Bed and Breakfast for transient lodging may be granted provided that the Commission determines:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) The dwelling shall have a minimum floor area of two thousand square feet (2,000 sq. ft.) and shall be capable of accommodating such rooms for transient visitors based on interior arrangement, size, structural condition and mechanical equipment.
(b) The minimum lot area for a bed and breakfast shall not be less than the district requirement.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(c) The lot must provide a minimum of eight thousand square feet (8,000 sq. ft.) of land for each guest unit; however, there shall be no more than eight guest rooms.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(d) Such bed and breakfast transient lodging use is not permitted on a parcel where rooms are rented for any other lodging purpose.
12.16.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) In the Village Zone, bed and breakfast accommodations may be in a structure containing a permitted business use.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) There shall be no more than eight (8) guest rooms in the dwelling and any accessory building.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(d) Not less than seven hundred fifty square feet (750 sq. ft.) of living space, including a separate bathroom, in a structure on the parcel shall be reserved and assigned as the dwelling unit for occupancy by the owner, manager, proprietor, with no accessory apartment application required.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(e) In residential zones, no parking space shall be located in the area required for building setback from a street line.
(f) Meals for occupants of such rooms shall be limited to breakfast only.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12057
12.16.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations in addition to the following:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) An affidavit shall be provided upon application affirming that the applicant will comply with the above stated limitation on the duration of room occupancies and the property owner grants permission to the agent of the Commission to make inspection of the site so that this regulation may be enforced.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) In the event of any change of ownership of the lot where an approved bed and breakfast use is located, the new owner must obtain a Zoning Permit by demonstrating that all conditions prerequisite to the relevant permit have been and continue to be met.
(Amended 1/1/2012
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12058
12.17 Motels
12.17.1 Purpose: These Regulations are intended to ensure that new motels and the expansion of existing motels are compatible with the surrounding area and contribution to the unique community character and economic viability of the Town of Clinton.
12.17.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a Motel may be granted provided that:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) The minimum lot area for motels shall not be less than the district minimum.
(b) The lot shall be served by a public water supply.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
12.17.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) The motel shall be served by a public water supply.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) The maximum number of guest units may not exceed 15% as a function of net lot area (maximum number of guest units = net lot area/area of a single guest unit x 0.15). For the purpose of this calculation:
(1) Net lot shall be the total lot area of tidal wetlands, inland wetlands and floodplain on-site as well as the area of any easements; and
(2) The area of a guest unit in the calculation shall be no less than two hundred eighty-five square feet (285 sq. ft.)
(c) Not more than five percent (5%) of the units shall contain kitchen or cooking facilities.
(d) Occupancy of rooms for transient lodging by any person shall not exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days in a 90-day period with the first day of occupancy.
(e) In addition to the aesthetic value of landscaped buffers, such buffers shall mitigate any adverse impacts of light and sound created by a motel facility on adjacent properties and their occupants. Such mitigation shall be accompanied by utilizing a mix of vegetation with varying widths, heights and foliage densities so as to buffer adjacent properties to the satisfaction of the Commission. As such the Commission may require:
(1) A 5’ vegetative buffer at the side property lines and a 25’ vegetative buffer at the rear property line.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12059
(2) A 25’ landscaped front yard.
(3) The landscaped buffering requirements of this Section shall be in addition to Section 26.7 and where they differ, whichever results in the greater buffering shall apply.
(4) The Commission may require a 6’ fence of a suitable character at the rear and sides of the property where required to provide a buffer between uses.
(f) No motel shall be located within one thousand feet (1,000’) of the property line of any other motel. This shall not apply to the expansion or modification of any existing motel as of January 1, 2012.
(Amended (1/1/2012)
(g) The motel shall be designed so as to be similar and compatible characteristics to the developments existing in the surrounding area of such motel, or an upgrade or enhancement to such area. Such characteristics shall include, but are not limited to, consideration of building bulk and size, architectural features including windows/doors and façade lengths and heights as well as building finishes, lighting fixture design and signage; and overall site design including landscaping.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
12.17.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations in addition to the following:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) An affidavit shall be provided upon application for a Special Exception affirming that the application will comply with the above stated limitation on the duration of room occupancies and the property owner does grant permission to the agent of the Commission to make inspections of the site so that this regulation may be enforced. This affidavit shall be filed as a property deed restriction in the Town of Clinton Land Records in the Office of the Town Clerk should the Commission approve the Special Exception application.
(b) The application shall include detailed architectural renderings which will demonstrate that the proposed design will have similar and compatible characteristics to the developments existing in the surrounding area of such facility.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12060
12.18 Hotels
12.18.1 Purpose: These Regulations are intended to ensure that new hotels and the expansion of any hotels constructed in the future are compatible with the surrounding area and contribute to the unique community character and economic viability of the town of Clinton.
12.18.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a Hotel may be granted provided that:
(a) The minimum lot area for a hotel shall not be less than the district minimum.
(b) The lot shall be served by the exclusive public water supplier.
12.18.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) New or remodeled rooms shall be no smaller than three hundred square feet (300 sq. ft.).
(b) All rooms may contain coffee makers, microwave ovens and mini-fridge units.
(1) Rooms may contain kitchen or cooking facilities including but not limited to ranges, full sized refrigerators, or dishwashers.
(c) Occupancy of rooms for transient lodging by any person shall not exceed thirty (30) consecutive days in a ninety (90) day period.
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 12.18.3(c) above, any individual who is registered at a hotel as part of a negotiated business rate package with an existing business entity may be in residence without any specific time limit so long as that negotiated business rate package (as it may change from time to time) is in full force and effect. As an example if a business has negotiated for a block of rooms (one or more) to house staff for business related opportunities (i.e. from start up to training) this exception shall supersede 12.18.3(c).
(d) No mechanical equipment, other than public utility facilities, or refuse receptacles shall be visible from grade level on the public rights-of-way.
(e) The following shall be considered valid accessory uses for hotels:
(1) Fitness center
(2) Meeting/Conference rooms
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12061
(3) Business center (in the nature of internet-connected computers, a printer and a workspace, but not meant to be used as a regular office)
(4) “Breakfast bar” style food service area
(5) Gift/amenities shop
(6) Pool, indoor or outdoor
(7) Guest Laundry facilities
(f) A restaurant is a separately permitted use which may be located within the same structure as the hotel, and shall not be considered an accessory use.
(1) A restaurant must meet the standards found in Section 12.28: Restaurants and Other Food Service Establishments, and any other applicable sections of these Regulations.
(g) Structured parking may be integrated into the hotel design. If such structured parking is located at grade, it shall count as the first floor of the structure.
(h) A bicycle parking area shall be provided.
(i) The owner or operator of the hotel is encouraged to coordinate with regional transit services such as, but not limited to, 9 Town Transit, to allow for the picking up and dropping off of individuals at or near the hotel location.
(j) The premises shall be equipped with a surveillance system, such as a video recording system, deployed to the satisfaction of the Clinton Police Department, or other appropriate law enforcement agency.
(k) The owner or operator of a hotel shall have a management plan to ensure that occupants of the hotel do not create a public nuisance, or that such occupants are removed should the owner or operator determine that the occupant is creating a public nuisance. Nuisance includes but is not limited to excessive noise odors detectable outside the occupants room, the presence of unregistered occupants, the presence of animals not approved by the hotel owner or operator, damage to the hotel room in excess of ordinary wear and tear, illegal activity, or any threat to the health or safety of other hotel occupants, personnel or public.
(l) Sign Standards
(1) There shall be no more than one (1) wall sign per each exterior wall of the hotel structure. Each sign shall not exceed forty-eight square feet (48 sq. ft.).
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12062
12.18.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations in addition to the following:
(a) An affidavit shall be provided upon the application for a Special Exception affirming that the application will comply with the above stated limitation on the duration of room occupancies and the property owner grants permission to the agent of the Commission to make inspections of the site so that this regulation may be enforced.
(1) This affidavit shall be filed as a property deed restriction in the Town of Clinton Land Records in the Office of the Town Clerk should the Commission approve the Special Exception application.
(2) This affidavit shall also be filed simultaneously with the Certificate of Special Exception.
(b) The applicant shall submit the following plans and documents:
(1) Landscaping plan
(2) Lighting plan
(3) Litter Control Plan
(4) Traffic Study
(5) A Parking Analysis prepared by a Professional Engineer or Traffic Engineer which addresses the following:
(i) Calculation methods
(ii) Indication whether shared parking is being utilized
(iii) Provisions for reserve parking
(c) The applicant shall submit a letter from the exclusive public water supplier certifying that there is adequate water supply to the site.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12063
12.19 Business and Professional Offices
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.19.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to allow the development of larger office buildings while keeping with the character of the Town of Clinton.
12.19.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a Business or Professional Office with a ground floor area over 15,000 square feet, or with a ground floor area of 5,000 square feet in the Village Zone, may be granted in Districts permitting Business and Professional Office provided that:
(a) The lot shall be served by public water.
(b) The minimum lot area shall not be less than the district requirement.
12.19.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) The office shall be served by public water.
(b) Buffers:
(1) There shall be a 6’ fence of a suitable character at the rear and sides of the property.
(2) There shall be a 5’ vegetative buffer at the side property line and a 25’ vegetative buffer at the rear of the property.
(3) There shall be a 25’ landscaped front yard.
(c) Parking:
(1) All parking shall be located in the side or rear yard of the property.
(2) The parking area shall be accessed directly from a Town or State Road.
12.19.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12064
12.20 Financial Institutions
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.20.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to allow the development of Financial Institutions in a way that is compatible with the overall character of the Town of Clinton and so as to not degrade the natural environment or negatively impact public health, safety and property values.
12.20.2 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) There shall be no additional structures for the financial institution for the purpose of housing an ATM or similar equipment
(b) Additionally, any drive-up window must comply with Section 12.22 of these Regulations.
12.20.3 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall submit a traffic study.
(b) The applicant shall submit a report from a traffic engineer certifying to the safety of the parking area.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12065
12.21 Retail Establishments and Personal Service Facilities
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.21.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to allow the development of Larger Retail Establishments and Personal Service Facilities in Districts permitting such uses in a way that is compatible with the overall character of the Town of Clinton and so as to not degrade the natural environment or negatively impact the public health, safety and property values.
12.21.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a Retail Establishment or Personal Service Facility that occupies more than 15,000 square feet or has a ground floor area of more than 5,000 square feet in the Village Zone, may be granted provided that:
(a) The lot shall be served by public water.
(b) The minimum lot area shall not be less than the district requirement.
12.21.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions in Section 11:
(a) The facility shall be served by public water.
(b) All loading spaces and delivery areas shall be located so that they are suitably screened from any public way.
(c) There shall be a six foot (6’) suitable etc. as above fence at the rear and sides of the property.
(d) There shall be a five foot (5’) vegetative buffer at the side property line and a twenty-five foot (25’) vegetative buffer at the rear of the property line.
(e) There shall be a twenty-five foot (25’) landscaped front yard.
(f) All trash removal must be done after 7:00 a.m. and before 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
(g) For sites abutting residential zones, no busses or delivery trucks shall idle in the parking areas.
(h) Storage of retail merchandise and supplies necessary for the operation of a retail establishment located on the same premises provided the storage area is less than 15,000 sq. ft.
(1) A storage facility over 15,000 sq. ft. shall be considered a warehouse.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12066
12.21.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The application shall be accompanied by a security lighting plan, which includes the hours of reduced lighting.
(b) The applicant shall submit a traffic study.
(c) The applicant shall submit a report from a traffic engineer certifying to the safety of the parking area.
(d) The applicant shall submit a landscaping plan.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12067
12.22 Drive-up Windows
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.22.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to allow the development of Drive-up Windows in a way that is compatible with the overall character of the Town of Clinton and so as to not degrade the natural environment or negatively impact the public health, safety, and property values.
12.22.2 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) There shall be no more than one drive-up window per building.
(b) The drive up window system shall be located on one side of the building only.
(c) Any drive-up window will have no more than two lanes per building and for use by only one business per building.
(d) A drive-up window at a pharmacy shall only be permitted for the presentation and pickup of prescription medication.
(e) The drive-up window vehicle lanes will be located so as to be physically separated from parking lot aisles and driveway entrances.
(f) Evergreen, or other tree species with similar visual canopy, of not less than three inch (3”) caliper, at least six feet (6’) in height, shall be planted every twenty-five feet (25’) along the perimeter landscaping area whenever a drive-up window abuts a residential zone.
(g) There will be no more than two additional “drive-up window” signs for directional flow, provided that the directional signs are not more than two square feet (2 sq. ft.) each, with the words “Enter” or “Exit” only.
(h) No more than two “Open” or “Closed” signs will be allowed and must be located directly above the drive-up window lane and shall be no greater than two square feet (2 sq. ft.) each.
(i) The drive-up window shall comply with Section 33: Off-Street Parking and Loading.
12.22.3 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall demonstrate that provision has been made for the stacking of vehicles in a lane which is separate from the traffic circulation pattern associated with the use and its parking area.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12068
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that adequate provision has been made for customers to park and safely enter/exit the building without crossing through adjacent lanes of moving traffic or stacking lanes for the drive-up window service.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12069
12.23 Shopping Centers
12.23.1 Purpose: These regulations are intended to ensure that new shopping centers and expansions to existing shopping centers, which are both permitted by Special Exception, are compatible with the surrounding area and contribute to the unique community character and economic viability.
12.23.2 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) Shopping Center:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(1) A shopping center shall contain one retail store (which term includes a supermarket) to act as an anchor store, with a total floor area not to exceed seventy thousand square feet (70,000 sq. ft.) of which no more than sixty thousand square feet (60,000 sq. ft.) shall be used as a retail sales area.
(2) No story of any anchor store shall exceed twenty-five feet (25’) in height from floor to finished ceiling.
(3) Additional retail stores, financial institutions, restaurants or personal service establishments shall not exceed thirty thousand square feet (30,000 sq. ft.) of total floor area per establishment and shall not exceed a total floor area of sixty thousand square feet (60,000 sq. ft.)
(i) There shall be four or more such establishments.
(ii) Each establishment shall provide separate customer entrances.
(4) The total floor area of a shopping center shall not exceed one hundred ten thousand square feet (110,000 sq. ft.).
(b) Neighborhood Shopping Center:
(1) The total floor area of a neighborhood shopping center shall not be less than ten thousand square feet (10,000 sq. ft.) and no individual establishment shall be greater than ten thousand square feet (10,000 sq. ft.) in total floor area.
(2) The total floor area of a neighborhood shopping center shall not exceed sixty thousand square feet (60,000 sq. ft.).
(c) Parking:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12070
(1) Off-street parking and loading requirements and landscaping requirements shall comply with Section 33: Off-Street Parking, of these Regulations.
(2) The Parking Space Standards of Section 33.3 may be reduced to allow for shared parking facilities available within a Shopping Center.
(i) The minimum parking requirement shall be one (1) space for each two hundred and fifty square feet (250 sq. ft.) of gross floor area on all uses within the Shopping Center or Neighborhood Shopping Center.
(ii) Parking lots utilizing the reduced parking requirements shall include minimum landscaped areas (as required by Section 33 of these Regulations) amounting to at least twenty percent (20%) of the total lot area, exclusive of building coverage.
(d) All loading spaces and delivery areas shall be located so that they are suitably screened from any public way.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(e) There shall be a six foot (6’) suitable etc. as above fence at the rear and sides of the property.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(f) There shall be a five foot (5’) vegetative buffer at the side property line and a twenty-five foot (25’) vegetative buffer at the rear of the property line.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(g) There shall be a twenty-five foot (25’) landscaped front yard.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(h) All trash removal must be done after 7:00 a.m. and before 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(i) For sites abutting residential zones, no busses or delivery trucks shall idle in the parking areas.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(j) Storage of retail merchandise and supplies necessary for the operation of a retail establishment located on the same premises provided the storage area is less than 15,000 sq. ft.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(1) A storage facility over 15,000 sq. ft. shall be considered a warehouse.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
12.23.3 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations in addition to the following:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) The applicant shall submit a traffic study.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(b) The applicant shall submit a lighting plan.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12071
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(c) The applicant shall submit a landscaping plan.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12072
12.24 Liquor Stores
(Added 1/1/2015)
12.24.1 Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulation uses, which because of their nature, are recognized as having potentially serious objectionable operational characteristics. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These Regulations protect health, general welfare and property values in the town of Clinton.
12.24.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a liquor store may be granted provided that:
(a) No liquor store shall be located within five hundred feet (500’) of the property line of any public, private or parochial school, day care center, library, park, playground or other recreational facility in any zone. Nor shall any such business be located within five hundred feet (500’) of the property line of any church, convent, monastery, synagogue or other similar place of worship or five hundred feet (500’) of a cemetery.
(1) For the purposes of this Section, distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion of the building containing or proposing to contain a liquor store to the nearest boundary of the uses specified.
12.24.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) Signage:
(1) Liquor stores shall be obligated to adhere to the signage requirements for the underlying zoning district in which they are located.
(2) Notwithstanding any other requirements, any windows allowing visibility into the store shall retain at least 50% open visibility to the store interior.
(i) This means, specifically, that there shall not be signs, advertisements, products, logos, or promotions either on the window or within three feet (3’) interior to the window.
(3) Any advertisement or signage located outside the store which is not permanent affixed to either the ground or the building shall be removed and placed out of sight during all hours the business is not in operation.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12073
(4) The violation of this subsection of the Regulations shall be cause to terminate the Special Exception, following a hearing.
(b) Parking requirements shall comply with Section 33: Parking, of these Regulations.
12.24.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall submit a map showing all the properties and uses located within five hundred feet (500’) of the property proposed to contain a liquor store.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12074
12.25 Massage Establishments
(Added 1/1/2015)
12.25.1 Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate uses which, because of the nature, are recognized as having potentially serious objectionable operational characteristics. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These Regulations protect health, general welfare and property values in the town of Clinton.
12.25.2 Definitions: The terms “massage”, “massage establishment”, “massage therapist” and “massage therapy” shall be defined in Section A. Definitions of the Connecticut River Area Health District “Body Care Code”, as may be amended from time to time.
12.25.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) The provisions of the Connecticut River Area Health District “Body Care Code”, as may be amended from time to time, must be adhered to.
(b) The provisions of the Town of Clinton Code, Chapter 369: Massage Establishments and Practitioners, as may be amended from time to time, must be adhered to.
(c) The actual act of massage therapy and/or massage shall not be visible from any window or door.
(d) Parking and loading requirements shall comply with Section 33: Parking, of these Regulations.
12.25.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall submit a map showing all the properties and uses located within one thousand feet (1,000 ft.) of the property proposed to contain a massage establishment.
(b) Every two years, starting with the year of approval, the owner of the establishment shall file with the ZEO an Affidavit stating that the requirements of the Connecticut River Area Health District “Body Care Code” and the Town of Clinton Code, Chapter 369: Massage Establishments and Practitioners, have been met.
(c) Failure to provide the affidavit within sixty (60) days from every two (2) year anniversary year shall constitute a violation, which shall be grounds for
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12075
institution of enforcement actions that may result in the revocation of the approval such that it may be null and void.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12076
12.26 Tattoo Parlors and Body Piercing Salons
(Entire Section Amended 1/1/2012)
12.26.1 Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate uses which, because of their nature, are recognized as having potentially serious objectionable operational characteristics. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These Regulations protect health, general welfare and property values in the town of Clinton.
(Amended 4/30/2012)
12.26.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a Tattoo Parlor and/or Body Piercing Salons may be granted provided that:
(a) No tattoo parlor shall be located within one thousand feet (1,000 ft.) of the property line of any public, private or parochial school, day care center, library, park, playground or other recreational facility in any zone. Nor shall any such business be located within one thousand feet (1,000 ft.) of the property line of any church, convent, monastery, synagogue or other similar place of worship or cemetery.
(Amended 4/30/2012)
(1) For the purposes of this Section, distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion of the building containing or proposing to contain a tattoo parlor to the nearest boundary of the uses specified above.
(b) Tattoo parlors are not permitted in structures which contain accessory apartments or other dwelling units.
12.26.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) The actual act of applying tattoos to a person’s body shall not be visible from any doors or windows.
(b) Off-street parking and loading requirements shall comply with Section 33: Off-Street Parking, of these Regulations.
(Amended 4/30/2012)
12.26.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall submit a map showing all the properties and uses located within one thousand feet (1,000 ft.) of the property proposed to contain a tattoo parlor.
(Amended 4/30/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12077
12.27 Adult Entertainment Businesses
12.27.1 Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate uses which, because of their nature, are recognized as having potentially serious objectionable operational characteristics. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These Regulations prevent clustering of these uses in any one location and thereby protect health, general welfare and property values in the town of Clinton.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
12.27.2 Definitions:
(a) Adult Bookstore: An establishment which has as principal activity the sale of books, magazines, newspapers, videotapes, video discs and motion picture films which are characterized by their emphasis on portrayals of human genitals and public areas or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, and which establishment excludes minors by virtue of age.
(b) Adult Cabaret: A cabaret which features nude and/or partially nude dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dances, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers and which excludes minors by virtue of age.
(c) Adult Entertainment Business: Any establishment which is customarily not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of the public, thereby excluding any minor by reason of age. These include, but are not limited to, one or a combination of the following types of businesses: adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult cabaret, adult novelty business, and adult personal service business.
(d) Adult Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons having as a principal activity the displaying of motion pictures characterized by their emphasis on portrayals of human genitals and pubic regions or actions of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy for observation by patrons therein and from which minors are excluded by virtue of age.
(e) Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building having as a principal activity the presenting of material characterized by emphasis of portrayals of human genitals and pubic regions or actions of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy for observation by patrons therein in individual viewing booths and from which minors are excluded by virtue of age.
(f) Adult Novelty Business: A business which has as a principal activity the sale of devices of simulated human genitals or devices by design for sexual stimulation and which excludes minors by virtue of age.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12078
(g) Adult Personal Service Business: A business having as a principal activity a person, while nude or partially nude, providing personal services for a person of the same or other sex on an individual basis in an open or closed room and which excludes minors by virtue of age. It includes, but is not limited to, the following activities: massage parlors, exotic rubs, modeling studios, body painting studios, wrestling studios, and individual theatrical performances. It does not include activities performed by such persons pursuant to, and in accordance with, licenses issues to such persons by the State of Connecticut.
(h) Partially Nude: Having any or all of the following body parts exposed: buttocks, genitals, pubic area or female breasts.
(i) Principal Activity: A use accounting for more than twenty percent (20%) of a business’ stock in trade, display space, or floor space, or movie display time per month.
12.27.3 Qualifications: A Special Exception for an adult entertainment business may be approved provided that:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) No such adult entertainment business shall be located within one thousand feet (1,000 ft.) of the following:
(1) A district which, pursuant to these Regulations and the Zoning Map of the Town of Clinton is classified Residential, Village Zone or Business B-2.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(2) Another such adult entertainment business.
(3) The property line of any public, private or parochial school, day care center, library, park, playground or other recreational facility, whether commercial or non-profit, in any zone.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(4) The property line of any church, convent, monastery, synagogue or similar place of worship, places of public assembly, medical and dental offices.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(5) For the purposes of this Section, distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building containing or proposing to contain an adult entertainment use to the nearest boundary of the uses specified above.
(b) Adult Entertainment Businesses are not permitted in structures which contain accessory apartments or other dwelling units.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12079
12.27.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4, in addition to the following:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) Required Renewal:
(1) Purchasers of buildings that have had Special Exceptions for adult entertainment businesses who want to continue the Special Exception must obtain a Zoning Permit by demonstrating that all conditions prerequisite to obtaining the relevant permit have been met.
(2) Any such renewal must be referred to the Commission for consideration. The Commission, in its sole discretion, may require a new application and a demonstration of compliance with all conditions necessary for a Special Exception.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12080
12.28 Restaurants and other Food Service Establishments
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.28.1 Purpose: It is the purpose of these Regulations to allow Restaurants and other Food Service Establishments in specific business and industrial zones and within the Village Zone District and Marine Zone in a way that is compatible with the existing character of the neighborhood and so not to degrade the natural environment or negatively impact the public health, safety and property values, while providing economic growth for the Community.
12.28.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a restaurant or other food service establishment may be granted provided that:
(a) The lot shall be served by public water.
12.28.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) There shall be adequate parking spaces provide as required in Section 33: Off-Street Parking and Loading.
(b) The projected traffic to and from the establishment shall not result in any lowering of the traffic flow rating for the surrounding roadways.
12.28.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall provide a detailed traffic study completed by a certified traffic engineer.
(b) The applicant shall submit a letter from the Connecticut Water Company certifying that there is adequate water supply to the site.
(c) The Commission shall consider the impact on neighboring properties that have uses that are permitted as of right.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12081
12.29 Outdoor Seating for Restaurants and Other Food Service Establishments
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.29.1 Purpose: These Regulations seek to permit by Special Exception outdoor seating at restaurants and food service establishments in a manner that promotes businesses while keeping the harmony and scale of the surrounding areas.
12.29.2 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) There are to be no more than forty (40) outdoor seats provided.
(b) To allow for pedestrian circulation, a minimum of five feet (5’) of sidewalk along the curb and leading to the entrance of the establishment shall be maintained free of tables and other encumbrances.
(c) Planters, posts with ropes or other fixed or removable enclosures shall be used to define the outdoor eating area.
(d) Extended awnings, canopies, or large umbrellas shall be permitted and located to provide shade for patrons.
(e) Outdoor eating areas shall have additional outdoor trash receptacles.
(f) Tables, chairs, planters, trash receptacles and other elements of street furniture shall be compatible with the architectural character of the building where the outdoor eating area is located.
(g) Outdoor eating areas are not entitled to additional signage, beyond that permitted for the use.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12082
12.30 Take-out Restaurant
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.30.1 Purpose: It is the purpose of these Regulations to permit by Special Exception Take-out Restaurants in a way that is compatible with the overall character of the surrounding properties and so as to not degrade the natural environment or negatively impact the public health, safety and property values.
12.30.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a Take-out Restaurant may be granted provided that:
(a) The lot is served by public water.
12.30.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) The restaurant shall be served by public water.
(b) There shall be adequate parking spaces provided as required in Section 33: Off-Street Parking and Loading.
(c) The projected traffic to and from the establishment shall not result in any lowering of the traffic flow rating for the surrounding roadways.
(d) Glass shall occupy no more than thirty percent (30%) of the exterior wall surface of the building and all glass shall be tinted.
(e) The control of litter shall be the sole and exclusive responsibility of the owner/operator of the restaurant that generated it, and adequate provisions shall be made for its containment, recovery and removal from the site and from any surrounding properties where it may be found.
12.30.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall provide a detailed traffic study completed by a certified traffic engineer.
(b) The applicant shall submit a letter from the Connecticut Water Company certifying that there is adequate water supply to the site.
(c) As a part of the decision process, the Commission shall find that the Take-out Restaurant does not negatively impact the traffic flow of the area and is in harmony with the surrounding uses. In addition, the Commission shall consider the impact on neighboring properties that have uses that are permitted as of right.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12083
12.31 Indoor Theaters and Assembly Halls over 15,000 sq. ft.
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.31.1 Purpose: It is the purpose of these Regulations to permit indoor theaters and assembly halls that exceed 15,000 square feet of floor area in the Business Zones in a way that is compatible with the overall character of existing residential areas and so as to not degrade the natural environment or negatively impact the public health, safety, and property values.
12.31.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for an indoor theater or assembly hall may granted provided that:
(a) The lot shall be served by public water.
12.31.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) The facility shall be served by public water.
(b) There shall be adequate parking spaces as required in Section 33: Off-Street Parking and Loading.
(c) The projected traffic to and from the facility shall not result in any lowering of the traffic flow rating for the surrounding roadways.
(d) The post-construction traffic flow rate shall be a level B or higher.
12.31.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall provide a detailed traffic study completed by a certified traffic engineer.
(b) The applicant shall submit a letter from the Connecticut Water Company certifying that there is adequate water supply to the site.
(c) As a part of the decision process, the Commission:
(1) Shall find that the facility does not negatively impact the traffic flow of the area and is in harmony with the surrounding uses and the purpose and intent of the Regulations; and
(2) Shall consider the impact on neighboring properties that have uses that are permitted as of right.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12084
12.32 Limited Recreational Facility:
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.32.1 Purpose: These Regulations are intended to promote the development of limited recreational facilities which are compatible with the surrounding area and contribute to the unique community character and economic viability of the town of Clinton.
(a) These Regulations apply to athletic fields, tennis courts, golf courses, public swimming pools and skateboard parks only.
12.32.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a limited recreational facility may be granted provided that:
(a) The lot shall be a minimum of two (2) acres.
12.32.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) Sale or rental of equipment, accessories, clothing and similar items in a “pro shop” shall be considered accessory uses to a limited recreational facility provided that:
(1) Such uses are of such character, size and intensity as to conform to the definition of accessory uses as set forth in these Regulations; and
(2) Such facilities that are located in residential zones, such sale or rental shall not occur on any day when the subject recreational facility is not open to its patrons.
(b) Lighting:
(1) All lighting fixtures used for event lighting shall be fully shielded, or be designed to minimize up-light, spill-light and glare.
(2) The maximum height is thirty-five feet (35’)
(3) The applicant must meet the guidelines established by the current Electrical Institute of Engineers for recreational lighting, and all the requirements of these Regulations.
(4) Poles are to be located at least one hundred feet (100’) from residential zones or property lines.
12.32.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12085
(a) For applications for golf courses and athletic fields:
(1) The applicant shall provide detailed information concerning the sources of irrigation waters and volumes required and the method of distribution and application.
(2) The applicant shall also provide detailed information concerning the following:
(i) The fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides and other chemicals to be employed in/at the facility.
(ii) The quantities to be stored on-site and the precautions to be taken in their storage and handling;
(iii) A monitoring plan to ensure early detection of groundwater contamination.
(3) In making a decision on an application for golf courses and athletic fields, the Commission shall consider following:
(i) The potential impacts on the volume of surface and subsurface waters available to surrounding or down-gradient properties and shall require the efficient use of irrigation waters;
(ii) The use of best management practices (BMP’s) for the storage, handling and application of lawn care chemicals, to minimize adverse impacts to ground and surface waters; and
(iii) The adequacy of the applicant’s long-term groundwater monitory program.
(b) For applications for tennis courts and skateboard parks:
(1) The applicant shall provide a detailed schedule of trash and litter removal.
(2) The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the security measures for the facility.
(c) In making a decision on an application for a limited recreational facility in the R-60 and R-80 zones, the Commission shall treat the use as a non-residential activity in a residential zone, and shall take into consider the following:
(1) The size and location of the proposed use;
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12086
(2) The nature and intensity of the operations involved;
(3) The size of the site with respect to the existing or future street(s) giving access to it; and
(4) Other factors so as to ensure that the proposed recreational facility shall be such that it will be in harmony with the orderly development of the area.
(5) The location, nature and height of buildings, walls, and fences shall not discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent residential land and buildings for residential uses nor impair the value thereof.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12087
12.33 Bowling Alleys and Billiard or Pool Halls
(Section Added 1/1/2012)
12.33.1 Purpose: It is the purpose of these Regulations to permit bowling alleys and billiard or pool halls in a way that is compatible with the overall character of the surrounding area and so as to not degrade the natural environment or negatively impact the public health, safety and property values.
12.33.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a bowling alley, billiard or may be granted provided that:
(a) No such use shall be located within one thousand feet (1000’) of any property contain the same or similar use, church, school, day care facility or any property that sells or serves alcoholic beverages.
12.33.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the structure shall be utilized for retail and/or food service upon approval a Special Exception for that use.
(b) There shall be no outside storage.
(c) All dumpsters shall be screened on three sides and located so as not to be in the public view.
12.33.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall submit a landscaping plan.
(b) The applicant shall submit a photometric plan showing both normal and security lighting.
(c) The applicant shall submit a litter control plan.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12088
12.34 Commercial Recreational Facilities
(Section added 1/1/2012 & Amended 1/1/2015)
12.34.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to permit Commercial Recreational Facilities in a way that ensures that this use is compatible with the surrounding areas, contributes to the economic viability of the town of Clinton and protects the public health, safety and welfare.
(Amended 1/1/2015)
12.34.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for an Commercial Recreational Facility may be granted provided that:
(Amended 1/1/2015)
(a) The lot must be served by public water.
(b) The minimum lot area for an Outdoor Commercial Recreational Facility shall be a minimum of eighty thousand square feet (80,000 sq. ft.).
(Amended 1/1/2015)
12.34.3 Standards and Qualifications: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) Indoor Commercial Recreational Facility Type A:
(Added 1/1/2015)
(1) The facility shall be located entirely within a structure.
(2) If the facility is to be located within an existing structure, there shall be no limit on the footprint of the structure.
(Amended 6/1/2015)
(3) The footprint of each new structure shall not exceed seventy thousand square feet (70,000 sq. ft.).
(Amended 6/1/2015)
(4) Recreational activities shall not include adult-orientated entertainment establishments, as defined in Section 12.27.
(5) The facility shall only operate between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m.
(6) No more than 25% of any structure may be utilized for retail and/or food service as an accessory use.
(i) The retail or food service accessory use shall not operate when the recreational facility is not open for recreational activities.
(b) Indoor Commercial Recreational Facility Type B:
(Amended 1/1/2015)
(1) Facilities shall be located within a structure that may be easily converted to other uses permitted in the zone.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12089
(2) The footprint of each structure shall not exceed forty thousand square feet (40,000 sq. ft.)
(Amended 1/1/2015)
(3) Recreational activities shall not include adult-orientated entertainment establishments, as defined in Section 12.27.
(4) No more than fifty percent (50%) of the open floor area shall be devoted to games and/or entertainment devices and equipment that are electrically or electronically controlled.
(5) Facilities shall only operate between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m.
(6) All separate rooms, alcoves and portions of the facility shall be arranged so that there is an attendant within the room or such that the attendant can easily supervise all rooms.
(c) Outdoor Commercial Recreational Facility:
(Amended 1/1/2015)
(1) There shall be a fifty foot (50’) buffer on the sides and rear of the property, and a 30’ landscaped front yard.
(2) There shall be appropriate safety fencing either around the facility or property.
(3) Facilities shall only operate between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(4) Lighting shall conform to the following standards:
(i) All fixtures used shall be fully shielded, or be designed to minimize up-light, spill-light and glare.
(ii) The applicant must meet the guidelines established by the current Electrical Institute of Engineers for recreational lighting and all the requirements of these Regulations.
(iii) Poles higher than thirty feet (30’) are permitted provided that the Commission considers the impact on the following:
(I) Effects on the existing uses in the area; and
(II) Conservation of surrounding property values and the character of the neighborhood.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12090
12.34.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall submit a photometric plan.
(b) The applicant shall submit a landscaping plan.
(c) The applicant shall submit a litter control plan.
(Added 1/1/2015)
(d) The applicant shall submit a traffic study.
(Added 1/1/2015)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12091
12.35 Riding Academies and Boarding Stables
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.35.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to encourage the development of riding academies and boarding stables in a way that is compatible with the surrounding area and protects the public health, safety and welfare.
12.35.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a riding academy and boarding stable may be granted provided that:
(a) Boarding stables and riding academies shall not be permitted on a parcel that is less than five (5) acres.
12.35.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) All areas where horses are to be pastured, exercised or otherwise maintained shall be fenced so as to contain the horses within the property.
(b) No stable, paddock or other structure or enclosure designed or intended for overnight occupancy or exercise by horses shall be less than seventy-five feet (75’) from any property line.
(c) Pasture areas, or other large, open areas for the grazing of horses, shall be no less than five feet (5’) from the property line.
(d) All manure and stable sweepings from horses in buildings shall be enclosed in a watertight enclosure designed to prevent the escape of odor or access by insects or other pests.
(1) Such containers shall be emptied regularly or otherwise disposed of so as to control odors or risks to public health.
(2) No such container shall be located less than one hundred feet (100’) from any property line.
(e) The maximum number of resident horses shall not exceed three (3) horses for every forty thousand square feet (40,000 sq. ft.) of land.
(f) The use of temporary buildings, trailers or tents for the stabling of horses is prohibited. All materials, supplies and feed shall be enclosed within a permanent building.
(g) The premises shall be designed and used so as to avoid noise levels which are a nuisance to surrounding property owners. Public address systems are prohibited.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12092
(h) There shall be no floodlighting which transmits light outside the property upon which it originates.
12.35.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations in addition to the following:
(a) A lighting plan shall be submitted with the application
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12093
12.36 Commercial Kennels
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.36.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to encourage the development of commercial kennels in a way that is compatible with the surrounding area and to protect the public health, safety and property values.
12.36.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a commercial kennel may be granted provided that:
(a) Commercial dog kennels shall not be permitted on a parcel less than five (5) acres in area.
12.36.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) No building, run, pen or other structure or enclosure designed or intended for occupancy by animals shall be less than two hundred feet (200’) from any property line.
(b) All runs, pens or other enclosures designed or intended for occupancy by animals shall be surrounded by walls or earthen berms no less than six feet (6’) in height.
(c) All buildings or structures for occupancy by animals shall be fully enclosed, with walls, roof and windows, and shall be ventilated by louvered or baffled opening or by mechanical ventilation equipment.
(d) All waste from animals shall be enclosed in a watertight enclosure designed to prevent the escape of odor or access by insects or other pests.
(1) Such container shall be emptied regularly or otherwise disposed of so as to control odor or risks to the public health.
12.36.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12094
12.37 Veterinary Hospitals
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.37.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to promote the development of veterinary hospitals in a way that is compatible with the surrounding area and protects the public health, safety, welfare and property values.
12.37.2 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception for a Veterinary Hospital with a floor area over 15,000 square feet or with a ground floor area up to 5,000 square feet in the Village Zone, may be granted in districts permitting Veterinary Hospitals provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) No building, run, pen or other structure designed or intended for the occupancy by animals shall be less than one hundred feet (100’) from any property line.
(b) All runs, pens or other enclosures designed or intended for occupancy by animals shall be surrounded by walls or earthen berms no less than six feet (6’) in height.
(c) All buildings or structures for occupancy by animals shall be fully enclosed, with walls, roof and windows and shall be ventilated by louvered or baffled openings or by mechanical ventilation equipment to control noise.
(d) All waste from animals shall be enclosed in a watertight enclosure designed to prevent the escape of odor or access by insects or other pests.
(1) Such container shall be emptied regularly or otherwise disposed of so as to control odor or risks to public health.
12.37.3 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12095
12.38 Farms:
(Added 6/1/2014 & Amended 10/1/2014)
12.38.1 Purpose:
(a) It is the purpose of this section to govern without limitation, the following: the land and on-farm buildings, equipment, manure processing and handling facilities, and practices which contribute to the production, preparation and marketing of agricultural and horticultural commodities, crops, livestock and livestock products as a commercial enterprise, including field crops, maple sap, nurseries, Christmas trees derived from a managed Christmas tree operation whether dug for transplanting or cut from the stump.
12.38.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a farming operation may be granted provided that:
(a) Farms shall not be permitted on a lot containing less than three (3) acres of land.
12.38.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the Commission determines that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) Except as otherwise provided herein, the keeping of livestock shall adhere to the provisions of Section 28.1(h).
(b) The number of livestock to be permitted per lot shall be determined by the required report of the Connecticut Department of Agriculture.
(c) Any production, processing, preparation or storage of horticultural commodities including compost, mulch, manure or other biomass products shall be required to meet the following additional standards:
(1) Thirty-five feet (35’) setback from any residential property.
(2) One hundred feet (100’) setback from any well or water body from which water is taken for human consumption.
(3) Preparation or processing of compost, mulch or manure shall take place Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(4) The deliveries of materials for preparation or processing of compost, mulch or manure shall take place Monday through Saturday between 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12096
(5) There shall be a twenty-five feet (25’) vegetative buffer along all property lines that abut residential uses and/or districts to reduce noise emanating from the preparation or processing operation.
(6) The production, processing, preparation and storage of horticultural commodities as specified above shall not exceed fifteen thousand square feet (15,000 sq. ft.).
12.38.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations in addition to the following:
(a) When the application involves the production, processing, preparation or storage of horticulture commodities, the applicant shall submit an operational plan which shall demonstrate standard operating procedures and best management practices.
(b) Within thirty (30) days of the commencement of the use, the applicant shall provide to the ZEO, and each year thereafter the following information:
(1) Report of inspection by the Fire Marshal.
(2) To the extent required, report of inspection by the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
(3) Report of inspection from the Connecticut Department of Agriculture, as to whether the Farm is in compliance with generally accepted agricultural practices are defined by the Department of Agriculture as methods of managing a farm operation that do not violate federal, state, or local laws; damage public health or safety and welfare; and that are customary in the agricultural industry.
(4) Report of inspection from the State or Local Health Department.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12097
12.39 Farmer’s Markets
12.39.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to allow for and regulate farmer’s markets, which are not otherwise regulated under the Farm Tourism Regulations (Section 12.40)
12.39.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a farmer’s market may be granted provided that:
(a) A farmer’s market under these Regulations must meet the definition of “Certified Farmer’s Markets” as stated in CGS Section 22-6r, as may be amended from time to time.
(b) “Fresh produce”, “farmer’s kiosk”, “farm” and “farm products” shall have the same meanings as defined in CGS Section 22-6r, as may be amended from time to time.
12.39.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) Operation of the farmer’s market may not exceed two days in any seven days.
(b) The hours of operation shall begin no earlier than 7:30 a.m. nor end any later than 10:00 p.m.
(c) The number of parking spaces shall be provided as determined by the Commission in order to maintain the purpose and intent of the parking regulations, in accordance with Section 33.11: Parking Space Standards.
(d) When new buildings and/or structures are to be constructed or modifications to the exterior of any existing building and/or structure are proposed, the proposed design shall have similar and compatible characteristics to the development existing in the surrounding area of such building/structure.
(1) Such similar and compatible characteristics shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of building bulk size, architectural features including windows/doors and façade lengths and heights as well as building finishes, lighting fixtures design and signage; and overall site design including landscaping.
12.39.4 Procedures: Applications shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The required Statement of Use shall include the following information:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12098
(1) A list of the proposed products to be offered together with a copy of the certificate from the Connecticut Commission of the Department of Agriculture authorizing the farmer’s market to operate.
(2) The proposed hours of operation.
(3) Whether the proposed use is periodic or seasonal so that the Commission can determine if areas are capable of having multiple uses throughout the year.
(b) The location of any periodic versus seasonal uses shall be shown on the site plan.
(c) When new buildings and/or structure are to be constructed or modifications to the exterior of any existing building or structure, architect prepared floor plans and building elevations shall be required.
The application shall include drawings which will demonstrate that the proposed design will have similar and compatible characteristics to the development existing in the surrounding area of such building/structure.
(d) A lighting plan shall be required with each application.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(e) A traffic study shall be required for each application.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12099
12.40 Farm Tourism Uses
12.40.1 Purpose: These Regulations are intended to ensure that farm tourism and the expansion of existing farm tourism uses are compatible with the permitted uses in the surrounding area and contribute to the unique community character and economic viability.
These Regulations permit farm tourism as compatible accessory uses. It is recognized that the magnitude of these accessory uses are often greater than the uses that surround farms. While the use or the accumulation of, farm tourism uses should be incidental and subordinate to the use of the property for farming, they require the greater level of regulatory scrutiny that is afforded under the Special Exception permit.
12.40.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a farm tourism use may be granted provided that:
(a) The minimum lot area for farm tourism shall not be less than five (5) acres.
(b) As of the date of application for a Special Exception, no zoning violation shall exist on the property. The applicant shall submit a current Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
(c) Regulation of farm stands is distinct from farm tourism and is permitted under the separate definition in Section 3.7.3, tables of allowed uses in Sections 27.1.44 and 27.2.44, both title “Nurseries; fruit, vegetable or farm stands; farms and commercial greenhouses”, and requirements in Section 28.1.4(g), which is part of “Accessory Uses, Home Occupations and Alternative Energy Systems”.
12.40.3 Standards: Not all of the standards listed below shall apply to every property which is the subject of an application. To the extent that the Commission finds that each does apply, a Special Exception for the farm tourism shall not be granted unless the Commission also finds that the applicable standards have been met:
(a) Farm tourism use(s) shall have a direct supportive relationship to the farming taking place on the farm; as a minimum, the farm tourism use must provide an opportunity for sales of produce from the on-site farming.
(b) The farm tourism use must utilize at least one produce produced on, or process from the product produced on the farm.
(c) Food preparation for events shall be limited to that which is essential to the event (such as: pumpkin pie with a pumpkin festival, vendor food with a fair) for which the application is being made.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12100
(d) The following table gives the maximum allowed aggregate area for farm tourism use(s) on various size farm properties:
Farm Related Economic Development (FRED) Area Table Lot Acreage
5
15
25
35
45
55
65
75
85
95
100 & > Tourism Acreage
2.50
3.82
5.12
6.45
7.76
9.08
10.35
11.71
13.03
14.34
15.00
Lot area shall be rounded to the nearest half (½) acre following standard rules. For each half (½) acre more of lot area between denominations of 10 add 0.0657894 acres to the allowed farm tourism area.
(e) The farm tourism use(s) shall comply with the General Condition of Section 11.2.3, with particular regard to the level of the street (progressing from low to high; local, collector, arterial) to which traffic from the accessory farm tourism use would access and egress. The traffic access egress deficiencies may be offset if formal agreements are established for off-site parking and a safe off-road pedestrian access way between the sites is provided. Such offsets must be evidenced by documents provided to the Commission assuring such offsets for the duration of the activity under the Special Exception.
(f) On the farm, a vegetative buffer shall separate farm tourism uses (e.g. pick-your-own fields, hiking trails and hay wagon ride routes) from non-farming uses. A minimum width of fifteen feet (15’) on and/or off the farm property shall be required. Permanent open space easements/dedications on or obtained from abutting properties may be substituted for the on-site buffer. The documentation for which shall be subject to approval by the Commission.
(g) On the farm, a vegetative and/or structural sound buffer (e.g. sound deadening barriers or buildings) shall be capable of eliminating noise outside farm tourism uses so that it is not plainly audible at a distance of thirty feet (30’) in any direction from the property boundary.
(1) The Commission may accept in lieu of a vegetative and/or structural sound buffer, a report from a qualified Sound Engineer certifying that the activity(s) being applied for are able to be conducted in such a manner that the activity(s) is not plainly audible at a distance of thirty feet (30’) in any direction outside the property boundary. The report shall describe the requirements necessary for conducting the activity in order for conducting the activity in order for it to comply.
(h) The minimum distance of any uses that generate smoke, heat or ash shall be seventy-five feet (75’) from any property line;
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12101
(i) The hours of operation shall not be extended before 9:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and before 9:00 a.m. and after 12:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday, except for specific events as allowed in Section 12.40.4.
(j) The number of events which require permitting under Section 12.40.4(b), Category B, within a given calendar year shall be limited to eight (8), unless the applicant can demonstrate to the ZEO that there will be no greater impact on neighboring properties than the activities permitted under Section 12.40.4(a), Category A.
(k) Public health requirements for potable water and waste disposal shall be met with permanent facilities.
(1) If not regulated by the Public Health Code, temporary sanitary facilities, such as chemical toilets, shall be required for any event or use where patrons will be on site on average of more than two (2) hours, for which there are no facilities available to the public within five hundred feet (500’).
(2) If the use is temporary, the facilities shall only be required on site for the periods in which the use is taking place.
(3) The Public Health Code shall prevail in cases where such facilities are regulated under the Code.
(l) Proposed structures shall reflect or accent existing farm structures with historical and/or architectural character which the Commission determines should be maintained.
(m) The Commission may excuse or allow the substitution of alternative features, for such things as buffers, fencing or distance from property lines, with respect to site specific physical features of a particular farm, if the Commission finds that the excusing or substitution of alternative features serves the intent of the standard(s) being excused or for which an alternative feature is allowed.
12.40.4 Requirements: The following uses shall be considered accessory to the existing farming uses as long as they take place as required below. In aggregate, areas outdoors for these uses shall not exceed those provided for in the “Farm Related Economic Development (FRED) Table” above. When indoors, the portion of the structure(s) utilized for farm tourism use(s) shall be deducted from the FRED:
(a) Category A: Continuous Activity:
(1) Retail and wholesale of agricultural products: New or temporary structure(s), or the floor area within an existing or temporary structure,
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12102
housing this use shall not exceed two thousand five hundred square feet (2,500 sq. ft.) of floor area;
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(2) The retail of handcrafts and artisan items: New or temporary structure(s) or the floor area within an existing or temporary structure, housing this use shall not exceed two thousand five hundred square feet (2,500 sq. ft.) of floor area;
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(3) Agricultural education instruction: New or temporary structure(s) or the floor area within an existing or temporary structure, housing this use shall not exceed one thousand eight hundred square feet (1,800 sq. ft.) of floor area.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(4) Demonstration of production of furniture, black smith items, quilts, fabrics or similar products made utilizing traditional processes: New or temporary structure(s) or the floor area within an existing or temporary structure, housing this use shall not exceed two thousand five hundred square feet (2,500 sq. ft.) of floor area.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(5) Restaurant (Level 1): New or temporary structure(s) or the floor area within an existing or temporary structure, housing this use shall not exceed one thousand eight hundred square feet (1,800 sq. ft.) of floor area where customers are served at counters with no more than a total of thirty-five seats (whether indoor or outdoor).
(Amended 1/1/2012 & 7/1/2013)
(6) Restaurant (Level 2): New or temporary structure(s) or the floor area within an existing or temporary structure, housing this use shall not exceed one thousand eight hundred square feet (1,800 sq. ft.) of floor area where customers are served indoors, at tables, with no more than thirty-five seats.
(Amended 7/1/2013)
(i) Under no circumstances shall the hours be extended earlier than 9:00 a.m. or later than 10:00 p.m.
(Amended 7/1/2013)
(b) Category B: Events, which require a permit from the ZEO:
(1) Agricultural fairs, festivals, markets, carnivals and similar functions:
(i) New or temporary structure(s) or the floor area within an existing or temporary structure, housing this use shall not exceed one thousand eight hundred square feet (1,800 sq. ft.) of floor area.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(2) Outdoor and indoor musical concerts, plays, operas and other performance arts events, art exhibits and shows:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12103
(i) New or temporary structure(s) or the floor area within an existing or temporary structure, housing this use shall not exceed one thousand eight hundred square feet (1,800 sq. ft.) of floor area;
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(ii) The hours of operation may be extended based on the nature and timing of each event if the applicant can demonstrate utilizing the same standards as in Section 12.40.3 above, that there will be no adverse impact on the neighborhood. Under no circumstances shall the hours be extended earlier than 7:00 a.m. or later than 11:00 p.m.
(3) Gathering events such as parties, receptions, weddings, reunions and services, whether catered or not:
(i) New or temporary structure(s) or the floor area within an existing or temporary structure, housing this use shall not exceed one thousand eight hundred square feet (1,800 sq. ft.).
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(I) When used in this category, tents (otherwise a temporary structure) may exceed the area limitations, above.
(Amended – Effective 7/1/2010)
(II) However, they must be put up no more than two (2) days in advance of the event and removed from the property, unless it is to be stored in a permanent structure located on the site, no more than two (2) days after the event for which they are first set up.
(Amended – Effective 7/1/2010)
(ii) Areas outdoors for this use shall not exceed one quarter (¼) of the minimum lot size for the zone in which it is located. If the property is in multiple zones, the lesser of lot size requirements shall be applied.
(iii) The hours of operation may be extended based on the nature and timing of each event if the applicant can demonstrate using the same steps in Section 12.40.3 above, that there will be no adverse impact on the neighborhood. Under no circumstance shall the hours be extended earlier than 7:00 a.m. or later than 11:00 p.m.
(c) Regulation of Use:
(1) As part of an approval for a farm tourism site plan, the Commission shall approve the location on the property that will be devoted to farm tourism;
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12104
(i) The location and size shall be dependent upon the potential impact to the surrounding land uses and public infrastructure. The standards set forth in Section 12.40.3 above, shall be the criteria by which potential impacts shall be determined acceptable or unacceptable.
(ii) The maximum area for farm tourism cannot exceed that given in the table at 12.40.3(d), above.
(2) The distance of farm tourism uses that contain or have site lighting to abutting properties shall be sufficient to buffer those properties from the effect of site lighting. The minimum distance shall be fifteen feet (15’) from any property line. Permanent open space easements/dedications on, or obtained from, abutting properties may be part of the protection of abutting properties from the effect of site lighting.
(3) For site where there will be less than ten thousand square feet (10,000 sq. ft.) of disturbance that would not have to provide a soil and erosion control plan in accordance with Section 30, the utilization of appropriate mitigation methods as outlined in the “2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control,” as the same may be amended from time to time, shall be employed to reduce potential impacts of soil erosion and sediment.
(4) The utilization of appropriate mitigation methods as outlined in the “2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual”, as the same may be amended from time to time shall be employed to reduce potential impacts of stormwater.
12.40.5 Procedure:
(a) At the first regular meeting of the Commission after submission of the Application, the Commission shall make a finding as to which of the lettered Standards in Section 12.40.3, above, are not applicable to the subject Application and shall so advise the Applicant.
(b) In granting a Special Exception for farm tourism, the Commission shall specify the type of accessory uses and the conditions upon them that will be allowed within the farm tourism area which they have approved on the site plan.
(c) The ZEO shall be authorized to issue as-of-right permits as specified below:
(1) With the FRED approved as part of a Special Exception granted under this Section, the ZEO may administratively permit events in Category B,
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12105
above. Unless specifically included in an approval, any activity not listed in 12.40.4(b) above, shall require a modification of the Special Exception approval from the Commission. In approving an application, the Commission may specify a category for the unlisted use so that the ZEO can be allowed to approve substitutions for it.
(2) Subsequent to the original approval, unless specifically prohibited in the Special Exception, the ZEO shall be authorized to administratively permit modifications of uses contained in Section 12.40.4(b), above, with others in the same category, if they can meet the Standards contained in Section 12.04.3 and the Requirements contained in Section 12.40.4 without necessitating an increase in the percentage of the property permitted by the Commission for farm tourism.
(d) If a violation of the Special Exception is found, a warning shall be issued. Two (2) violations within a year shall be grounds for review by the Commission of the Special Exception for farm tourism. If the Commission finds the violations create an impact that relate to the criteria in Section 12.40.3 that did not exist at the time of approval, then it may initiate legal procedures to revoke the Special Exception approval.
(e) Application Requirements:
(1) The required Statement of Use shall include the following information:
(i) The proposed uses for the property;
(ii) The proposed hours of operation for each use proposed; and
(iii) The anticipated periods or seasons (approximate dates) the uses will occur for each proposed use.
(2) The required site plan shall show the following information:
(i) The areas devoted to farming versus farm tourism;
(ii) The areas to be used for specific farm tourism uses within the farm tourism area shall be noted;
(iii) Uses that are periodic or seasonal should be noted so that the Commission can determine if areas are capable of having multiples uses throughout the year;
(iv) Lighting meeting the requirements in Section 12.40.4(c)(2), above.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12106
(3) When new buildings and/or structures are to be constructed or modification to the exterior of any existing building or structure, architect prepared floor plans and building elevations shall be required.
(i) The application shall include drawings which will demonstrate that the proposed design will have similar and compatible characteristics to the development existing in the surrounding area of such building/structure.
(ii) Such similar and compatible characteristics shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of building bulk size, architectural features including windows/doors and façade lengths and heights as well as building finishes, lighting fixtures design and signage; and overall site design including landscaping.
(4) A lighting plan shall be required with each application.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(5) A traffic study shall be required for each application.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12107
12.41 Philanthropic, Educational or Religious Uses
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.41.1 Purpose: These Regulations are intended to promote the development of philanthropic, education or religious uses in a way that is harmonious with the surrounding areas and does not degrade the public health, safety and property values.
12.41.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a philanthropic, education or religious use may be granted provided that:
(a) The owner/applicant is either a duly incorporated non-profit body or governmental unit.
(b) The facility is considered to be one of the following or similar:
(1) Private school
(2) College or university
(3) Museum
(4) Library
(5) Charitable institution
(6) Cemetery
(7) Place of worship
(8) Parish hall
(9) Fraternal society
(10) Senior center
(c) The subject parcel is served by public water.
12.41.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criterion is met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions in Section 11:
(a) The facility shall be served by public water.
12.41.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12108
(a) The applicant shall submit a lighting plan that shows that there is no glare onto abutting properties.
(b) The applicant shall submit a landscaping plan.
(c) The applicant shall submit a traffic generation study.
(d) The applicant shall provide proof of the organizations non-profit status.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12109
12.42 Buildings, Uses and Facilities of the Town of Clinton, State of Connecticut, Federal Government and Other Governmental Agencies over 15,000 sq. ft.
12.42.1 Purpose: These Regulations are intended to promote the development of buildings, uses and facilities of the Town of Clinton, State of Connecticut, Federal Government and other governmental agencies that exceed 15,000 square feet of floor area in a way that is compatible with the surrounding areas and does not degrade the public health, safety and property values.
12.42.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a building, use or facility of the Town of Clinton, State of Connecticut, Federal Government or other governmental agency may be granted provided that:
(a) In Residential Districts, the minimum lot area of the subject lot shall not be less than the district requirement.
12.42.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) The footprint of any municipal, state or federal building shall be governed by the requirements of the use proposed and shall not be subject to the requirements of Section 26.11.21 (Maximum footprint of any single building). The footprint may exceed 10,000 or 40,000 square feet as the zone may specify.
12.42.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The following shall be submitted:
(1) Lighting Plan
(2) Landscaping Plan
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12110
12.43 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
12.43.1 Intent: Recent advances in wireless communications technology have resulted in a new generation of telecommunication services. These new services transmit electromagnetic waves of such a frequency and power that will likely require numerous antenna locations. These antennas may be located on buildings, water towers and other similar structures, but will also frequently be located on new or enlarged towers. This requires the Town of Clinton regulate these wireless telecommunication system facilities in a different manner than conventional television and radio transmission towers which are able to transmit their signals at much greater distances and from a lower height.
A number of providers of wireless communications services has recently been licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and additional providers are expected to be licensed in the near future. These firms are expected to pursue antenna sites within the town of Clinton and these efforts are expected to include requests to construct new communication towers.
The intent of these Regulations is to provide for the establishment and/or expansion of wireless telecommunication services within the town of Clinton while protesting neighborhoods and minimizing the adverse visual and operational effects of wireless telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting and screening. More specifically this Regulation has been developed to:
(a) Update Clinton’s Zoning Regulations to comply with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and provide for the establishment and expansion of wireless telecommunications services;
(b) Minimize the number and height of towers and encourage the use and the joint use of new towers and existing structures for the placement of telecommunications antennas;
(c) Provide for the needs of the town of Clinton for:
(1) Public health and safety;
(2) Telecommunications facilities for Clinton’s citizens and Clinton’s business and industrial sector;
(3) Protection of sensitive areas from adverse aesthetic and environmental impacts from telecommunications facilities.
(d) Maximize use of existing and approved towers and other structures to accommodate new antennas and transmitters in order to reduce the number of communication towers needed to serve the community;
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12111
(e) Encourage providers to co-locate their facilities on a single tower or structure;
(f) Site facilities below visually prominent ridge lines;
(g) Minimize the location of towers and antennas in visually sensitive areas;
(h) Minimize the location and antennas in visually sensitive areas;
(i) Encourage creative design measures to camouflage facilities;
(j) Protect historic and residential areas from potential adverse impacts of such towers; and
(k) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structure.
12.43.2 Definitions: For the purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the stated definitions:
(a) Antenna: A device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves. Examples include, but are not limited to, whip antennas, panel antennas and dish antennas.
(b) Applicant: The licensed carrier, provider and landowner, acting jointly.
(c) Base: The location where a tower is attached to its foundation.
(d) Base Equipment: A structure or building at the base of the mount or a box located inside such structure or building within which is housed service, electrical and back-up power equipment.
(e) Base Height: The maximum building height in the subject zone plus ten feet (10’).
(f) Bond: An amount of money secured by the commission for the removal of the wireless telecommunications facility, if said facility is abandoned and not removed by the applicant. The bond should be posted as required in Section 8: Performance Bond Procedures and Bond Agreements, of these Regulations.
(g) Co-location (Co-located): The use of a single mount or site by more than one licensed carrier. Co-location also means locating a wireless telecommunications facility on an existing structure (e.g. water tower) or building provided that the facility does not extend beyond ten feet (10’) above the mount or, for electric transmission tower mounts, the facility does not extend beyond fifteen feet (15’) above the mount.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12112
(h) Fall Zone: The distance equaling the height of a tower from any property line of the proposed site except in those instances where the antenna is co-located on an existing structure.
(i) Height of Tower: The vertical distance measure in feet from the lowest existing ground elevation of such tower base to the topmost point of the tower including any antenna or other appurtenances. The “existing ground elevation” shall mean the actual elevations of the property at the time of adoption of this Section (June 1, 2001), or the elevation approved by the Commission in connection with any application file hereunder.
(j) Licensed Carrier (Provider): A company authorized by the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) to build and operate the proposed wireless telecommunication facility.
(k) Mount: The structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted. There are three types of mounts:
(1) Roof-mounted: Mounted on the roof of a building;
(2) Side-mounted: Mounted on the side or façade of a building; or
(3) Ground-mounted: Mounted on the ground, including mounting on a tower.
(l) Not Sensitive: All areas not categorized as sensitive.
(m) Not Visible: The base, base equipment and lower 50% of a tower is behind a building of at least one story in height or a stand of trees (the average height of which is not lower than twenty feet (20’) and which in the winter screens at least 80% of the base, base equipment and lower part of the tower), as viewed by an observer from any sensitive area.
(n) Sensitive: Historic areas, residential areas and other areas.
(1) Historic areas include any existing or future Historic District, whether designated by the local, state or Federal government, in the town of Clinton, and properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places or areas within two hundred fifty feet (250’) of such district or properties.
(2) Residential areas include residential zones or areas within two hundred fifty feet (250’) of such zones.
(3) Other areas including the Village Zone.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12113
(o) Wireless Telecommunications Facility (Facilities): The mount including any antennas or other appurtenances for the provision of wireless telecommunications services, including but not limited to those services defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
(p) Tower: A mount structure that is intended solely to support equipment used to receive and/or transmit electromagnetic waves. Design examples of towers include, but are not limited to, self-supporting lattice, guyed and monopole.
(q) Visible: The base, base equipment and lower 50% of a tower is visible to a higher degree than a tower that is not visible, as viewed by an observer from any sensitive area.
12.43.3 General Requirements:
(a) Co-location Encouraged: Co-location is encouraged and preferred to the construction of a new mount or tower.
(1) The applicant shall commit to allow co-location in accordance with this Section.
(2) Applicant shall provide a description of existing telecommunication tower or other suitable mounts in the service area and documentation indicating why their telecommunication antennas cannot be mounted on these towers.
(i) Such documentation shall include demonstration that the shared use is not technically, legally or environmentally feasible; or for towers constructed prior to the effective date of this section, that the shared use is not economically feasible or that the owner of such facility/facilities has refused permission for the share use.
(3) The owner of any tower approved under this Section shall be required to make space available for additional antennas to the maximum feasible number of other users, including competitors.
(i) Such availability shall be made under commercially reasonable terms and conditions.
(ii) Failure of an owner to share use of tower approved hereunder shall constitute a violation of any permit issued to such owner, and shall be grounds for the Commission, upon public hearing and notice to the owner, to revoke such permit.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12114
(4) In the event co-location is found not to be feasible by the applicant, the Commission may retain a technical expert to verify if co-location at the site is feasible or is not feasible.
(i) The cost for such a technical expert will be at the expense of the applicant, and such cost shall be reimbursed prior to the decision on any pending application.
(ii) Failure to reimburse the Commission for such costs shall be grounds for denial of the application without prejudice.
(b) Alternate Sites: The Commission may require the investigation of alternate sites by the applicant and demonstration of a good faith effort to co-locate with other carriers.
(1) Such good faith effort includes contact with all other licensed carriers licensed to operate a wireless telecommunications facility in Clinton.
(2) In the event the applicant finds alternate sites not to be feasible, the Commission may retain a technical expert to verify if the alternate site is feasible or not.
(i) The cost for such a technical expert will be at the expense of the applicant, and such cost shall be reimbursed prior to the decision on any pending application.
(ii) Failure to reimburse the Commission for such costs shall be grounds for denial of the application without prejudice.
(c) Principal or Accessory Uses: Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. An existing telecommunication facility or other use on the site shall not necessarily preclude the location of a new facility on the site, if the new facility meets the intent, standards and requirements of these Regulations.
(d) Compliance with Other Laws: The applicant shall present that the proposal meets the minimum standards and requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or any other applicable Town, State or Federal codes, standards or requirements.
(e) No Negative Impacts: If any proposed facility is found by the Commission to result in significant negative impacts on the public health, safety or welfare, it shall not be approved.
(1) Such significant negative impacts will not include the health or environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12115
such emissions comply with standards adopted by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
(f) Abandonment/Discontinuation: At such time that a licensed carrier plans to abandon or discontinue operation of a wireless telecommunications facility, such carrier will notify the Commission by certified US postal service at least thirty (30) days prior to the cease of operations. Such notice shall be given no fewer than thirty (30) days prior to abandonment or discontinuation of operations.
(1) In the event that a licensed carrier fails to give such notice, the wireless telecommunications facility shall be considered abandoned upon such discontinuation of operations.
(2) Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the carrier shall physically remove the wireless telecommunications facility within ninety (90) days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use.
(i) “Physically remove” shall include, but not be limited to, removal of antennas, mount, base wireless telecommunications facility and restore to its natural condition, except that any landscaping and grading shall remain in the after-condition.
(ii) The Commission may secure the removal of the wireless telecommunications facility by means of a bond, the amount of such bond shall be determined in accordance with Section 12.36.6(a)(xx) of these Regulations.
(3) If a carrier fails to remove a wireless telecommunications facility in accordance with this Section, the Town of Clinton shall have the authority to enter the subject property and physically remove the facility.
(i) Costs for the removal of the wireless telecommunications facility shall be charged to the landowner in the event the Town must remove the facility, and the cost thereof may be deducted from any bond posted by the carrier.
(g) Expansion/Alteration of Existing Facility: Where a previously approved facility is proposed to be extended or substantially altered in a manner that in any way changes the character or intensity of the use, such proposed extension or substantial change or alteration will be treated as a new application under this Section.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12116
(h) Term of Permit: Approvals for wireless telecommunications facilities are limited to a ten-year time period.
(1) Upon expiration of the time period, the applicant may seek renewal.
(i) If renewal is sought, the Commission may deny the renewal only if it finds that the maintenance requirements of this Section have not been met or that the facility has a significant impact on the quality of line in the community which was not disclosed or reasonably discoverable at the time of the original application and that due to developments in communication technologies the facility is outmoded.
(ii) If renewal is not sought or renewal is sought but denied, the facility shall constitute a zoning violation and the procedures under the abandonment provisions of this Section shall be imposed.
(i) Maintenance Required: The applicant shall maintain the wireless telecommunications facility.
(1) Such maintenance shall include, but shall not be limited to, painting, structural integrity and landscaping.
(2) In the event the applicant fails to maintain the facility, the Town of Clinton may undertake the maintenance at the expense of the applicant.
(j) Submission of Radio Frequency Emissions: After a wireless telecommunications facility is operational, the applicant shall submit, within ninety (90) days of beginning operations, actual existing and maximum future projected measurements of radio frequency (RF) radiation from the facility.
(1) Should the applicant be required to submit additional information to the FCC regarding RF radiation after beginning operations, the applicant shall also submit such additional information to the Commission.
(2) Should a new tower require co-locators, to the degree possible, the maximum future projected measurements of RF radiation shall be submitted to the Commission.
(3) Violation of any standard for RF radiation adopted by the Federal government shall constitute a violation of any permit issued hereunder, and shall be grounds for revocation of such permit as provided herein.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12117
(k) Facility on Town Property: In the event that a facility is constructed on Town property, the Town shall be held harmless from any responsibility due to structural or other failures of the facility. Such hold harmless shall be set forth in a written document satisfactory to the Town Attorney.
(l) Economic Development: In order to promote economic development, the Commission may consider the adequacy of service in commercial and industrial areas when evaluating any application.
(m) Licensed Carrier and Owner as Applicant: Application for any wireless telecommunication facility shall be made only by a licensed carrier, acting jointly with all record owners of the subject property, and referred to in the Section as the applicant.
(1) The applicant shall provide written notice to the Commission, within ninety (90) days, of any change in the composition of the parties constituting the applicant of a wireless telecommunication facility.
12.43.4 Specific Standards:
(a) Location Standards:
(1) If the Commission finds that a particular area or site structure or building is well-suited to the location of one or more facilities, it may require the clustering of mounts in or on said areas site, structure or building provided that all facilities meet the requirements of this Section.
(2) Locations in order of preference for facilities (i) being the most preferred, (v) being the least.
(i) On existing or approved towers
(ii) Within existing structures (e.g. steeple, spires, etc.)
(iii) On existing structures (e.g. buildings, water towers and utility poles)
(iv) In non-sensitive areas
(v) In sensitive areas with mitigation
(3) The applicant shall show the Commission the applicant’s plan or model for the coverage of all areas in the town of Clinton and the locations of all existing and proposed towers that would provide the coverage.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12118
(4) The applicant shall show all facilities within Clinton and within two (2) miles of the town’s boundary with adjacent communities, along with each facility’s coverage area.
(b) Site Standards:
(1) All utilities shall be underground.
(2) Unless base equipment is located in underground vaults or in an existing structure and no security fence is required, the base area shall be large enough to accommodate:
(i) The required base equipment, access drive and parking for all carrier vehicles anticipated.
(ii) Screening and landscaping area at least twenty feet (20’) wide around the outside of the security fence perimeter or the area around the smallest rectangle that can be drawn about all base equipment if no fencing is required.
(I) This area shall be planted to screen the base equipment or security fencing from view year-round.
(II) The Commission may also require walls to achieve the screening function especially where the tower is close to a building located on the site and the wall can be made to seem as an extension of the building.
(3) A tower proposed as a ground mounted facility shall have two times the fall zone distance from any abutting sensitive area if it is deemed not visible and three times the fall zone from any sensitive area if it is deemed visible.
(4) Base equipment structures, cabinets and fencing of ground-mounted facilities shall not be located within any required setback.
(5) In order to facilitate the evaluation of the site in relation to the proposed use, the Commission may require cross-sections of the site and environs, balloon tests, photographic superimpositions and other studies in connection with any application.
(c) Structural Standards:
(1) Unless otherwise specifically approved by the Commission, all towers proposed under this Section shall be monopoles.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12119
(2) Unless required by the FAA, the colors of towers and other visible facility equipment shall be a non-contrasting blue or gray.
(3) Unless required by the FAA, no lights shall be permitted on any facility higher than fourteen feet (14’) above the surrounding grade.
(i) No strobe lights shall be permitted on any visible facility and shall be strenuously avoided for any “not visible” facility.
(4) No signs other than for safety or security directly involving the operation of the facility shall be permitted.
(5) To minimize tower proliferation, towers shall be designed structurally to adequately carry the weight, load/stress and height to permit at least three (3) additional co-locators including a municipal antenna, unless specifically waived by the Commission. To achieve this, the tower may be designed for incremental height expansion.
(6) The maximum size of dish antennas shall be three feet (3’) in diameter. The maximum size of a panel antenna shall be two feet by six feet (2’ x 6’).
(7) Except as provided below, roof-mounted facilities shall not be extended more than ten feet (10’) above the maximum height of the building and shall be located away from the roof perimeter to minimize visibility from the ground.
(8) Roof mounts on existing buildings may extend higher than ten feet (10’) above the surface of any roof on building in industrial or commercial areas, provided that:
(i) No base equipment, cabinets, fences or screens are visible from the streets or surrounding properties.
(ii) The Commission finds that the proposal does not significantly and negatively impact the area.
(iii) The Commission finds that there does not exist a significant number of locations from which the top of the roof is visible.
(iv) The proposed structure is not to be within any sensitive area.
(9) Antennas mounted on the façade of the buildings shall be of a design, color and material which blends with the materials of the existing
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12120
building to the greatest extent possible and shall be located to create the least conflict in compatibility with the appearance of the building.
(10) The height of the tower shall not exceed the building height requirement of the district unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that such service can only be provided at the location and at the height requested, but in no event shall the total height exceed 199 feet.
(i) Further, any proposed tower shall be designed in all respects to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least three (3) additional users if the tower is over one hundred feet (120’) or for at least one additional user if the tower is to be of such design as to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accommodate antennas mounted at varying heights. See the requirements for co-location hereinabove.
(11) Any facility to be located within Special Flood Hazard Areas shall comply with all application provisions of these Regulations. See Section 17 of these Zoning Regulations.
12.43.5 Application Procedure:
(a) Application for Special Exception for a communications facility shall be made to the Commission in accordance with Section 4.
(1) In addition to Section 4, in evaluating a telecommunications facility, the Commission shall also consider the potential for co-location, alternative site locations, feasible alternative technologies and cooperation by the applicant regarding the use of the facility for Town emergency communication services, except that consideration of renewals shall be evaluated by Subsection 12.43.3(h), Term of Permit, only.
(b) Temporary Mobile Facility: The temporary use of a mobile wireless telecommunications facility, sometimes known as Cell on Wheels (COW), based on such factors as its size, the size of the site, its placement on the site, potential safety impacts and the degree to which the COW does not compromise the character of the surrounding area and generally meets the intent of these Regulations, may be approved as follows:
(1) By a Zoning Permit issued by the ZEO allowed for an initial period of up to three (3) months if they find that the COW has not created nuisances, hazards or excessively compromised the character of the area.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12121
(2) The Commission, may, by Site Plan Review, grant approval for up to an additional three (3) months beyond any approval period granted by the ZEO, if it confirms the finding in (1) above.
(3) The Commission may, by Special Exception, grant approval to an additional three (3) months beyond any approval period originally granted by the Commission through Site Plan Review approved in (2) above, for a total of nine (9) months, if the applicant can show a need to extend such time of temporary facility operation, and an application for one or more permanent location(s) are in active preparation or have been submitted for consideration.
(i) The Commission may grant approval for the time during which the construction of any permanent facility approved by the Town is being delayed by a pending administrative appeal or other legal proceeding, provided such extension be for no more than the period of pendency of such legal proceedings, plus the time required to construct the facility upon the conclusion of such proceeding.
12.43.6 Application Requirements: Any application for a telecommunications facility, whether by Zoning Permit, Site Plan Review or Special Exception, shall contain all that information required in accordance with the applicable provisions of these Regulations, and in addition, the following:
(a) A plan showing where and how the proposed antenna will be affixed to a particular building or structure.
(b) Details of all proposed antenna and mounting equipment including size and color.
(c) Elevations of all proposed shielding and details of materials including color.
(d) An elevation of all proposed equipment buildings or boxes. Details of all proposed fencing including color.
(e) A design drawing including cross section and elevation of all proposed towers.
(1) A description of the tower’s capacity including the number and type of antennas it can accommodate as well as the proposed location of all mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12122
(2) Where a monopole is proposed, the design shall illustrate how the tower will collapse upon itself without encroaching upon any adjoining property line.
(f) A report from a licensed engineer indicated that the proposed wireless telecommunications site will comply with the emission standards found in Subsection 12.43.3(j) of this Section, modeled at the full, ultimate capacity of the facility, and measured at the perimeter of any fenced enclosure surrounding the tower.
(1) Such report shall also certify that the installation of such site will not interfere with public safety communications, and shall provide supporting data and calculation as will permit an independent engineer to confirm the conclusions of said report.
(g) An analysis of the fall zone for the proposed tower prepared by a licensed engineer.
(h) Proof that either the applicant or a co-applicant holds a bona fide license from the FCC to provide the telecommunication service that the propose tower is designed to support.
(i) A report or letter from the FAA that the proposed tower complied with all airport safety requirements.
(j) Map depicting the extent of the provider’s planned coverage within the town of Clinton and the service area of the proposed wireless telecommunication site, and a master plan depicting how coverage within the town is to be provided, including future tower sites. See Section 12.43.4(a)(4) and (3) of these Regulations.
(k) Upon request of the Commission, the applicant shall provide a simulation of the proposed wireless telecommunication site in order to help the Commission ascertain the visual impacts associated with such proposal.
(l) For towers located in or within one thousand feet (1,000’) of a sensitive area, the applicant shall provide a view shed analysis showing all areas from which the tower would be visible.
(m) A plan for the removal of the wireless telecommunications facility upon its abandonment or obsolescence, including detailed procedures and methods to be employed, and accompanied by an estimate of the cost of such removal.
(1) Such estimate shall include the cost of any engineering or other supervisory services. [See Section 12.36.3(f)]
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12123
(n) Alternate sites where the proposed wireless telecommunications facility could be located if the proposed site is found to be unacceptable.
(1) Allegations by the applicant that there are no alternate sites will require detailed, written reports by qualified engineers to support such allegations, there being a presumption that cases where there is only one feasible site are very rare.
(o) The location of any designated Scenic Roads, Historic Districts, or buildings on the State or Federal Registers of Historic Structures within a three (3) mile radius of the proposed facility.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12124
12.44 Manufacturing, Processing or Assembling of Goods
(Section Added 1/1/2012)
12.44.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to permit the manufacturing, processing or assembling of goods in a way that ensures that the use is compatible with the surrounding area and protects the public health, safety and welfare of the community.
12.44.2 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, requirements and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) Buildings shall be oriented in such a manner that the truck bay doors and/or delivery entrances are located on the opposite side of the building from adjacent residential uses and/or districts.
(b) There shall be adequate access to all portions of the facility for emergency equipment and personnel.
(c) There shall be a fifty foot (50’) vegetative buffer along all property lines that abut residential uses and/or districts that is adequate to reduce noise emanating from the facility.
(d) There shall be no outside storage of equipment or materials except for motor vehicles for the transportation of materials over public roads.
(e) No single structure shall exceed one hundred thousand square feet (100,000 sq. ft.) in size.
(f) No such facility shall be located so that its public entrance is within a twelve hundred foot (1,200’) radius of the main entrance to any other facility.
(g) There shall be no use of such facility that is noxious or offensive due to odors, dust, noise, fumes or vibrations.
(h) There shall be no service, sales, repairs or fabrication of motor vehicles, trailers or other similar equipment, appliances or machinery.
(i) There shall be no retail activities to be conducted on the site.
12.44.3 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The required statement of use shall include the following:
(1) Times when equipment and motors will be running.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12125
(2) Standard operating procedures and Best Management Practices.
(3) Storm water quality measures and maintenance requirements.
(4) Spill incident procedures and reports.
(5) A list of all chemicals or hazardous materials and quantities that will be stored in the facility.
(b) A lighting plan shall be submitted.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12126
12.45 Warehousing and Wholesale Businesses
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.45.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to permit warehouses for the storage of materials and wholesale businesses in a way that ensures that the use is compatible with the surrounding area and protects the public health, safety and welfare of the community.
12.45.2 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) Buildings shall be oriented in a manner that the truck bay doors and/or delivery entrances are located on the opposite side of the building from adjacent residential uses or districts.
(b) There shall be adequate access to all portions of the facility for emergency equipment and personnel.
(c) There shall be a fifty foot (50’) vegetative buffer along all property lines that abut residential uses and/or districts that is adequate to reduce noise emanating from the operation.
(d) There shall be no outside storage of equipment or materials except for motor vehicles for the transportation of materials over public roads.
(e) No single structure shall exceed one hundred thousand square feet (100,000 sq. ft.) in size.
(f) No such facility shall be located so that its public entrance is within twelve hundred feet (1,200’) radius of the public entrance to any other such facility.
(g) There shall be no use of such facility that is noxious or offensive due to odors, dust, noise, fumes or vibrations.
(h) There shall be no service, sales, repairs or fabrication of motor vehicles, trailers or other similar equipment, appliances or machinery.
(i) There shall be no retail activities to be conducted on the site.
12.45.3 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The application shall be accompanied by a lighting plan.
(1) The lighting plan shall provide for both the normal hours of operation and security night lighting.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12127
(b) The required statement of use shall include the following:
(1) Times when equipment and motors will be running.
(2) Standard operating procedures and Best Management Practices.
(3) Storm water quality measures and maintenance requirements.
(4) Spill incident procedures and reporting.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12128
12.46 Self-Storage Warehouses
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.46.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to allow the development of self-storage warehouses in a way that is compatible with the overall character of the neighborhood in which it shall be located and the town of Clinton, and so as to not degrade the natural environment or negatively impact the public health, safety and property values.
12.46.2 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) The use shall be limited to individual storage compartments, not to exceed two hundred square feet (200 sq. ft.) and shall specifically exclude any commercial use or activity otherwise permitted in the zone.
(b) All self-storage warehouses shall be screened by a twenty-five foot (25’) wide landscaped strip consisting of a dense evergreen barrier of a height sufficient to obscure store units from adjoining uses, properties and walls.
(c) A barrier must be provided around the perimeter of the subject property.
(1) If the barrier to be provided is a fence, said fence shall a minimum of six feet (6’) in height and shall be constructed of opaque materials that will prevent the passage of light and debris.
(d) No warehouse shall exceed one story and eighteen feet (18’) in height.
(e) No outside storage is allowed.
(f) Facility access shall be restricted to between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily.
(g) No individual utility service shall be provided to any individual storage units.
(h) All exterior lighting and illuminated signs shall be design, located, arranged, installed and directed in such a manner as to avoid objectionable light at, and glare across, the property lines and shall be compatible with the surrounding area.
(i) No flammable, toxic, hazardous or noxious items or materials shall be stored in any unit at any time.
(1) The Commission reserves the right to preclude the storage and/or require the removal of any material or products it deems inappropriate for safe storage in such units.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12129
(2) The ZEO or Fire Marshal or their authorized agents shall be authorized to periodically inspect the premises to determine continued compliance with these Regulations.
(j) Buildings shall be so situated and/or screened that overhead access doors are not visible from the public way.
12.46.3 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12130
12.47 Marinas, Docks, Wharves, Slip Basins and Landings
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.47.1 Purpose: It is the purpose of these Regulations to permit marinas, docks, wharves, slip basins and landings, including the storage, repair and serving of pleasure boats, within the Marine Zone in a way that is compatible with the goals and recommendations of the Municipal Coastal Plan and so as to not degrade the natural environment or negatively impact the public health, safety and property values.
12.47.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception may be granted provided that:
(a) The lot is served by public water.
12.47.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) Any boat storage area shall be in addition to the area required for off-street parking purposes and shall be limited to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total land area to be used.
(b) All boats being stored on the subject site shall observe the setbacks for structures.
(c) The facility shall be served by public water.
(d) Best Management Practices shall be observed for typical mechanical activities, painting and fiberglass repair, the hauling and storage of boats, fueling and facility management, as set forth in the Connecticut Clean Marina Guidebook.
(e) Compliance with Section 18: Coastal Area Management, of these Regulations.
(f) Within six months of the commencement of operation of a facility under these Regulations, the applicant must submit proof of certification as a Connecticut Clean Marina.
(g) Sale or rental of equipment, accessories, clothing and similar items in a “Ship’s Store” shall be considered accessory uses to a marina, dock, wharf, slip basin, and/or landing for pleasure boats, provided that such uses are of such character, size and intensity as to conform to the definition of accessory uses as set forth in these Regulations.
12.47.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The site plan shall also show the following:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12131
(1) The limits of any area to be filled or dredged, either existing and proposed ground elevations or existing and proposed contours at an interval not exceeding two feet (2’).
(2) The layout of any proposed piers or float systems and other off-shore facilities.
(3) The limits of the boat storage area.
(b) The applicant shall submit detailed drawings for any proposed groin, seawall, jetty, navigation channel, boat basin, pier, dock, wharf, bulkhead, retaining wall, piling and/or other facilities.
(c) A landscaping plan shall accompany the application.
(d) A lighting plan shall accompany the application.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12132
12.48 Sale of Pleasure Boats, Marine Equipment, Engines, Supplies and Provisions
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.48.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to ensure that the development of facilities for the sale of pleasure boats, marine equipment, engines, supplies and provisions in a way that is compatible with the surrounding area and contribute to the unique community character and economic viability of the town of Clinton.
12.48.2 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) There shall be no storage or display of boats and equipment in the front yard of the property.
(b) The primary sale of boats, equipment, engines, supplies, provisions and any other marine related items shall be conducted inside of a fully enclosed structure.
(c) At no time shall parking spaces designated for motor vehicles be used for the storage of boats and/or marine equipment.
(d) There shall be an adequate off street loading area(s) for all deliveries and shipments.
12.48.3 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) A lighting plan shall be submitted with the application.
(b) A landscaping plan shall be submitted with the application.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12133
12.49 Manufacturing and Rebuilding of Boats
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.49.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to encourage the development of facilities for the manufacturing and rebuilding of boats in a way that is compatible with the surrounding area and protects the public health, safety and property values.
12.49.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a facility for the manufacturing and rebuilding of boats may be granted provided that:
(a) The lot is served by public water.
12.49.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) All manufacturing/rebuilding activities must be conducted indoors.
(b) All outside storage of boats and materials shall be located within a designated area enclosed by a fourteen foot (14’) high fence.
(c) The subject site shall be kept in an orderly and safe condition at all times so that emergency vehicles and equipment can access all areas within the site.
(d) No hazardous materials shall be stored outside.
(e) The facility shall be served by public water.
12.49.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The required statement of use shall include a statement of standard operating procedures and best management practices.
(b) A lighting plan shall be submitted with the application.
(c) A landscaping plan shall be submitted with the application.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12134
12.50 Processing, Storage and Sale of Fish, Shellfish and Lobsters
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.50.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to promote the development of facilities for the processing, storage and sale of locally caught fish, shellfish and lobsters in a way that is compatible with the surrounding areas and protects the public health, safety and property values.
12.50.2 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) All processing, storage and sales shall be conducted inside of a permanent structure.
(b) All wastes generated on site shall be removed on a regular basis to prevent odor or other nuisances that may occur.
(c) Waste water must be removed or disposed of in a manner that is approved by the Director of Health.
(d) The owner/operator of the facility shall possess a current CT DEEP Residential Commercial Fishing, Lobster Pot or Finfish License.
(e) The catch landing as defined by CT DEEP shall be Clinton, port code 027.
(f) All catching shall only be from areas 1 through 6, and 151 through 155 as shown on CT DEEP LIS and Vicinity Fishing Area Chart, as may be amended from time to time.
(g) The wholesale of catches shall only be conducted in the Marine District.
(h) Storage of all equipment associated with the operation must be in an enclosed structure.
(i) There shall be no discharge of any liquids or water onto the ground surface.
12.50.3 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall submit a letter from the Connecticut DEEP approving the site/facility for the proposed use.
(b) The applicant shall submit a copy of their current DEEP Commercial Fishing License.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12135
(c) The applicant shall submit a copy of the current plate number, vessel name and registration or documentable number.
(d) The required statement of use shall include a statement of the maximum quantity of gear to be used, as defined by the Connecticut DEEP.
(e) A lighting plan shall be submitted with the application.
(1) The plan shall show both normal operating and security lighting for the facility.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12136
12.51 Marine Contractor’s Businesses, Associated Buildings and Storage Yards
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.51.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to permit marine contractor’s businesses, associated buildings and storage yards for equipment and materials associated with this type of business in a way that ensures that this use is compatible with the surrounding area and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community.
12.51.2 Statements and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria is met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) There shall be a fifty foot (50’) buffer from all residential districts and abutting residential properties and structures.
(b) There shall be adequate access provided to all portions of the facility for fire suppression equipment and personnel.
(c) The outside storage of materials and equipment shall conform to the following:
(1) Materials and equipment shall be located within a designated area shown on the site plan.
(2) The outside storage area shall be enclosed by a fourteen foot (14’) high fence that is opaque or solid.
(3) The outside storage area shall have a setback of fifty feet (50’) from all property lines.
(4) There shall be no storage of any liquids or hazardous materials, except as approved under Section 12.58 of these Regulations.
(5) All fuel storage tanks shall have self-containment capabilities in case of a spill or leak.
(d) All maintenance work on equipment shall be performed within a structure or on an impervious surface that is designed to retain any spillage of fluids and cleaned immediately upon completion of work on that particular piece of equipment.
(e) The operation of the site shall be in accordance with the DEEP Connecticut Clean Marina Guidebook.
(f) The transportation of equipment in and out of the site shall be conducted between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12137
(g) The subject site shall be kept in an orderly and safe condition as all times to provide for access of emergency equipment to all areas of the site.
(h) No stockpiling of dredged materials except as authorized by CT DEEP and with an approved Special Exception as obtained by Section 12.53 of these Regulations.
(i) The facility shall have security lighting which will be in effect one hour after closing.
12.51.3 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall submit the following information as a narrative attached to the application at the time of submission:
(1) List of the quantity and type of materials being stored
(2) Spill incident procedures and reporting
(3) List of on-site emergency equipment
(4) How materials are stored, handled, transports and disposed
(5) Name and contact information for the on-site responsible party
(6) Time when equipment and/or motors will be running.
(b) The required site plan shall include a layout of the storage area showing all separation distances.
(c) A lighting plan shall be submitted with the application, showing the security lighting.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12138
12.52 Contractor’s Businesses and Storage Yards
(Section added 1/1/2012))
12.52.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to permit contractor’s businesses, office and storage yards for equipment and materials associated with this type of businesses in a way that ensures that this use is compatible with the surrounding area and protects the public health, safety and welfare of the community.
12.52.2 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria is met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) There shall be a fifty foot (50’) buffer from all residential districts.
(Amended 11/1/2016)
(b) There shall be adequate access provided to all portions of the facility for fire suppression equipment and personnel.
(c) The outside storage of materials shall conform to the following:
(1) Materials and equipment shall be located within a designated area shown on the site plan.
(2) The outside storage area shall be screened from public view by either an eight foot (8’) high fence that is opaque or solid or a natural barrier or a combination thereof. A plan for such vegetative buffer of at least five feet (5’) in width and eight feet (8’) in height may be substituted for the fence or natural barrier.
(Amended 11/1/2016)
(3) The outside storage area shall have the following setbacks:
(i) Setback from front lot line: Twenty-five feet (25’)
(ii) Setback from all other lot lines: Fifteen feet (15’)
(iii) There shall be a fifty foot (50’) setback from all residential districts.
(Amended 11/1/2016)
(4) There shall be no storage of any liquids or hazardous materials, except as approved under Section 12.53 of these Regulations.
(5) All fuel storage tanks shall have self-containment capabilities in case of a spill or leak.
(d) All maintenance work on equipment shall be performed within a structure or on an impervious surface that is designed to retain any spillage of fluids and cleaned immediately upon completion of work on that particular piece of equipment.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12139
(e) The processing and/or stockpiling of earth products, including but not limited to topsoil, gravel, sand, stone, rock and demolition debris shall not be allowed unless a Special Exception is obtained as per Section 12.53 of these Regulations.
(f) The transport of equipment in and out of the site shall be conducted between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. for properties located in Industrial Zones and 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. for properties located in all other zones, Monday through Sunday, except during emergency circumstances.
(Amended 11/1/2016)
(g) The subject site shall be kept in an orderly and safe condition at all times to provide for access of emergency equipment to all areas of the site.
(h) The facility shall have security lighting which will be in effect one hour after closing.
12.52.3 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall submit the following information as a narrative attached to the application at the time of submission:
(1) List of the typical types of materials and equipment to be stored on-site.
(2) Name and contact information for the on-site responsible party.
(3) Time when equipment and/or motors will be running.
(Amended 11/1/2016)
(b) The required site plan shall designate the area to be used as outside storage.
(Amended 11/1/2016)
(c) A lighting plan shall be submitted with the application, showing the security lighting.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12140
12.53 Excavation, Grading and Deposit of Materials
(Section moved from Section 12 – 1/1/2012)
12.53.1 General: No earth, loam, topsoil, gravel, clay or stone shall be excavated and removed from any lot, or graded or dumped on any lot, except as authorized by these Regulations or as authorized under a permit granted by the Commission under the provision of this Section.
12.53.2 Exclusions: The provisions of this Section and the requirements to obtain a permit shall not apply to the following cases:
(a) Necessary excavation and removal, or grading or dumping of soil or stone in direct connection with the lawful construction on the lot, of buildings, foundations, roads, driveways, parking areas, storm drainage, utility services, fences, walls, swimming pools or other bona fide construction projects, and for which any required Application for a Zoning Permit has been approved, or a subdivision plan has been approved by the Commission and recorded in the Town Clerk’s Office.
(b) Necessary excavation and removal, or grading or dumping of soil or stone in connection with the improvements on the lot solely for farming or landscaping purposes, burying of stones, regrading of difficult contours and the excavation of soil or stone for use on the lot and not for sale, and when written notice in advance of commencement of the operation has been given to the ZEO.
(c) Excavation and removal or grading of less than one hundred cubic yards (100 cu. yd.) of material on any lot in any calendar year.
(d) Provided that the excavation and removal, grading or dumping is:
(1) Authorized under Subsections 12.53.2(b) and 12.53.2(c) shall not occur in a Flood Hazard Area; and
(2) Authorized under Subsection 12.53.2(a) and 12.53.2(b) shall be deemed to permit the excavation and removal, or grading or dumping of only the quantity of material which is necessary to make the lot more suitable for the proposed use and provided further that excavation, grading, or removal authorized under Subsections 12.53.2(a) and 12.53.2(b) in connection with a project within two (2) years after commencement, and in the event of failure to obtain a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for such project, then such excavation and removal, or grading or dumping shall be deemed a violation of these Regulations, unless a Permit therefore has been secured from the Commission in accordance with this Section.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12141
(e) In all instances within the purview of the Exclusions contained in this Section, activity shall be conducted so as not to cause change to the surface, contour and drainage to or from adjacent property.
12.53.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) No excavation, soil removal or grading will be permitted within a five hundred foot (500’) natural buffer along Clinton’s Town Boundary, except that excavation, soil removal or grading activities may be permitted within such a distance when the applicant’s property straddles both sides of the Town Line, and when a variance is granted by the ZBA.
(b) The excavation, grading or removal shall be carried out in accordance with the maps and plans as approved by the Commission.
(c) The excavation, grading or removal shall not result in sharp declivities, pits or depressions or soil erosion, drainage or sewerage problems or conditions which would impair the reasonable reuse and development of the lot for purposed permitted under these Regulations in the District where the lot is located.
(d) At all stages of the work, proper drainage shall be provided to avoid soil erosion problems, excessive run-off, silting of streams and damage to public property, streets, or drainage facilities.
(e) Truck access to the lot and the work area shall be so arranged as to minimize truck hazards on streets and to avoid nuisance to residents of the neighborhood.
(f) No excavation and removal or grading, which is below the elevation of any abutting street or property line shall occur within fifty feet (50’) of such line, except that the excavation and removal of grading within such distance and below the elevation of any abutting property line may be permitted if written approval from the adjoining owner is received by the Commission.
(g) No excavation, grading, or removal shall occur at a depth greater than that which result in creating a slope steeper than one (1) vertical on three (3) horizontal projected from the bottom of the slope to a line at no time less than fifty feet (50’) from the property boundary.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(h) No dumping or stock piles shall exceed a height created by a slope steeper than two (2) vertical on one (1) horizontal.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12142
(i) Buildings or structures normal to the excavation, grading, dumping or removal operations may be erected on the lot and shall observe the same setback requirements pertaining to the zone.
(j) The work shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and Monday through Friday, excluding State and Federal holidays.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(k) Proper measures shall be taken to minimize nuisance from noise, dust, vibration and flying debris, and suitable fences or other barricades shall be provided around the excavation to protect pedestrians and vehicles.
(l) The toe of slope for all stockpile materials shall be setback twenty-five feet (25’) from the side and rear property lines and fifty feet (50’) from the front property line.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(m) No material shall be imported for processing, which includes, but is not limited to, crushing, screening, mixing or breaking of rock, except for the material that is to be used for on-site preparation.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(n) Upon completion of the work authorized, the area of excavated or otherwise disturbed ground shall be prepared and restored as follows:
(1) Such area shall be grated to slopes not exceeding one foot (1’) of rise on three feet (3’) of horizontal distance or to such lesser slope necessary for soil suitability, adequate drainage and safety; and
(2) The top layer of any arable soil, to a depth of not less than six inches (6”), shall be retained in the lot and spread over the entire disturbed area and the area shall then be seeded with a perennial grass and maintained until the ground shall be completely stabilized with a dense cover of vegetation and there exists no danger of erosion.
(i) This provision shall not apply to the areas of ponds or to exposed areas of ledge existing prior to the work.
(o) Performance bonds, to ensure faithful performance of the excavating and grading work in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
(p) The ZEO, or authorized agent, shall at all times have reasonable access to the lot for the purpose of inspection and determination of compliance with this Section.
12.53.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12143
(a) Alteration of Conditions: The Commission may modify any standards or conditions provided in Section 12.53.3, if in its judgment such modification is necessary to maintain the purpose and intent of this Section.
(b) Time Limit: Any permit issued by the Commission under this Section of the Regulations shall be valid for not less than two years and not more than five years.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(1) The Commission may grant one (1) extension of up to five years for the completion of the excavation or grading activity for good cause.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(c) Revocation and Suspension: Any permit approved pursuant to the provisions of this Section may be revoked by the Commission after notice in writing and a hearing for:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit:
(i) Violation of any provision of this Section or any other law or other Regulations of this permit; or
(ii) The existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or creating a nuisance or endangering the life or property of another.
(2) Notice: The notice shall describe the violation charged and may be either delivered personally or mailed postage prepaid to the address appearing on the application.
(3) Suspension: Any permit may be suspended for cause by the ZEO for a period not exceeding ten (10) business days without a hearing. All work under any permit shall be suspended following notice of a hearing to revoke as provided for in Section 12.53.4.
(4) Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation who, having been served with a cease and desist order with respect to a violation of any of the provisions of this Section, fails to comply with such order immediately or continues to violate any provision of this Section specified in such order, shall be subject to a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00), payable to the Treasurer of the Town of Clinton and may be subject to further action as set forth in CGS Section 8-12.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12144
12.54 Funeral Homes
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.54.1 Purpose: It is the purpose of these Regulations to permit funeral homes within specific non-residential zones in a way that is compatible with the overall character of those zones so as to not degrade the natural environment or negatively impact the public health, safety and property values.
12.54.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a funeral home may be granted provided that:
(a) The lot must be served by public water.
(b) A funeral home may not be permitted on any lot that is located fully or partially within the Aquifer Protection Area overlay zone on the Level A mapping.
(c) Any such facility shall be located on a lot having an area of one and one-half (1½) times the required area, unless the applicant can demonstrate that sufficient space exists for the facilities including sufficient parking both for clients as well as for employees and funeral home vehicles and for sufficient landscaping.
12.54.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) The facility shall be served by public water.
(b) The architectural design shall be compatible with the architectural designs in the area of the proposed facility.
12.54.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall submit architectural renderings with specific information regarding the materials to be used on the façade, windows and roof of the structure.
(b) A landscaping plan shall be submitted with the application.
(c) The applicant shall submit all written, technical and graphic materials pertaining to the services and products to be provided within the facility.
(d) The applicant shall submit a list of all chemicals to be stored and/or used on the site.
(e) A traffic study shall be submitted with the application.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12145
(f) In addition to the general considerations of Section 11, the Commission shall seek input from the State Department of Environmental Protection and State Department of Health Services, where applicable.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12146
12.55 Research Laboratories, Associated Offices and Buildings
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.55.1 Purpose: It is the purpose of these Regulations to permit research laboratories, associated offices and buildings within industrial zones in a way that is compatible within the overall character of the surrounding properties as so as to not degrade the natural environment or negatively impact the public health, safety and property values.
12.55.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a research laboratories, associated offices and buildings may be granted provided that:
(a) The lot must be served by public water.
12.55.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) The facility shall be served by public water.
(b) Buildings shall be orientated in such a manner that the truck bay doors and/or delivery entrances are located on the opposite side of the building from adjacent residential uses and/or districts.
(c) There shall be adequate access to all portions of the facility for emergency equipment and personnel.
(d) There shall be a fifty foot (50’) vegetative buffer along all property lines that abut residential uses and/or districts that is adequate to reduce noise emanating from the facility.
(e) There shall be no outside storage of equipment or materials except for motor vehicles for the transportation of materials over public roads.
(f) No single structure shall exceed one hundred thousand square feet (100,000 sq. ft.) in size.
(g) No such facility shall be located so that its public entrance is within a one thousand two hundred foot (1,200’) radius of the main entrance to any other such facility.
(h) There shall be no use of such facility that is noxious or offensive due to odors, dust, noise, fumes or vibrations.
(i) There shall be no service, sales, repairs or fabrication of motor vehicles, trailers or other similar equipment, appliances or machinery.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12147
(j) There shall be no retail activities to be conducted on site.
12.55.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall submit a letter at the time of application, from the Connecticut Water Company certifying that there is adequate water supply to the site for the proposed use.
(b) The applicant shall submit reports from all appropriate State and Federal agencies regulating the activities proposed for the site stating compliance.
(c) The applicant shall submit a list of all chemicals with estimated storage quantities that are to be kept on the premises.
(d) The applicant shall submit a waste management plan or documentation of a licensed outside contractor for chemical and biological wastes, as appropriate.
(e) As part of the decision process, the Commission shall find that the facility:
(1) Does not negatively impact the traffic flow of the area;
(2) Includes the appropriate safety measures; and
(3) Is consistent with light industrial activity in surrounding properties.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12148
12.56 Self-Service Cleaning Establishments (Laundromats)
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.56.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to encourage the development of self-service cleaning establishments in a way that is compatible with the overall character of those zones so as to not degrade the natural environment or negatively impact the public health, safety and property values.
12.56.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a self-service cleaning establishment may be granted provided that:
(a) The lot must be served by public water.
(b) A self-service cleaning establishment may not be permitted on any lot that is located fully or partially within the Aquifer Protection Area overlay zone.
12.56.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) The facility shall be served by public water.
(b) The facility shall not be more than ten thousand square feet (10,000 sq. ft.)
(c) All washing machines shall be equipped with an automatic shut-off valve in case of supply hose failure.
(d) The facility shall be equipped with a leak sensing alarm.
12.56.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) A landscaping plan shall be submitted with the application.
(b) A lighting plan shall be submitted showing both the normal operations and security lighting.
(c) The applicant shall submit a list of all chemicals with estimated storage quantities that are to be kept on the premises.
(d) The applicant shall submit a letter from the Connecticut Water Company certifying that there is adequate water supply to the site.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12149
12.57 Printing Establishments
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.57.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to permit printing establishments in a way that ensures this use is compatible with the surrounding area and protects the public health, safety and welfare of the community.
12.57.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a printing establishment may be granted provided that:
(a) The lot is served with public water.
(b) A printing establishment may not be permitted on any lot that is located fully or partially within the Aquifer Protection Area overlay zone.
12.57.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) The facility shall be served with public water.
(b) A zero discharge/closed loop system shall be employed.
(c) There shall be no production discharge to the subsurface sewage disposal system or ground/surface water.
(d) There shall be no outside storage of materials.
(e) There shall be no retail sales of products.
12.57.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section4, in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall submit a list of all chemicals with estimated storage quantities that are to be kept on the premises.
(b) A lighting plan shall be submitted with the application, showing the site lighting for operating hours and after-hours security.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12150
12.58 Storage of Hazardous Materials
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.58.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to permit the storage of materials which are hazardous, flammable, explosive and/or dangerous within the appropriate districts in a way that ensures that the storing of such materials is compatible with the surrounding area and protects the public health, safety and welfare of the community.
12.58.2 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) A one hundred foot (100’) setback for all structures containing hazardous materials is required from all residential zoning districts and abutting residential structures and properties.
(1) Said distance shall be measured in a straight line between the two nearest points of each of the lots.
(b) There shall be adequate access to all areas of the facility for fire suppression equipment and personnel.
(c) There shall be no outside storage of hazardous materials.
(d) All hazardous material storage tanks shall have a double wall construction.
(e) All containers holding hazardous materials shall be properly labeled.
(f) The applicant shall comply with all Federal, State and local codes for the storage of hazardous materials.
(g) There shall be appropriate security fencing around the perimeter of the facility.
12.58.3 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall submit a list of the quantity and type of materials being stored.
(b) The applicant shall submit the type and details for the following:
(1) Fire suppression equipment
(2) Ventilation equipment
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12151
(3) Inventory monitoring system
(4) Leak detection, fire, smoke and security equipment and monitoring.
(c) The applicant shall provide a layout of the storage area showing separating distances.
(d) The applicant shall submit a narrative detailing spill incident procedures and reporting.
(e) The applicant shall submit a narrative detailing standard operating or management procedures.
(f) The applicant shall submit a narrative detailing the employee training.
(g) The applicant shall submit a list of all on-site emergency equipment.
(h) The applicant shall submit a narrative stating how the materials are to be stored, handled, transported and disposed.
(i) The applicant shall provide the name and contact information of the on-site responsible party.
(j) The applicant shall provide a schedule of when and by whom site inspections are to be done.
(k) The applicant shall provide an evacuation plan for the facility.
(l) The Fire Marshal shall inspect the plans and facility prior to opening.
(m) The plans and facility shall comply with NFPA standards.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12152
12.59 Commercial Oil, Propane, or Gasoline Storage Tanks
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.59.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to permit commercial oil, propane and gasoline storage tanks in a way that ensures that this use is compatible with the surrounding area and protects the public health, safety and welfare of the community.
12.59.2 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) The maximum amount of commercial oil, propane or gasoline, cumulatively of all these types of fuels, which can be stored on any one lot is thirty thousand (30,000) gallons.
(Added 1/1/2015)
(b) There shall be a one hundred foot (100’) setback from all residential districts and abutting residential properties and structures.
(1) Said distance shall be measured in a straight line between the residential structure and the structure and/or tank that is being used for the commercial oil, propane or gasoline storage tanks.
(c) There shall be adequate access to all portions of the facility for fire suppression equipment and personnel.
(d) The outside storage of materials and equipment shall conform to the following:
(1) Materials and equipment shall be located within a designated area shown on the site plan.
(2) The outside storage area shall be enclosed by a six foot (6’) high fence that is opaque or solid.
(Amended 1/1/2018)
(3) The outside storage area shall have a setback of fifty feet (50’) from all property lines.
(4) There shall be no storage of any liquids or hazardous materials, except as approved under Section 12.58 of these Regulations.
(5) All fuel storage tanks shall have self-containment capabilities in case of a spill or leak.
(e) All maintenance work on equipment shall be performed within a structure or on an impervious surface that is designed to retain any spillage of fluids and
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12153
cleaned immediately upon completion of work on that particular piece of equipment.
(f) The transport of material in and out of the site shall be conducted between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except in the case of emergency.
(g) The subject site shall be kept in an orderly and safe condition at all times to provide for access of emergency equipment to all areas of the site.
(h) Security lighting shall be in effect upon sunset.
12.59.3 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall submit the following information as a narrative attached to the application at the time of submission:
(1) List of the quantity and type of materials being stored.
(2) The type of leak detection, fire, smoke and security monitoring.
(3) Spill incident procedures and reporting.
(4) Standard operating or management procedures.
(5) List of on-site emergency equipment.
(6) How materials are stored, handled, transported and disposed.
(7) Name and contact information of the on-site responsible party.
(b) The applicant shall submit literature about the inventory monitoring system.
(c) The required site plan shall include a layout of the storage area showing all separating distances.
(d) A lighting plan shall be submitted with the application, showing the security lighting.
(e) The Fire Marshal shall inspect the plans and facility prior to opening.
(f) The plans and facility shall comply with NFPA standards.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12154
12.60 Gasoline Filling Stations
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.60.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to permit gasoline filling stations in a way that ensures that this use is compatible with the surrounding area and protects the public health, safety and welfare of the community.
12.60.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a gasoline filling station may be granted provided that:
(a) The location shall be approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 14-321 through 14-322.
(1) Such approval shall not be in lieu of the Special Exception required by these Regulations and shall be obtained prior to the submission of the application to the Commission.
(b) No gasoline filling station shall be permitted within two hundred feet (200’) of any school, house of worship, hospital or place of public assembly.
(1) Said distance shall be measured in a straight line between the two nearest points of each of the lot.
12.60.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) Provision is made for entering and leaving the lot in such a manner that traffic hazards are minimized.
(b) The outside storage of vehicles shall conform to the setback requirements for a structure.
(c) No motor vehicle parts, wrecked or dismantled vehicles, or equipment shall be stored outside.
(d) All fuel filling devices are located at least fifty feet (50’) away from any street line or property line.
(e) All lighting on buildings or canopies shall be enclosed and recessed below a horizontal surface of the structure, with lenses or other measures to reduce the visibility of the light source and to prevent glare.
(f) No lighting shall be located on any vertical surface of a building or structure, nor directed upward or outward, horizontally, from any vertical surface.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12155
(g) A retail establishment (convenience store) may be combined with this use provided that:
(1) Adequate vehicular and pedestrian traffic flow patterns are established which prevent conflict with gasoline and service patrons.
(2) There shall be no seats, stools, tables or other facilities for the on-site consumption of food.
(3) There shall be no overnight parking associated with the retail trade use, other than for employees.
12.60.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The following shall be submitted with the application:
(1) A lighting plan.
(2) A traffic study.
(3) A landscaping plan.
(b) The Fire Marshal shall inspect the plans and facility prior to opening.
(c) The plans and facility shall comply with NFPA standards.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12156
12.61 Motor Vehicle and Limited Repairer Service
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.61.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to permit motor vehicle and limited repairer services in a way that ensures that this use is compatible with the surrounding area and protects the public health, safety and welfare of the community.
12.61.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a motor vehicle and limited repairer service may be granted provided that:
(a) The location shall be approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of CGS Sections 14-321 through 14-322.
(1) Such approval shall not be in lieu of the Special Exception required by these Regulations and shall be obtained prior to the submission of the application to the Commission.
(b) No motor vehicle and limited repairer service shall be permitted within two hundred feet (200’) of any school, house of worship, hospital or place of public assembly.
(1) Said distance shall be measured in a straight line between the two nearest points of each of the lots.
12.61.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) That provision is made for entering and leaving the site in such a manner that traffic hazards are minimized.
(b) That no unregistered motor vehicle and no motor vehicle parts or equipment, shall be stored or parked within the setbacks.
(c) That no repair work, except of an emergency nature, will be performed out of doors.
(d) There shall be a seventy-five foot (75’) vegetative buffer from all residential districts and abutting residential properties and structures.
(1) This requirement does not apply to any renovation, remodeling or expansion of any facility existing as of the effective date of these Regulations (Insert date).
(e) The number of vehicles may be stored or displayed on the property shall be determined as follows:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12157
(1) On lots up to fifteen thousand square feet (15,000 sq. ft.):
(i) Twenty percent (20%) of the lot area, excluding tidal wetlands, shall be divided by two hundred forty (240).
(ii) The largest divisible whole number is the number of vehicles permitted to be stored or displayed.
(2) On lots greater than fifteen thousand square feet (15,000 sq. ft.):
(i) Fifteen percent (15%) of the lot area, excluding tidal wetlands, shall be divided by two hundred forty (240).
(ii) The largest divisible whole number is the number of vehicles permitted to be stored or displayed.
(f) All driveways, outdoor storage areas, and other areas to be used by vehicles shall be paved with a dustless surface, and shall be landscaped with perimeter and interior islands to direct traffic flow and to screen working and/or storage areas.
12.61.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) A landscaping plan shall be submitted with the application.
(b) A traffic study shall be submitted with the application.
(c) In making a decision, the Commission shall find that:
(1) In the B-4 zone, the location of the use or its proximity to like or other establishments will not be detrimental to the orderly economic growth of a retail shopping area in the District.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12158
12.62 Establishments for the Sale of New or Used Vehicles
(Section 1/1/2012)
12.62.1 Purpose: The purpose of these Regulations is to permit establishments for the sale of new or used vehicles in a way that ensures that this use is compatible with the surrounding area and protects the public health, safety and welfare of the community.
12.62.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for an establishment for the sale of new or used vehicles may be granted provided that:
(a) The location shall be approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of CGS Sections 14-321 through 14-322.
(1) Such approval shall not be in lieu of the Special Exception required by these Regulations and shall be obtained prior to the submission of the application to the Commission.
12.62.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria are met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) That provision is made for entering and leaving the site in such a manner that traffic hazards are minimized.
(b) That no unregistered motor vehicle, motor vehicle registered to a dealer, or motor vehicles parts or equipment shall be stored or parked nearer to the street line than the building line.
(c) All driveways, outdoor storage areas, and other areas to be used by vehicles shall be paved with a dustless surface, and shall be landscaped with perimeter and interior islands to direct traffic flow and to screen working and/or storage areas.
12.62.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) A landscaping plan shall be submitted with the application.
(b) A traffic study shall be submitted with the application.
(c) In making a decision, the Commission shall find that:
(1) In the B-4 zone, the location of the use or its proximity to like or other establishments will not be detrimental to the orderly economic growth of a retail shopping area in the District.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12159
12.63 Motor Vehicle Detailing and Car Washing Facilities
(Section added 1/1/2012)
12.63.1 Purpose: It is the purpose of these Regulations to permit motor vehicle detailing and car washing facilities in specific business zones in a way that ensures that the operation of these facilities are compatible with the surrounding area and protects the environment, health, safety and welfare of the community.
12.63.2 Qualifications: A Special Exception for a motor vehicle detailing and car washing facilities may be granted provided that:
(a) The lot is served by public water.
12.63.3 Standards and Requirements: A Special Exception may be granted provided that the following criteria is met in addition to the standards, criteria and conditions stated in Section 11:
(a) A one hundred foot (100’) setback for all structures containing a facility is required from all residential zoning districts and abutting residential structures and properties.
(b) There shall be adequate access to all portions of the facility for fire suppression equipment and personnel.
(c) There shall be no outside storage of new or used materials.
(d) No facility shall be allowed to discharge directly into any stormwater drainage collection system.
(e) Each facility shall discharge its wastewater effluent into its own water reclamation system; include a holding tank with an audio/visual alarm system to warn operating personnel of high level conditions requiring removal by proper means.
(f) All facilities shall provide a safe and suitable means of ingress and egress and maneuvering on the site, including sufficient area on the site for queuing of vehicles for peak periods of operation and sufficient area for patrons to utilize self-service vacuum machines.
(1) Unless the facility provides for an automatic drying machine, the vehicle washing facility shall provide an area for customers to dry and wipe down their vehicles prior to leaving the site.
(g) There shall be appropriate security fencing around the perimeter of the facility.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 12160
12.63.4 Procedures: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
(a) The applicant shall submit a list of the quantity and type of chemicals being stored on-site.
(b) The applicant shall submit the type and details of the following:
(1) Fire suppression equipment.
(2) Ventilation equipment.
(3) Inventory monitoring systems.
(4) Leak detection, fire, smoke and security equipment and monitoring.
(c) The applicant shall submit a narrative at the time of application, detailing the following:
(1) Spill incident procedures.
(2) Standard operating or management procedures.
(3) Employee training.
(4) The storage, handling, transportation and disposal of materials.
(d) The required site plan shall show the layout of the storage area, showing the separating distances.
(e) The applicant shall provide the name and contact information of the on-site responsible party.
(f) The applicant shall provide a schedule of when and by whom site inspections are to be done.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1301
Section 13
Zoning Board of Appeals
Variances
Certificate of Location
Dealer’s & Repairer’s License
13.1 The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by these Regulations and the Connecticut General Statutes, and may adopt rules and procedures necessary to exercise its authority. The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
13.1.1 To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that here is an error in any order, requirement or decision by the ZEO.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
13.1.2 To determine and vary the application of these Regulations in harmony with their general purpose and intent, and with due consideration for conserving the public health, safety, convenience, welfare and property values solely with respect to a parcel of land where owning to conditions especially affecting such parcel but not generally affecting the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of such Regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship so that substantial justice will be done and public safety and welfare secured.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
13.2 Variances: Variances shall only be granted where such an action would be in harmony with the purposes of these Regulations as set forth in Section 1 of these Regulations; and where literal enforcement of these Regulations would result in unusual hardship, as defined by the courts of the State of Connecticut, which may be summarized as follows:
(Amended 1/1/2012)
13.2.1 The hardship recognized by the law is that of the property, due to is unique shape, topography or other inherent physical conditions;
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) The personal hardship of the owner, such as age or family condition, is not a legal hardship which would support the granting of a variance.
(b) The hardship must not be merely financial, such as the owner would make more money or lose less money if the variance were granted, as financial hardship is personal and not inherent in the property itself.
13.2.2 The hardship must be unique to the property, in the same sense that it is a characteristic which is not exhibited by other properties in the area or in the zone, and which makes it appropriate for special treatment.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
(a) Merely being too small or too narrow is not a legal hardship unless it restricts the property from being put to a reasonable use permitted in the subject zone.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1302
(b) If the surrounding properties are predominately too small and too narrow for current zoning standards, that is not a legal hardship in that it is not unique to the property for where the variance is being requested.
13.2.3 The hardship must not be created by the owner or his/her predecessor in title, such as dividing a parcel to create lots which cannot support the desired use, or creating a topographic condition by excavation, fill or other measures which render the property unusable for its highest use without a variance or by building a structure which, for whatever reasons, violates a current Regulation.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
13.2.4 The burden is on the applicant to demonstrate that the requirements for a variance have been met.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
13.2.5 Variances are to be granted sparingly and only to the minimum extent necessary to allow property to be used for the least intensive use which is permitted in the subject zone.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
13.3 Limitations: In accordance with CGS Section 8-6, the Board is hereby prohibited from approving a variance which has the effect of permitting any use in any zone which is not a permitted use, whether as of right or by Site Plan or by Special Exception, under these Regulations. Additionally, no variance shall be granted with respect to Section 12.27 inclusive to permit an adult entertainment business nor Section 26.7.2 inclusive, to permit encroachment into the tidal wetlands buffer.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
13.4 The ZBA shall hear and decide appeal and requests for variances from the requirements of Section 17: Flood Hazard Zone and shall notify the Commission of pending appeals. The Board is referred to Section 17.11: Variance Procedure – Zoning Board of Appeals for guidance.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
13.5 Certificate of Approval of Location, Dealers’ and Repairers’ Licenses: The purpose of this Section is to establish the procedures and standards which uses requiring a Certificate of Approval of Location (CAL) from the ZBA shall follow prior to applying for a license to operate from the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles or a Zoning Permit from the Town of Clinton.
(Amended 1/1/2012)
13.5.1 Auto Junk Yard: The uses regulated by this Section shall not be construed to include an auto junkyard. It is the specific intent of this Section to prohibit the establishment of new auto junkyards or the extension of any auto junkyard already operating as a non-conforming use.
13.5.2 General Standards: The ZBA shall review an application before it, to determine if the proposed use and structures will conform to the following general standards in addition to any special standards for particular uses specified:
(a) That the location, type, character and size of the use and of any building or other structure in connection therewith shall be in harmony with and conform to the appropriate and orderly development of the Town and the
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1303
neighborhood and will not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent property or impair the value thereof.
(b) That the nature and location of the use and of any building or other structure in connection therewith shall be such that there will be adequate access to it for fire protection purposes.
(c) That the streets serving the proposed use are adequate to carry prospective traffic, that provision is made for entering and leaving the property in such a manner that no undue hazard to traffic or undue traffic congestion is created and that adequate off-street parking and loading facilities are provided.
(d) That the lot on which the use is to be established is of sufficient size and adequate dimension to permit conduct of the use and provision of buildings, other structures and facilities in such a manner that will not be detrimental to the neighborhood or adjacent property.
(e) That the property will be suitably landscaped to protect the neighborhood and adjacent property.
(f) That the site plan and architectural design shall be in conformance with the purpose and intent of any plan of development adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission for the area in which the use is to be located and that the site plan provides for continuation and appropriate improvement of streets terminating at the lot where the use is to be located.
(g) That the architectural plan of buildings, other structures and sign, including the exterior building materials, color, elevations, roof line height and bulk, shall be of a character as to harmonize with the neighborhood and to preserve and enhance the appearance and beauty of the community.
13.5.3 Automotive Uses: Automotive uses listed in the Schedule (Section 24) shall conform to the following Specified Standards:
(a) That provision is made for entering and leaving the lot in such a manner that traffic hazards are minimized.
(b) That the outside storage and display of vehicles shall conform to the setback requirements for a building.
(c) That no repair work, except of an emergency nature, will be performed out-of-doors; and no more than six (6) motor vehicles awaiting repair shall be stored or parked out-of-doors.
(d) That all fuel-filling devices are located at least fifty feet (50’) away from any street line or property line.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1304
(e) That in Business Districts B-1 and B-4, the location of the use or its proximity to like or other establishments will not be detrimental to the orderly economic growth of a retail shopping area in the District.
(f) That in Business District B-1, the use shall be designated and located as a part of a complex of retail stores having a floor area of forty thousand square feet (40,000 sq. ft.) or more, and the use shall have no direct, independent access onto any street separate from the access to such stores.
(g) No gasoline station shall be permitted within two hundred feet (200’) of any school, house of worship, hospital or place of public assembly, said distance shall be measured in a straight line between the nearest points of each of the lots.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1401
Section 14
Vendors
14.1 Purpose: These Regulations are intended to allow for the distribution of vendors in the Town of Clinton in such a way as to focus this type of use in locations which are most conducive to pedestrian traffic and gathering. Recognizing that the Town of Clinton contains both established restaurants and a seasonal influx of individuals who may be looking for more casual or recreational options, this Section attempts to balance the competing needs of all stakeholders.
The Regulations are divided into three categories, Transient Vendors, Stationary Vendors, and Event Vendors to recognize the differing needs of these types of uses. A vendor permit may be granted for either Transient or Stationary Vendors. The two uses are mutually exclusive. The holder of a Transient or Stationary Vendor may also apply for an Event Vendor permit.
The Commission has determined that the interests of health, safety and welfare are best served by requiring vendors to obtain zoning permits. Each type of vendor shall be required to obtain a zoning permit prior to commencing operation. Failure to obtain a permit shall subject the vendor to penalties equivalent to those imposed on other zoning violators.
14.2 Definitions:
14.2.1 Event Vendor: A vendor which participates at an event or festival held within the town of Clinton, and may be trucks or trailers which are easily mobile but are intended to stay in one location for several days at a time.
14.2.2 Stationary vendor: A vendor which operates a truck or trailer or other portable structure but is intended to stay in one location.
14.2.3 Transient vendor: A vendor which operates a two-axle truck or other two-axle vehicle which move from location to location each day and are inherently designed to be mobile in their sales technique. This may include door-to-door salesmen and similar solicitors. A transient vendor may stay at each location for up to three (3) hours daily.
14.2.4 Vendor: Any person or persons who engage in the activity of selling, offering for sale, offering to give away, or giving away of anything of value including food, beverages, goods, wares, merchandise or services.
14.3 Transient Vendors:
14.3.1 Standards: A permit may be issued provided that the following criteria are met:
(a) Transient vendors must park on private property or on a cul-de-sac outside the regular flow of traffic.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1402
(1) The vendor must have the consent of each private property owner in which they park on or in front of said property.
(2) Transient vendors shall not be located closer than twenty feet (20’) of any fire hydrant.
(b) Transient vendors shall be located so that they are do not obstruct emergency access, line-of-sight or other essential circulation patterns.
(c) Transient vendors must demonstrate that they have an unobstructed area of at least ten feet (10’) in front of and behind the vehicle or portable structure and fifteen feet (15’) from the side of the vehicle on which the sales occur to allow potential customers to approach the vehicle safely and to queue without obstructing traffic or creating a danger to themselves or others.
(d) Transient vendors are prohibited from erecting permanent or fixed-location structures, tables, umbrellas or similar devices at any location at which they stop.
(e) Transient vendors must be self-sufficient in electricity and water supply and may not hook up to supplies at any location at which they stop.
(f) Transient vendors may erect temporary signs pursuant to Section 34.8 of these Regulations.
(g) Transient vendors shall not create any objectionable noise, smoke, odor, toxic fumes, vibration, radio interference, or other unsuitable conditions that would degrade the properties in the neighborhood it visits.
(h) Transient vendors shall be limited in their hours of operation from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday.
(i) Transient vendors are responsible for the clean-up of all litter associated with the items they sell which shall accumulated at the locations they visit.
(j) A Transient Vendor Permit shall be limited in duration for a period of six (6) continuous months, which period may be extended for three additional one-month periods at the sole discretion of the ZEO. Transient Vendor Permits are limited to no more than nine (9) months in any twelve (12) month period.
14.3.2 Procedures: An applicant for a Transient Vendor Permit shall submit an application for said permit along with the following information:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1403
(a) The make, model and license plate number of the vehicle or vehicles to be used for vending;
(b) A statement of use, indicating what will be sold;
(c) All appropriate State licenses and permits required for the sale of the types of items being sold;
(d) Specific locations where the Transient vendor will be stopping, by street address, together with the signed consent of the owner of that location.
(1) Should these locations change subsequent to the permit being obtained, a modification of the permit is required.
(e) A copy of the unapproved Clinton Police Department Application – For Solicitor’s/Vendor’s Permit form, along with copies of the driver’s licenses of all operators of the vehicle or vehicles to be operated.
14.4 Stationary Vendors:
14.4.1 Standards: A permit may be issued provided that the following criteria are met:
(a) Stationary vendors must be located on private property.
(1) The vendor must have the consent of the property owner on which they are located.
(b) Stationary vendors shall be located so that they do no obstruct emergency access, line-of-sight or other essential circulation patterns.
(c) Stationary vendors shall be located so that they are not encroaching into the lot line setbacks for the zone in which they are located.
(d) Stationary vendors must demonstrate that they have an unobstructed area of at least ten feet (10’) in front of and behind the vehicle and fifteen feet (15’) from the side of the vehicle or portable structure on which the sale occur to allow potential customers to approach the vehicle safely and to queue without obstructing traffic or creating a danger to themselves or others. Stationary vendors shall not be located closer than twenty feet (20’) of any fire hydrant.
(e) Stationary vendors may erect semi-permanent or fixed-location structures, tables, umbrellas or similar devices at their location provided that these items are location entirely on private property and do not obstruct pedestrian pathways, such as sidewalks.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1404
(f) Stationary vendors may hook up to electricity and water supply at their location, provided they have the written consent of the owner of said facilities.
(g) Stationary vendors may erect temporary signs pursuant to Section 34.8 of these Regulations.
(h) Stationary vendors shall not create any objectionable noise, smoke, odor, toxic fumes, vibration, radio interference or other unsuitable conditions that would degrade the properties at their location.
(i) Stationary vendors shall be limited in their hours of operation from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday. Set-up of the site shall not commence before 6:00 a.m. and break-down shall be completed no later than 10:00 p.m. Vendor shall not leave any conveyance or stand unattended during operating hours.
(j) Stationary vendors are responsible for the cleanup of all litter associated with the items they sell which shall accumulate at their location.
(1) Vendors shall provide trash receptacles in sufficient quantities to allow customers to dispose of their trash in a sanitary manner and shall be responsible for emptying them when they are full and at the end of each day.
(2) No food waste may be left exposed overnight.
(k) A Stationary Vendor Permit shall be limited in duration for a period of four (4) continuous months, which may be extended for two additional two-month periods at the sole discretion of the ZEO. Stationary Vendor Permits are limited to no more than eight (8) months in any twelve (12) month period.
14.4.2 Procedures: An applicant for a Stationary Vendor Permit shall submit an application for said permit along with the following information:
(a) The make, model, and license plate number of the vehicle or vehicles to be used for vending;
(b) A statement of use, indicating what will be sold;
(c) All appropriate State licenses and permits required for the sale of the types of items being sold;
(d) The specific location where the Stationary vendor will be located, by street address, together with the signed consent of the owner of that location;
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1405
(e) A copy of the unapproved Clinton Police Department Application – For Solicitor’s/Vendor’s Permit form, along with the names of all proprietors or managers of the Stationary vendor.
14.5 Event Vendors: Throughout the year, within the town of Clinton there are festivals or events which typically last one to three days and feature food and other attractions. While the Town would like to encourage these types of events, the goal of the Event Vendor Permit is to regularize how vendors of these types of events are licensed. Event vendors typically arrive twelve (12) to twenty-four (24) hours prior to an event to set up their site, remain in place throughout the event and then remove their personal property within twelve (12) hours of the end of the event.
14.5.1 Standards: A permit may be issued provided that the following criteria are met:
(a) Event vendors must be located on the grounds of the event itself, with the consent of the event organizer.
(b) The Event vendor shall be located so that it does not obstruct emergency access, line-of-sight or other essential circulation patterns.
(c) Event vendors must demonstrate that they have an unobstructed area to allow pedestrians to pass unimpeded between the truck/trailer and the nearest fixture or other vendor location. There shall be adequate queuing for each location.
(d) Event vendors may erect fixed-location structures, tables, umbrellas or similar devices at their location subject to the rules and requirements of the event organizer.
(e) Event vendors may hook up to electricity and water supply at their location provided they have the written consent of the owner of said facilities.
(f) Event vendors may erect temporary signs pursuant to Section 34.8 of these Regulations.
(g) Event vendors shall not create any objectionable noise, smoke, odor, toxic fumes, vibration, radio interference or other unsuitable conditions.
(h) Event vendors shall be limited in their hours of operation to the hours the event is officially opened for business. This means that even if an Event vendor is physically on-site prior to or following an event, it may not be open for business during those periods.
(i) Event vendors are responsible for the cleanup of all litter associated with the items they sell which shall accumulate at their location.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1406
(j) Event Vendor Permits shall be limited in duration for a period of three (3) days, which may be extended by the ZEO for an additional day upon demonstration of need.
14.5.2 Procedures: An applicant for an Event Vendor Permit shall submit an application for said permit along with the following information:
(a) The make, model and license plate number of the vehicle or vehicles or trailers to be used for vending;
(b) A statement of use, indicating what will be sold;
(c) All appropriate State licenses and permits required for the sale of the types of items being sold;
(d) The specific event where the Event vendor will be attending, together with the signed consent of the owner of that location;
Effective May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 1501
Section 15
East Main Street Village District (EMS-VD)
15.1 Statement of Purpose: The East Main Street corridor, from the Indian River east to the intersection with Route 145 on the north side of East Main Street and to the intersection with Beach Park Road on the south, maintains the character and scale of a small New England village. It is an area of mixed civic, commercial and residential uses, characterized by a development pattern of larger governmental and religious structures set on generous open lots, combined with older buildings, which are primarily residential in scale, located close to the road with parking located to the side or rear of the building. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes §8-2j, the purpose of this East Main Street Village District (“the District”) is to ensure that new development or redevelopment of land within the District protects the distinctive and traditional character of the East Main Street streetscape and is consistent and compatible with the following objectives:
15.1.1 Keep intact the concentration of municipal buildings and existing open lawns as the central focal point of the town’s civic activities;
15.1.2 Maintain the existing village scale by encouraging similarly sized buildings that keep with the village character of the neighborhood, thereby preventing new buildings which are noticeably larger than the current scale that predominate the streetscape;
15.1.3 Preserve the historic and significant structures within the District;
15.1.4 Promote and maintain a mix of residential, commercial, and public and municipal uses;
15.1.5 Reduce visual clutter and establish architectural, landscaping and signage standards which foster area identity, reflecting the maritime nature and history of Clinton; and
15.1.6 Promote the East Main Street corridor as an extension of the central business district, encouraging pedestrian activity between the two districts.
15.2 Permitted Uses: The Commission encourages mixed uses within a single structure or within a complex of structures. Commercial uses may be located on the ground floor with offices or apartments on the upper floors, in accordance with these Regulations. Refer to Section 27 for the uses and type of permit required. For administration and review of applications regulated by this Section, the Clinton Design Review Board shall function as the architectural review board as described in Section 8-2j of the Connecticut General Statutes.
15.3 Design Standards: Site design, architectural design, and scale and massing of buildings shall be of such character as to harmonize and be compatible within the District. The intent of these standards is to protect the distinctive character, landscape, and historic structures, and pedestrian scale of the District.
Effective May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 1502
15.3.1 Site Development: Building setback from the street, side setbacks from adjacent buildings and orientation of the axis of buildings shall be consistent with and recognize the rhythm, spacing and orientation of other adjacent buildings. The primary visual focus of the site shall be the front yard area and the front building façade.
(a) Maintenance of views, historic buildings, monuments, and landscaping is required, to the greatest extent practicable.
(b) The removal or disruption of historic, traditional, or significant structures or architectural elements shall require authorization of Planning & Zoning Commission as part of an overall proposal to develop or redevelop a site, and not as a simple structural demolition.
(c) The conversion, conservation, and preservation of existing buildings and sites in a manner that maintains the historic or distinctive character of the District is encouraged.
(d) Off-street parking shall be located in side and rear yards only, and shared parking areas may be established for adjacent lots. Each site shall be designed to encourage pedestrian use along East Main Street, and non-residential uses shall be designed to facilitate pedestrian movement within each site.
15.3.2 Building Form and Materials: New construction and rehabilitation of existing buildings should be harmoniously related to their surroundings, the terrain in the district, and to the use, scale, and architecture of existing buildings in the District that have a functional or visual relationship.
(a) The exterior of structures or sites shall be consistent with:
(1) The “Connecticut Historical Commission – The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings,” as amended; or
(2) Distinctive characteristics of the District identified in the Town of Clinton Plan of Conservation and Development.
(3) Interior changes or exterior changes not visible from the public way are not subject to review by this Regulation. Routine maintenance, rehabilitation, or in-kind replacement of building materials or elements are not subject to review by this Regulation.
(b) Lengthy unbroken façades parallel or visible to East Main Street shall not be permitted. The maximum horizontal length of an unbroken façade visible to East Main Street shall not exceed thirty feet (30’). Façade offsets shall be sufficient to create a strong shadow line.
(c) On lots where street frontage limits building width and on other lots where appropriate, the buildings shall be oriented so that the narrow end (short axis) is facing the street side.
Effective May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 1503
(1) The building width facing the street shall not exceed forty-five feet (45’).
(2) For corner lots or lots fronting two roads both visible from the East Main Street public way, orientation and building design should appropriately reflect the shape and proportions of the parcel.
(d) Roof structures shall be in accordance with the existing architectural character of the area as seen from any public way. Roofs shall project enough beyond the façade to create an overhang and cast a shadow.
(e) Mechanical equipment shall be concealed by or placed under the roof eaves or enclosed within a structure on top of the roof. Where this is not possible, mechanical elements shall be located so that they are not visible from public streets or adjacent residential uses. Mechanical equipment located at ground level shall be screened and landscaped.
(1) Solar energy systems, while allowed in this District, should be located in such a way to neither diminish the efficacy of the system nor detract from the District character.
(f) Accessory structures shall be located in the rear or side yards only. There shall be no accessory structures located in the front yard.
(g) Particular attention shall be given to architectural detail and landscaping of the side of the building facing East Main Street, so that there appears to be an entrance at the front of the structure.
(h) Open porches are encouraged and may be used as display areas for commercial and service uses located within the building.
(i) Materials used in construction or reconstruction shall be consistent and compatible with materials found in similar structures throughout the District.
15.3.3 Parking Requirements: Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with Section 33 of these Regulations, and with the following additional provisions:
(a) No off-street parking for structures built after the implementation of the District regulations shall be located in the front yard facing East Main Street.
(1) If a change of use requires that the number of parking spaces be increased for a structure built before the implementation of these Regulations, the added parking spaces must be located to the rear of a line drawn parallel to the street line at a distance of not less than the closest distance to any part of the building to the street line.
Effective May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 1504
(b) For all structures built after the implementation of these Regulations, all parking on the lot shall be located to the rear of a line drawn parallel to the front lot line at a distance not less than the closest part of the building to the front lot line.
(c) All off-street parking areas, whether serving a single lot or multiple lots, shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 33.
(d) Parking in side and rear yards shall be buffered from neighboring property by a five foot (5’) wide landscaped buffer area unless joint parking is approved by the Commission. Each lot shall have its own buffer, and the presence of a buffer on the adjacent lot shall not suffice.
(1) The Commission may also approve common access driveways to joint parking areas. All proposals for joint parking and common access shall be accompanied by an easement. The easement shall include a written agreement providing for maintenance of the access and parking area and associated landscaping. The easement shall be filed on the Clinton Land Records in the Town Clerk’s Office at the expiration of the appeal period.
(e) In addition, any parking spaces which are visible from East Main Street shall be screened by landscape elements to the greatest extent practicable.
(f) Parking areas shall be designed to provide safe pedestrian passage from parking to building.
15.3.4 Sidewalks:
(a) All new development or enlargement of existing development shall include the installation of a sidewalk meeting the requirements of this Section, unless a conforming sidewalk exists. The Commission shall determine when enlargement of existing development requires the installation of a sidewalk.
(b) Sidewalks shall be provided along the entire street frontage on East Main Street and along connecting side streets within the District. Sidewalks shall be provided from the frontage sidewalk to the primary building entrance.
(c) All sidewalks parallel to East Main Street and connecting side streets shall be constructed of brick, slate, concrete, or suitable paving blocks, and shall have a minimum width of five feet (5’).
15.3.5 Landscaping:
(a) The area between the front of the building and the sidewalk shall be landscaped in a manner complementary to the scale and style of the building.
Effective May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 1505
(1) There shall be no structure, fence, wall or planting in excess of three feet (3’) located within the front yard, with the exception of any buffer areas required by these Regulations.
(2) Low hedges, board, picket or wrought iron fences and stone walls are appropriate for the District. Window boxes, planters and flowerbeds are encouraged.
(3) Commercial establishments may provide benches or other outdoor seating for customers and other pedestrians as part of the front landscape design.
(b) All building foundations shall be planted with native shrubs or otherwise appropriately landscaped.
(c) All freestanding signs shall have appropriate landscaping at their base.
(d) All service areas, storage areas and trash receptacles shall be screened by fencing and planting.
(e) Street trees shall be planted at a minimum distance of one (1) tree for every fifty feet (50’) of frontage. Every lot shall have a least one street tree. Suitable existing trees may be used to meet this requirement. All street trees shall be of a type, size and location approved by the Commission.
(f) Any disturbed portion of lot which is not used for buildings, structures, accessory uses, parking, loading or sidewalks shall be landscaped and maintained in such a manner as to minimize sediment and erosion, dust and stormwater runoff.
(g) Any screening, landscaping and/or paving required by these Regulations or as part of a Site Plan approval shall be maintained by the property owner or primary lessee in good condition through the period of use of the property.
15.3.6 Lighting: Exterior lighting shall be of a style and character that is harmonious with the character of the District. Lighting shall be properly scaled for pedestrians.
(a) Lighting structures in parking areas shall not exceed twelve feet (12’) in height.
(b) Luminaries shall have shielded light sources to prevent glare and the casting of light outside of the property limits.
(c) Pedestrian walkways may be illuminated by light bollards or other low level lighting standards with shielded light sources.
Effective May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 1506
(d) Building mounted flood lighting is prohibited, with the exception of motion-activated security lighting.
(e) Indirect lighting, which is not directed at property boundaries, is encouraged.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1601
Section 16
Historic Districts
16.1 Historic District: In addition to the requirements of these Regulations, any application for construction, alteration or extension of any building or other structure, including but not limited to, swimming pools, within a Historic District shall require a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Historic District Commission.
16.2 Properties Abutting a Historic District: Within any parcel immediately abutting a local Historic District, the following shall apply:
(Amended 10/1/2013)
16.2.1 Any new building or other structure shall be of such character as to be consistent with the historic architecture prevalent in the local Historic District and to harmonize with existing buildings in the District, together with other such provisions as may be required by the Historic District Commission.
16.2.2 The entire area of the lot required for setbacks from a street line shall be landscaped, except for necessary access drives, with lawns and with shrubs and trees.
16.2.3 Construction, alteration or extension of any building, originally designed as a house, shall be carried out in such a manner as to protect the integrity of residential architecture design.
16.2.4 In the event of conflict between the above requirements and those of the Historic District Commission, the more restrictive regulation shall prevail.
16.2.5 This Section pertains to local historic districts, such as the Liberty Green Historic District and does not pertain to districts listed on the National Register of Historic Places, such as the Clinton Village Historic District.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1701
Section 17
Flood Hazard Zone
17.1 Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objective:
17.1.1 Statutory Authorization: The Legislature of the State of Connecticut has, in CGS Section 8-1, delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Planning and Zoning Commission of Clinton, Connecticut does regulate as follows:
(a) Severability: See Section 2.2 of these Regulations.
17.1.2 Designation of the Planning and Zoning Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby appointed to administer and implement this Regulation by granting or denying Flood Hazard Area Permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
17.1.3 Finding of Fact:
(a) The flood hazard areas of the town of Clinton are subject to periodic inundation, which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in the other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood-proofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to flood loss.
17.1.4 Statement of Purpose: It is the purpose of this Regulation to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
(a) To promote human life and health.
(b) To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
(c) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
(d) To minimize prolonged business interruptions.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1702
(e) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard.
(f) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas.
(g) To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard.
(h) To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.
17.1.5 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to accomplish its purposes, this Section includes methods and provisions for:
(a) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
(b) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction.
(c) Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels and natural protective barriers that help accommodate or channel flood waters.
(d) Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and
(e) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.
17.2 Definitions: For the specific purpose of this Section, the words below shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Section its most reasonable application.
17.2.1 Base Flood: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
17.2.2 Base Flood Elevation (BFE): The elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas.
17.2.3 Basement: That portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1703
17.2.4 Breakaway Walls: A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
17.2.5 Coastal AE Zone: The portion of the Coastal High Hazard Area with wave heights between 1.5 feet and 3.0 feet bounded by a line labeled the “Limit of Moderate Wave Action” (LiMWA) on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). VE Zone floodplain construction standards are applied to development, new construction and substantial improvements in the Coastal AE Zone.
17.2.6 Coastal High Hazard Area (“VE” and “Coastal AE” Zones): An area of Special Flood Hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. Coastal High Hazard Areas are designated as Zone VE and Zone AE bounded by a line labeled “Limit of Moderate Wave Action” (LiMWA) on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
17.2.7 Cost: As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor’s estimate.
The estimate shall include, but not be limited to, the cost of materials (interior finishing components, structural components, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials; building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor’s overhead; contractor’s profit; and grand total.
Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and specifications; survey costs; permit fees; outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems; and detached structures such as garages, sheds and gazebos.
17.2.8 Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.
17.2.9 Elevated Building – A and AE Zones: A non-basement building built to have the top of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls, or by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1704
17.2.10 Elevated Building – VE and Coastal AE Zones: A non-basement building built to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow of water and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. “Elevated Building” also includes structures, which have the lower area enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of Subsection 17.9.2(d) (Construction Methods: Space Below the Lowest Floor).
17.2.11 Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for serving the lots on which the manufactured home are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the effective date of the Flood Hazard Zone Regulations (September 3, 1980).
17.2.12 Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for serving the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
17.2.13 Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): The federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
17.2.14 Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal wetlands and/or
(b) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
17.2.15 Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM): The official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated the limits of the regulatory floodway and 100-year floodplain.
17.2.16 Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): The official map of a community on which the administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
17.2.17 Flood Insurance Study (FIS): The official report provided in which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the Flood Hazard Boundary – Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1705
17.2.18 Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1’).
17.2.19 Functionally Dependent Use or Facility: A use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The terms includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities.
17.2.20 Highest Adjacent Grade (HAG): The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
17.2.21 Historic Structure: Any structure that is:
(a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
(c) Individually listed on a state inventory of places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.
(d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by either:
(1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
17.2.22 Limit of Moderate Wave Action (LiMWA): The approximate landward limit of the 1.5 foot breaking wave within a Coastal AE Zone. These areas are bounded by a line labeled “Limit of Moderate Wave Action” (LiMWA) on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The effects of wave hazards between the VE Zone and LiMWA (or between the shoreline and the LiMWA for areas where VE Zones are not identified) will be similar to, but less severe than those in the VE Zone.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1706
17.2.23 Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Regulation.
17.2.24 Manufactured Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle.
17.2.25 Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
17.2.26 Market Value: As related to substantial improvement and substantial damage, the market value of the structure shall be determined by (1) the appraised building value of the structure as shown on the Assessor’s Field Card prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.
17.2.27 Mean Sea Level (MSL): The North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced.
17.2.28 New Construction: Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of these Regulations, the initial FIRM, September 3, 1980, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
17.2.29 Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle which is built on a single chassis; four hundred square feet (400 sq. ft.) or less when measured at the longest horizontal projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
17.2.30 Sand Dunes: Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
17.2.31 Special Flood Hazard Area: The land within the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map. After detailed ratemaking has been completed and prepared for publication of the FIRM, Zone A is usually refined into Zones A, A1-A30 or AE. The Special Flood Hazard Area also includes the Coastal High Hazard Area and all zones starting with an “A” or “V” designation.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1707
17.2.32 Start of Construction: For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issues, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor doesn’t include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
17.2.33 Structure: A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, including propane tanks or cylinders in excess of twenty pounds (20 lbs.).
17.2.34 Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damage condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. “Substantial Damage” also means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
17.2.35 Substantial Improvement: Any combination of repairs, re-construction, alteration or improvements to a structure taking place during a five-year (5) period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure. This term includes structures that have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
For the purpose of this definition, “Substantial Improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimension of the structure. The term does not, however, include any improvement project required to correct existing violations of State and local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement agent and are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
17.2.36 Variance: A grant of relief from the requirements of this Regulation, which permits construction in a manner that, would otherwise be prohibited by this Regulation.
17.2.37 Violation: Means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s flood plain management certificate, other
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1708
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
17.2.38 Water Surface Elevation: Means the height, in relation to North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
17.3 General Provisions:
17.3.1 Lands to which this section applies: The provisions of this Section shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the Clinton Planning and Zoning Commission.
17.3.2 Basis for establishing the areas of Special Flood Hazard Area: The Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Middlesex County, Connecticut, dated February 6, 2013, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), dated February 6, 2013 (Panels 09007C0312J, 09007C0316J, 09007C0317J, 09007C0318J, 09007C0319J, 09007C0336J, 09007C0338J) and August 28, 2008 (Panels 09007C0304G, 09007C0310G), and other supporting data, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Regulation. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this Regulation it must take precedence when more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA.
The SFHA’s include any area shown on the FIRM as Zones A, AE and VE, including areas designated as a floodway on a FIRM. The Zone VE and Coastal AE Zone bounded by a line labeled “Limit of Moderate Wave Action” (LiMWA) are also identified as a Coastal High Hazard Area on a FIRM. The SFHAs are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. Also included in the SFHA are areas of potential, demonstrable or historical flooding, including any area contiguous with, but outside the SFHA identified by FEMA, and where the land surface elevation is lower than the base flood elevation (BFE) as shown in the FIS, and where the area is not protected from flooding by a natural or man-made feature. The FIRM and FIS are on file in the Planning and Zoning Office, Town Hall, Clinton.
17.3.3 Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Section or other applicable regulations.
17.3.4 Zone Determination in Regards to Building Location: When a structure is located or proposed to be located straddling flood zones the following apply:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1709
(a) Portion of Structure in Flood Zone: If any portion of a structure lies within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered to be in the SFHA. The entire structure must meet the construction requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the more restrictive zone.
(b) Structures in Two Flood Zones: If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards of the most restrictive zone apply to the entire (i.e., V Zone is more restrictive then A zone; structure must be built to the highest BFE). The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. (Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive zone.)
(c) No Structures Entirely or Partially Over Water: New construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or partially over water.
17.3.5 Abrogation and Greater Restriction: This Section is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Section and another regulation easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
17.3.6 Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this Section, all provisions shall be:
(a) Considered as minimum requirements.
(b) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(c) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
17.3.7 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this Section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Section does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free of flooding or flood damages. This Section shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Clinton, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this Section or any administration decision lawfully made there under.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1710
17.4 Administration:
17.4.1 Flood Hazard Area Permit: All necessary approvals shall be obtained from the Commission prior to applying to the ZEO for a Flood Hazard Permit Application for a Flood Hazard Area Permit shall be made on forms furnished by the PZC and shall include, but not be limited to: Plans drawn to scale not less than one inch equals twenty feet (1”=20’), one inch equals forty feet (1”=40’) or other such scale as may be approved, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
(a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including the basement) of all structures.
(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been flood-proofed.
(c) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns) for structures in the Zones VE and Coastal AE Zones.
(d) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood-proofing methods for any structure meet the flood-proofing criteria in Subsection 17.6.: Specific Standards.
(e) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(f) Plans for any walls to be used to enclose space below the base flood level.
17.4.2 Application Review: The Commission shall review all applications to determine:
(a) That the permit requirements of this Section have been satisfied.
(b) All necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(c) For all applications in the area of special flood hazard except in the coastal high hazard area, whether the proposed development adversely affects the flood carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard. For the purposes of this Section, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1711
(d) For all applications in the coastal high hazard area of the area of special flood hazard, whether the proposed development alters sand dunes so as to increase potential flood damage.
(e) Whether plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base flood are in accordance with Subsection 17.9.2(d).
17.4.3 Additional Information:
(a) Obtain and record the actual as-built elevation (in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures.
(b) For all new and substantially improved flood-proofed structures:
(1) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level).
(2) Maintain the flood-proofing certifications required in Subsection 17.4.1(d).
(c) In coastal high hazard areas, certification shall be obtained from a registered professional engineer or architect that the structure is securely anchored to adequately anchored pilings or columns in order to withstand velocity waters and hurricane wave wash.
(d) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Section.
(e) Provide completed Elevation Certificates of all new or substantially improved structures signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer or Land Surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, on forms provided by FEMA.
17.4.4 In AE Zones, where Base Flood Elevations have been determined, but before a floodway has been designated, no new construction, substantial improvement, or other development (including fill), shall be permitted which will increase base flood elevations more than one foot (1’) at any point along the watercourse when all anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development.
17.4.5 Use of Other Base Flood Data: The Commission shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and any floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer Subsections 17.6.1: Specific Standards, Residential Construction and 17.6.2: Specific Standards, Nonresidential Construction. The Commission shall require base flood elevation (BFE) data to be provided with any application for new construction, substantial improvement or other development in Zone A without a FEMA-published BFE (un-numbered A Zone).
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1712
The Commission shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any BFE and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, including data developed for subdivision proposals, as criteria for requiring the new construction, substantial improvements or other development in un-numbered A Zones on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map(FIRM) meet the standards in Sections 17.5, 17.6, 17.7, 17.8 and 17.9.
17.4.6 Alteration of Watercourses: In the event of a proposal to alter or relocate a watercourse, the Commission shall:
(a) Notify adjacent communities, along with the Town’s appropriate commissions and the Department of Environmental Protection prior to any such alteration or relocation and shall submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
17.4.7 Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries: If any questions should arise with regard to FIRM Boundaries, the ZEO shall interpret the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 17.11: Variance Procedures – Zoning Board of Appeals. If an applicant can show just cause that a structure is not flood prone due to circumstances, such as being situated on a knoll, said applicant, in addition and as an alternative to the provisions afforded in Section 17.11, may file for a Letter of Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA acknowledging said fact as a basis for issuance of a LOMA. To be effective as a waiver of the application of the FIRM Boundaries, the LOMA must describe the waiver with sufficient particularity so that the Commission can determine the precise area of applicability. Neither the Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals shall make any determination that would relieve any requirement set forth in Section 17.
17.4.8 See Section 4: Application Requirements, Procedures and Decision Process for all other permit requirements.
17.5 Provision for Flood Hazard Reduction: In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
17.5.1 Anchoring:
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1713
(b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within Zones A, AE and VE shall be elevated on a permanent foundation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of this Section:
(1) Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four (4) corners of the manufactured home, with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with manufactured homes less than fifty feet (50’) long requirement one (1) additional tie per side.
(2) Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points, with manufactured homes less than fifty feet (50’) long requiring four (4) additional ties per side.
(3) All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred pounds (4,800 lbs).
(4) Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored.
(c) Aboveground Oil Tanks: Aboveground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or inside of the structure must be either elevated above the base flood elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad, or be securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement, have the top of the fill tank extended above the BFE, and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of flood water.
(d) Flood Vents: Flood vents shall be used in all structures with breakaway walls, open/shallow foundations and crawl spaces. There shall be a minimum of two vents and shall be installed no more than one foot (1’) above the finished grade inside and outside the structure.
(1) Foundation walls and other enclosure walls of A, AE Zone buildings (including Coastal AE Zone buildings) must be equipped with opening that allow the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(2) Flood opening must be provided in at least two of the walls forming the enclosures.
(3) The bottom of each opening is to be located no higher than one foot (1’) above the grade that is immediately under each opening. If the interior and exterior grades are different, the higher of the final interior grade and the finished exterior grade that is immediately under each opening is used to make the determination.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1714
(4) Louvers, screens or covers may be installed over flood openings as long as they do not interfere with the operation of the openings during a flood.
(5) Flood openings may be sized according to either a prescriptive method (one square inch of flood opening per square foot of enclosed area) or an engineering method (which must be certified by a registered engineer or architect).
(6) Details concerning the flood openings can be found in FEMA (2008c) Technical Bulletin 1-08, Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures, as may be amended from time to time.
(e) Finished grades shall slope away from the structure to the greatest extent possible. If this is not possible, the finished grades shall be sloped around the structure to a discharge point.
17.5.2 Construction Materials and Methods: All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with all Federal, State and local building codes and its Coastal Construction Manual #55, prepared by FEMA. If there is a conflict between standards, the most stringent shall apply.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(c) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
17.5.3 Utilities:
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters; and into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters.
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
17.5.4 Subdivision Proposals:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1715
(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which contain at least three (3) lots or two (2) acres (whichever is less).
17.5.5 Compensatory Storage: The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas that are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase to the footprint to the structure shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain. Storage shall be provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body. Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the municipality.
17.5.6 Equal Conveyance: Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not result in an (0.0 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood elevation). Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity.
17.6 Specific Standards: In areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Subsection 17.3.2: Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in Subsection 17.4.5: Use of Other Base Flood Data, the following standards are required:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1716
17.6.1 Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of one foot (1’) above the base flood elevation.
17.6.2 Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of one foot (1’) above the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(a) Be flood proofed to one foot (1’) above the base flood level so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effect of buoyancy.
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in Subsection 17.4.1(d).
17.6.3 Residential and Nonresidential Construction: As of August 28, 2008, no fully enclosed area below the lowest floor shall be allowed.
17.7 Manufactured Homes:
17.7.1 Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with Subsection 17.5.1(b), such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is one foot (1’) above the base flood elevation.
17.7.2 Recreational vehicles placed on site within Zones A, AE and VE shall either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; Or
(1) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
(c) Meet all the general standards of Section 17.5 including the elevation and anchoring requirements of Subsection 17.5.1. Recreational vehicles located in VE Zones and Coastal AE Zones must comply with standards provided in Section 17.8.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1717
17.7.3 For existing manufactured home parks where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equal or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced, require that:
(a) Stands or lots are elevated on compact fill or on piling so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be one foot (1’) above the base flood level.
(b) Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided.
(c) In the instance of elevation on pilings, that lots are large enough to permit steps, piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than ten feet (10’) apart, and reinforcement is provided for pilings no more than six feet (6’) above the ground level.
17.7.4 No manufactured home, or substantial improvement thereof, shall be placed in a coastal high hazard area except in an existing manufactured home park in accordance with Section 17.9.
17.7.5 No manufactured home, or substantial improvement thereof, shall be placed in a floodway except in an existing manufactured home park in accordance with Sections 17.5.1(b) and 17.10.
17.8 Coastal High Hazard Area: Coastal high hazard areas (VE Zones and Coastal AE Zones bounded by a line labeled “Limit of Moderate Wave Action” (LiMWA)) are located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Subsection 17.3.2. These areas have special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from tidal surges and hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
17.8.1 Location of Structures:
(a) All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of the Connecticut Coastal Jurisdiction line as defined in CGS Section 22a-359 as amended and in accordance with the recommendations as set forth in FEMA’s Coastal Construction Manual (FEMA #55), Chapter 8 “Siting” and Chapter 11 “Determining Site Specific Loads”.
(b) The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited except in an existing manufactured home park.
17.8.2 Construction Methods:
(a) Elevation: All buildings or structures shall be elevated so that the lowest supporting member is located no lower than one foot (1’) above the base flood elevation level, with all space below the lowest supporting member open so
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1718
as not to impede the flow of water, except for breakaway walls as provided for in Subsection 17.8.2(d).
(b) Structural Support:
(1) All buildings or structures shall be securely anchored on piling or columns.
(2) Pilings or columns used as structural support shall be designed and anchored so as to withstand all applied loads of the base flood flow.
(3) There shall be no fill used for structural support.
(4) No open/shallow foundations as described in Section 10.7 of FEMA’s Coastal Construction Manual (FEMA 55) are permitted.
(c) Certification: Compliance with the provisions of Subsections 17.8.2(a) and (b)(1) and (2) shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. The Certification shall include calculations for scouring.
(d) Space Below the Lowest Floor:
(1) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure started after the enactment of this Section shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway walls are used as provided in this Section.
(2) Breakaway walls shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided they are not a part of the structural support of the building and are designed so as to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are to be used and shall include flood vents.
(3) Design safe loading resistance of each wall shall not be less than ten (10) nor more than twenty pounds per square foot (20 lbs./sq. ft.).
(4) If more than twenty pounds per square foot (20 lbs./sq. ft.), a registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the designed wall collapse would result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood event, and the elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components during the base flood event. Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in this determination shall have one
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1719
percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (100 year mean recurrence interval).
(5) If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation.
(6) Prior to construction, placement for any structure that will have breakaway walls must be submitted to the Commission for approval.
17.8.3 Sand Dunes: There shall be no alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage.
17.9 Coastal AE Zone with Moderate Wave Action: High hazard areas (AE Zones) are located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Subsection 17.3.2. These areas have special flood hazards associated with moderate wave action from tidal surges and hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
17.9.1 Location of Structures:
(a) All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of the Connecticut Coastal Jurisdiction Line as defined in CGS Section 22a-359, as amended by Public Act 12-101 and in accordance with the recommendations set forth in FEMA’s Coastal Construction Manual (FEMA #55), Chapter 8 “Siting” and Chapter 11 “Determining Site Specific Loads”.
(b) The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited except in an existing manufactured home park.
17.9.2 Construction Methods:
(a) Elevation: All buildings or structures shall be elevated so that the lowest supporting member is located no lower than one foot (1’) above the base flood elevation level, with all space below the lowest supporting member open so as not to impede the flow of water, except for breakaway walls as provided in Subsection 17.8.2(d).
(b) Structural Support:
(1) All buildings or structures shall be securely anchored on piling or columns.
(2) Pilings or columns used as structural support shall be designed and anchored so as to withstand all applied loads of the base flood flow.
(3) There shall be no fill used for structural support.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1720
(4) Open/shallow foundations as described in Section 10.7 of FEMA’s Coastal Construction Manual (FEMA #55) are permitted.
(c) Certification: Compliance with the provisions of Subsection 17.9.2(a) and (b)(1) and (2) shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, including calculations for scouring.
(d) Space Below the Lowest Floor:
(1) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure started after the enactment of this Section shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway walls are used as provided in this Section.
(2) Breakaway walls shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided they are not a part of the structural support of the building and are designated so as to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are to be used and shall include flood vents.
(3) Design safe loading resistance of each wall shall not be less than ten (10) nor more than twenty pounds per square foot (20 lbs./sq. ft.).
(4) If more than twenty pounds per square foot (20 lbs./sq. ft.), a registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the designed wall collapse would result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood event, and the elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components during the base flood event. Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in this determination shall have one percent (1%) change of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (100 year mean recurrence interval).
(5) If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation.
(6) Prior to construction, placement for any structure that will have breakaway walls must be submitted to the Commission for approval.
17.10 Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Subsection 17.3.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1721
17.10.1 Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
17.10.2 If Section 17.8 and 17.9 are satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 17.5: Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
The Town may request floodway data of an applicant for the watercourses without FEMA-published floodways. When such data is provided by an applicant or whenever such data is available from any other source (in response to the Town’s request or not), the Town shall adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1’) at any point at any point along the watercourse.
17.11 Variance Procedure – Zoning Board of Appeals:
17.11.1 The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the ZEO in the enforcement or administration of the provisions of Section 17.
17.11.2 Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of the County of Middlesex, Middletown, Connecticut, as provided in CGS Section 8-8.
17.11.3 In passing upon such applications, the Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other provisions of Section 17 and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location where applicable.
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1722
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program of that area.
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site.
(k) The costs of provided governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
17.11.4 Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood elevation level, providing items (a) – (k) in Subsection 17.11.3 have been fully considered, and not located or partially located in Flood Hazard Areas designated Zone V, VE or designated coastal barriers. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
17.11.5 Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection 17.11.3 and the purposes of this regulation, the Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances, as it deems necessary to further the purposes of Section 17.
17.11.6 The records of all appeal actions shall be maintained in the Planning and Zoning Office and the Commission shall report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its biennial report.
17.11.7 Conditions for Variances:
(a) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this Section.
(b) Variances should not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(c) Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1723
(d) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, increase flood insurance rates, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in Section 17.5 or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(e) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest flood elevation, up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage.
17.12 Enforcement: Enforcement of this Section shall be in accordance with Section 5 of these Regulations.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1801
Section 18
Coastal Area Management Zone
Coastal Site Plan Review
18.1 Policy: It is the policy of the Commission that continued development and sound economic growth of Clinton’s coastal area shall take place in such manner that the coastal resources shall be preserved and enhanced. To this end the Commission adopted a Municipal Coastal Plan effective August 8, 2005 with revisions under the authority of the Connecticut Coastal Management Ace (CCMA) of January 1, 1980 and the following regulations and standards are in accordance with the recommendations of such program and such Act.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
18.2 Coastal Site Plan Review: All buildings, uses and structures lying fully or partly within the coastal boundary, as defined by CGS Section 22a-94 and as delineated on the Coastal Boundary Map for the Town of Clinton, shall be subject to the coastal site plan review requirements and procedures in CGS Section 22a-105 through 22a-109, unless specifically exempted below.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
18.3 Coastal Site Plan Review Exemptions: Pursuant to CGS Section 22a-109(b) the following activities are exempt from coastal site plan review requirements:
18.3.1 Exterior modification of, or minor additions of less than five hundred square feet (500 sq. ft.), to existing buildings or detached accessory buildings, such as garages and utility sheds.
18.3.2 Construction of new or modification of existing structures incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property including but not limited to, walks, terraces, decks, driveways, swimming pools, tennis courts, docks and detached accessory buildings.
18.3.3 Construction of new or modification of existing on-premises fences, walls, pedestrian walks or terraces, underground utility connections, essential electric, gas, telephone, water and sewer service lines, signs and such other minor structures as will not substantially alter the natural character of coastal resources as defined by CGS Section 22a-93(7), or restricted access along the public beach.
18.3.4 Construction of an individual single family residential structure except in or within one hundred feet (100’) of tidal wetlands, coastal bluffs and escarpments, beaches and dunes.
18.3.5 Activities conducted for the specific purpose of conserving or preserving soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish, wildlife and other coastal land and water resources.
18.3.6 Interior modifications to buildings.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1802
18.3.7 Minor changes in use of a building, structure or property except those changes occurring on property adjacent to or abutting coastal waters.
18.3.8 Gardening, grazing and the harvesting of crops.
18.4 Application: Except as exempted above, applicants for Zoning Permits, Site Plans, Special Exceptions, Variances, Subdivision or Re-subdivision approval, municipal improvements or multi-unit development within the coastal boundary shall file with the PZC or ZBA, as the case may be, a Coastal Site Plan and application on such forms as are prescribed by the Commission. Such applicant and site plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
(Amended 10/1/2013)
18.4.1 General Requirements: Pursuant to CGS Section 22a-105 and Section 22a-106:
(a) A plan showing the location and spatial relationship of coastal resources contiguous to the site.
(b) A description of the entire project with appropriate plans, indicating project location, design, timing and method of construction.
(c) An assessment of the capability of the resources to accommodate the proposed use.
(d) An assessment of the suitability of the project for the proposed site.
(e) An evaluation of the potential beneficial and adverse impacts of the project.
(f) A description of proposed methods to mitigate adverse effects on coastal resources.
(g) A statement demonstrating that the adverse impacts of the proposed activity are acceptable and that such activity is consistent with the coastal policies of CGS Section 22a-92 and that the proposed project is in compliance with all pertinent zoning regulations and the following special standards.
18.4.2 Special Standards and Criteria for Waterfront Property: All property abutting Long Island Sound, the Hammonassett, Indian, Hammock and Menunketesuck Rivers within the Clinton Coastal Area Boundary shall be subject, where applicable, to the following special requirements in addition to those listed elsewhere in these Regulations:
(a) Visual Access: Waterfront property shall be developed in a manner that is consistent with a waterfront setting and so that visual access to and from the water is maximized. In reviewing Coastal Site Plans for development of waterfront property, the Commission shall consider the following guidelines:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1803
(1) The quality and extent of views from adjacent public streets through the property to the water.
(2) The design and relationship of the development to the waterfront as viewed from the water.
(3) The quality and extent of view of adjacent property owners.
(b) Pump-out Facilities for Marinas: Construction of any new or the expansion of any existing commercial marina with mooring slips capable of handling boats nineteen feet (19’) or greater in length shall provide, on the marina site, an approved pump-out facility for the disposal of sanitary wastes as follows:
(1) The pump-out facility must be of adequate design and capacity to properly handle the wastes from all boats over nineteen feet (19’) with approved marine sanitation devices that area moored at the marina. In addition, the pump-out facility must provide sufficient capacity and be capable of accepting sanitary wastes from portable toilets on boats of less than nineteen feet (19’) and those without approved marine sanitation devices. The pump-out facility must be approved by the Director of Health and be submitted for review by the Department of Environmental Protection.
(2) The Commission may, at its option, permit a marina to enter into a suitable agreement with other marinas to share a single pump-out facility. In any such case, the pump-out facility must be of suitable design and capacity to handle the sanitary wastes from boats of all the marinas using the facility. In addition, the agreement between the marinas must be approved by the Director of Health and the Harbor Management Commission and the pump-out facility must be approved by the Director of Health.
(c) Marina Expansion:
(1) No expansion of slips and moorings for boats within Clinton Harbor will be permitted unless applicant can demonstrate to the Commission that adequate measures will be taken to protect water quality consistent with State DEP Water Quality Standards and Classifications for Clinton Harbor and adjacent waters and their tributaries.
(2) No expansion of mooring slips will be permitted unless adequate pump-out facilities exist and adequate shore services such as parking and refuse collection are provided.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1804
18.5 Application Fee: All applications for Coastal Site Plan Review shall be accompanied by an application fee as specified in Section 7: Fees.
18.6 Any reference made in these Sections (18.7 through and including 18.7.3) or in the Connecticut General Statutes referenced in said Sections, to the term “water dependent uses” shall have as its meaning the definition supplied by CGS Section 22a-93(16).
18.7 Consideration of the Application: In addition to reviewing Coastal Site Plans for compliance with the applicable standards, requirements or criteria set forth elsewhere in these Regulations, the Commission or Board, as the case may be, shall take into consideration compliance with the following criteria:
18.7.1 Consistency of the proposed activity with the applicable coastal policies in CGS Section 22a-92.
18.7.2 The acceptability of potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity on coastal resources as defined in CGS Section 22a-93(15).
18.7.3 The acceptability of potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity on future water dependent development opportunities as defined in CGS Section 22a-93(17) for the Marine Zone.
18.7.4 The adequacy of measures to mitigate adverse impacts of the proposed activity on coastal resources, and for the Marine Zone, future water dependent development opportunities.
18.8 The Commission or Board, as the case may be, shall approve, modify, condition, or deny the activity proposed in a Coastal Site Plan on the basis of the criteria listed in CGS Section 22a-106, to ensure that the proposed activity is consistent with the coastal policies in CGS Section 22a-92, and that the potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity on both coastal resources and future water dependent development opportunities are acceptable.
18.9 Pursuant to CGS Section 22a-106, the Commission or Board, as the case may be, shall state in writing the finding and reasons for its action with respect to any Coastal Site Plan, the Commission or Board shall make a written finding that:
18.9.1 The proposed activity with any conditions or modifications imposed by the Commission or Board is consistent with the coastal policies in CGS Section 22a-92.
18.9.2 That the proposed activity incorporated as condition or modifications, all reasonable measures which would mitigate potential adverse impacts on both coastal resources, and for the Marine Zone, future water dependent development activities.
18.9.3 That the potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity on coastal resources, and for the Marine Zone, future water dependent development opportunities with
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1805
any conditions or modifications imposed by the Commission or Board are acceptable.
18.10 Pursuant to PA 84-53, CGS Section 22a-105(e), nothing in these Regulations shall be deemed to deny the right of reconstruction of a building after a casualty loss.
18.11 Violations: In accordance with CGS Section 22a-108, any activity undertaken within the coastal boundary without the required Coastal Site Plan review and approval shall be considered a public nuisance and shall be subject to enforcement remedies authorized in that Section.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 1901
Section 19
Reserved for Future Use
Amended June 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2001
Section 20
Interchange Development Zone
20.1 Purpose: The purpose of the Interchange Development Zone (IDZ) is to permit and encourage variety, flexibility, and commercial viability in the area of Route 81, north of the I-95 exit 63 interchange, to Walnut Hill Road.
20.1.1 This Zone is meant to allow development appropriate to the area and its surroundings that provides enhancements to infrastructure, and integrates with and protects nearby neighborhoods.
20.1.2 This Zone should foster high-quality mixed-use development with careful attention to the appearance of buildings and the surrounding site and, should include professional landscaping.
20.1.3 Site Access will be an integral part of site planning, with interior service drives and limited curb cuts to facilitate traffic flow and safety.
20.1.4 Consideration of connectivity to other parts of Town, especially the train station and downtown, through way finding and tourist information, are important aspects of this Zone.
20.1.5 In recognition of the fact that it is generally site appearance and performance that determine whether a use is desirable or undesirable, permitted uses will be those that are able to meet all of the standards detailed below and in other applicable sections of these Regulations.
20.2 Definitions: For the purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the stated definitions:
20.2.1 Articulation: Facades shall incorporate different materials, colors, wall plane projections or recesses to prevent uninterrupted lengths of facades.
20.2.2 Commercial Center: Such shopping centers are a group of retail stores planned and designed for the site and utilized as a common facility on one lot. Shopping centers include a mix of retail, restaurants, financial institutions, and personal service establishments with common parking and loading areas and may include multifamily residential.
20.2.3 Enhanced Open Space: Buffering and screening are provided from nearby residential properties; the quality and access of beneficial open space and on-site recreation opportunities, and the extent of the conservation of natural features on-site.
Amended June 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2002
20.2.4 Pedestrian Amenities: Amenities that serve as informal gathering places for socializing, resting, and enjoyment of a particular area which contribute to a walkable center. Typical amenities include extra wide sidewalks (minimum 6-foot width), street trees, sitting spaces, weather protection (awnings and canopies), pedestrian scale lighting, seating or shelter at transit stops, sidewalk dining, etc.
20.2.5 Pedestrian-Friendly/Pedestrian-Oriented: Development which is designed with an emphasis primarily on the sidewalk and pedestrian access to and within the site and buildings, rather than on auto access and parking areas. The main entrance is oriented to the street sidewalk. There are generally windows or display cases along building facades which face the street.
20.2.6 Pedestrian Scaled: Site and building design elements that are dimensionally related to pedestrians, such as: small building spaces with individual entrances (e.g., as is typical of downtowns and main street developments); larger buildings which have articulation and detailing to break up large masses; narrower streets with tree canopies; smaller parking areas or parking areas broken up into small components with landscaping; and Pedestrian Amenities; and similar features. These features are all generally smaller in scale than those which are primarily intended to accommodate automobile traffic.
20.2.7 Strip Commercial Centers: Strip commercial centers are typically developed, owned and maintained as a unit and have large parking lots in front, with many/most of the stores arranged in a straight row and an automobile-centric design. Proliferation results in a pattern of development wherein commercial development is strung along arterial thoroughfare.
20.3 General Concepts:
20.3.1 Site Planning: Sites developed under this Zone are intended to be carefully planned, both within the site’s own boundaries and in relation to surrounding properties and the entire Interchange Development Zone. It is the express intention of these Regulations to result in developments that do not resemble typical Strip Commercial Centers. All developments shall be Pedestrian Scaled and Pedestrian Friendly/Pedestrian-Oriented. Uses should be consistent with those of a Commercial Center.
20.3.1.1 Subdivision: To promote both superior design and a mix of vibrant uses, sites developed within this Zone as part of a comprehensive master-planned development conforming to Section 20 of these Regulations may be subdivided into separate lots with certain flexibility in lot requirement standards. Subject to the approval of Special Exception, the minimum lot requirement standards of Sections 26.11.1 through 26.11.10 shall not apply to lots created as part of an approved subdivision within this Zone.
Amended June 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2003
20.3.2 Environmental Concerns: The environmental resources in the vicinity of the Interchange Zone are sensitive and important. All developed sites should seek to demonstrate conformance to the principles of Enhanced Open Space, including protection of wetlands and water quality, specifically in relation to the Aquifer Protection Area designation, providing public access to the Indian River (if applicable), and protecting the surrounding residential properties. Alternative wastewater treatments and demonstration of conformance to environmentally appropriate design elements, such as energy efficiency and ecologically sensitive infrastructure and landscaping is highly encouraged.
(a) For sites within the Aquifer Protection Area, designs must comply with state requirements, CGS § 22a-345i-1 to 22a-345i-10, and Section 4.33 of the Town of Clinton Zoning Regulations and the Town of Clinton Aquifer Protection Regulations.
20.3.3 Building Design: All buildings must be designed by registered architects and must conform to Section 20.7 of this Regulation.
20.3.4 Site Access: Access management is required on all sites to reduce the number of driveway cuts onto Route 81 and mitigate the deterioration of traffic flow generally caused by driveways on arterial streets. Site access techniques will include shared driveways (or provisions for future shared driveways for the first site in an area), interior service drives, and other approaches included in these Regulations. Pedestrian access routes must be appropriately designed between developments within this Zone along Route 81 and the Indian River, with consideration to streetscape continuity and avoidance of adverse impacts on nearby neighborhoods as well as to improve traffic and access in the surrounding area.
20.3.5 Mitigation of Neighborhood Impacts: Mitigation measures should address any material adverse impacts as described in Section 23.4 Performance Standards.
20.4 Permitted Uses: Permitted uses are commercial, institutional, cultural, residential and municipal that reflect the purpose of this Zone through careful attention to the appearance and siting of buildings and/or site amenities, and that meet all of the performance standards enumerated Section 24.2 of the Town of Clinton Zoning Regulations.
20.4.1 Residential Uses are allowed in up to 35% of the total building area. A residential use bonus of 15% for a total of 50% of the total building area may be permitted under Section 20.6 of these Regulations.
20.5 Prohibited Uses: See Section 24.2 of the Town of Clinton Zoning Regulations for a complete list of permissive uses. Uses not listed are prohibited.
20.5.1 Gasoline service stations; automotive, boat, recreational vehicle, truck, and similar sales, service, and repair garages. Public display of any vehicle for sale is strictly
Amended June 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2004
prohibited. “Boat” shall not include non-motorized boats up to 16 feet in length (e.g. canoes, kayaks).
20.5.2 Establishments where the principle use is a “drive-up” offering goods/services directly to customers waiting in motor vehicles; this does not include drive-up windows for pharmacies, financial institutions, food establishments, and other uses where a drive-up window is accessory;
20.5.3 Arcades, except as a minor accessory use (not to exceed 5% of the gross floor area);
20.5.4 Adult-oriented businesses (including but not limited to adult bookstores, adult theatres, massage parlors, and similar establishments);
20.5.5 Mini-warehouses/self-storage facilities;
20.5.6 Tattoo establishments;
20.5.7 Massage Parlors;
20.5.8 Firearms sales, except as a minor accessory use (not to exceed 5% of the gross floor area); and
20.6 Public Amenity Bonus and Incentives
20.6.1 Purpose: In the interest of promoting Enhanced Open Space, public amenities, environmental responsibility, and innovative site design and structural development on land within this Zone, the Commission, at the applicant’s request, may approve any combination of incentives listed within this Section and/or Section 20.4.1. The application must demonstrate conformance to the principles of this Regulation and the intent of this paragraph and each request must be submitted as a separate request for Commission determination. Approval will be based on whether or not the applicant demonstrates adherence to this Section, complies with the intent of the Town Plan of Conservation and Development, all other regulations required by the Town and State, and must be in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare. If the Commission determines that the applicant has not satisfied this burden of proof or compliance with this paragraph, the Commission may deny the request.
(a) The Commission shall grant the following incentives for compliance with the purpose of this Section:
(1) A reduction in the required side and rear setbacks up to 25 feet. Setbacks from residentially zoned areas are not eligible for such a decrease.
Amended June 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2005
(2) A 15% increase in residential development than otherwise required under these Regulations.
(3) An increase in one building story for a maximum of 75 feet/five stories in building height.
(b) Such public amenities include, but are not limited to: improvements to wetland access pathways; art installations or other decorative items like fountains; way finding maps of Clinton tourist attractions, such as shopping and restaurants; public seating and other outdoor furniture; construction of an observation deck for viewing of environmentally or visually significant resources; as well as a reduction in impervious surfaces.
(c) Other structural designs that are encouraged and eligible for the outlined incentives are:
(1) Structured parking: Structured parking allows less impervious surface while maintaining sufficient spaces per the required use.
(2) Innovative Stormwater/Wastewater Design: Energy and environmentally responsible and energy efficient stormwater and/or wastewater facilities may also be eligible based on their relevance to the environmental concerns of the area, their use of new technology, and efficiency.
(d) In the case of a hotel development, the inclusions of certain guest amenities are encouraged and eligible for the outlined incentives. Such amenities include, but are not limited to: On-site restaurant or dining facility; exercise or fitness center; indoor swimming pool; day spa; conference meeting rooms; business center; suites with multiple sleeping quarters and efficiency kitchen facilities; valet parking; concierge service; and shuttles to area attractions.
20.7 Design Standards: Design Standards within this Section relate to building materials and architectural features that seek to imitate the states of buildings seen in other areas of Clinton, most notably those buildings in the Village Zone.
20.7.1 Sites, buildings, signs, and landscaping shall be designed in accordance with the criteria and standards contained in Section 32 “Design Review.”
(a) Buildings constructed with a visible metal exterior are not permitted (excluding metal roofs).
Amended June 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2006
(b) Building elevations visible from the public street must be designed to not look like the back of a building; such architectural elements may include windows, articulation, and other features.
20.7.2 Site designs shall include existing trees and hedgerows, which must be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(a) Any trees within the public right-of-way must be evaluated by the Town’s Tree Warden.
(b) Likewise, landscaping plans shall include street trees and other landscaping elements.
(c) Existing healthy trees of eighteen inch (18”) caliper and greater shall be incorporated as well as significant stands (ten or more trees) of related species, or consistent scrub-shrub groupings occurring in front, side, or rear yards, shall be preserved unless the applicant can prove infeasibility.
(1) Such circumstances will be evaluated by the Town’s Tree Warden.
(2) Welling and mounding are recommended techniques when grade changes are required.
20.7.3 Driveway lighting in close proximity to Route 81 shall incorporate uniform fixtures and poles in order to obtain a uniform lighting appearance along Route 81.
20.7.4 All business, servicing, or processing, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, with the following exceptions:
(a) Off-street parking/loading;
(b) Seasonal outdoor dining;
(c) Outdoor amenities normally conducted as accessory uses to a hotel or residential development, such as swimming pool and patio;
(d) Outside display of merchandise for sale on the interior part of a pedestrian environment such as in a village-style shopping center, or a courtyard area with kiosks or market carts, where outside merchandise display is an integral part of the theme and thus enhances the appearance of the site; and
(e) Drive-up windows for financial institutions, pharmacies, food establishments, and other businesses is an appropriate accessory use.
20.7.5 Outside dining and display areas shall not restrict sidewalks intended for pedestrian passage and access.
Amended June 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2007
(a) Outside dining and display areas must be shown on the site plan and approved by the Commission.
20.7.6 For the purpose of this Section, garden shops that are contained within walls shall be permitted even though the enclosure does not have a partial or complete roof.
(a) The applicant may propose, and the Commission may accept, a ventilated wall similar in appearance to the rest of the building. A fence is not a wall.
20.7.7 Areas reserved for open space and land set aside to meet coverage requirements shall be distributed throughout the site in such a manner that the land is visible (from public streets) and/or useable (e.g., for pedestrian circulation, outdoor entertainment, and cultural events, or arts/crafts shows).
20.7.8 Outdoor storage is prohibited. Outdoor storage does not include approved trash receptacles per Section 20.13 of these Regulations.
20.7.9 Loading docks/receiving areas shall be shielded from public streets or from residential zones.
(a) All loading docks shall be designed as an integral part of the building, shall be suitably screened, and shall not detract from the appearance of the building and site.
20.7.10 Satellite dishes, HVAC equipment, and rooftop mechanical equipment, with the exception of solar panels, shall be set back from building edges, screened, and/or located so that visibility of the equipment is minimized from the public way.
20.8 Specific Site Appearance Requirements for Retail Establishments: The following additional objectives and standards apply to all retail establishments. Items designated as “objectives” are not mandatory, but are stated in order to provide insight regarding the Town’s design objectives. Items designated as “standards” are mandatory. All design details are subject to Commission approval.
20.8.1 Facades and Exterior Walls:
(a) Objective:
(1) The intent is to encourage a more pedestrian scale that residents will be able to identify with their community.
(2) Building setback from the street, setbacks from adjacent buildings, and orientation of the axis of buildings should be consistent with and recognize the rhythm, spacing, and orientation of other adjacent buildings to the extent possible.
Amended June 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2008
(3) Buildings should have architectural features and patterns that provide visual interest at the scale of the pedestrian, reduce structures that are incompatible with pedestrian scale development, and recognize local character.
(4) Features such as benches, niches, plantings, and pavers, may be used to create pedestrian interest are encouraged, the location of such features is subject to Commission approval.
(b) Standards:
(1) Facades greater than 100 feet in length shall incorporate articulations like wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least 3% of the length of the façade and extending at least 20% of the length of the façade.
(2) Ground-floor facades that face public streets and interior walkways shall have colonnades, display windows, entry areas, awnings, or other architectural features along no less than 60% of their length.
(3) Building facades must include a repeating pattern of at least two of these elements or other architectural features: color change, texture change, material change, or expression of architectural or structural bay through a change in plane no less than 12 inches in width, such as an offset or reveal.
(i) At least 1 of these elements shall repeat horizontally.
(ii) All elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than 30 feet.
20.8.2 Roofs:
(a) Objective:
(1) Variations in roof lines should be used to add interest to, and reduce the massive scale of, large buildings.
(2) Roof features should complement the adjoining neighborhoods.
(b) Standards:
(1) Sloping roofs shall have no less than two of the following features:
(i) Overhanging eaves;
Amended June 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2009
(ii) Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of the supporting walls, with an average slope greater than or equal to one foot of vertical rise for every three feet of horizontal run and less than or equal to one foot of vertical rise for every one foot of horizontal run;
(iii) Three or more roof slope planes.
(2) Flat roofs shall be fully screened by parapet walls.
20.8.3 Materials and Colors
(a) Objective:
(1) Exterior building materials and colors comprise a significant part of the visual impact of a building. Therefore, they should be aesthetically pleasing and, where appropriate, compatible with material and colors used in adjoining neighborhoods.
(b) Standards:
(1) Predominant exterior building materials shall be high quality materials. These include, but are not limited to:
(i) Brick;
(ii) Wood;
(iii) Fieldstone;
(iv) Other native stone;
(v) Textured concrete masonry units;
(vi) Stucco; and
(vii) Glass
(2) Predominant exterior building materials shall not include the following:
(i) Smooth-faced concrete block;
(ii) Tilt-up concrete panels;
(iii) Pre-fabricated steel panels; or,
(iv) Fiberglass or metal (excluding metal roofs).
(3) Façade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral, or earth tone colors.
(i) The use of high intensity colors or fluorescent colors is prohibited.
(ii) Neon tubing, LED, or similar lighting is an unacceptable feature for building trim and is prohibited.
Amended June 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2010
20.8.4 Back and Side Facades
(a) Objective:
(1) All facades of a building should contribute to the pedestrian scale of the building and encourage site integration by featuring characteristics similar to the front façade.
(b) Standards:
(1) All building facades shall comply with the requirements of section 20.10.1.
20.9 Site Access and Parking
20.9.1 Site Access:
(a) Regulation of vehicular access is necessary to maintain the efficient and smooth flow of traffic, to protect the functional level and maximize the traffic capacity of Route 81.
(b) In addition, parking and loading facilities must be designed and operated as to reduce hazards to pedestrians and protect adjacent property from nuisances caused by noise, fumes, and headlight glare.
20.9.2 Streets:
(a) All streets shall conform to all applicable Town Design and Construction Standards and Regulations.
20.9.3 Off-street Parking: It is the intent of these Regulations to create off-street parking that is creative and to achieve attractive, innovative parking layouts that will accent and highlight buildings and features of the Zone.
(a) The provisions of Section 29.11 do not apply to developments located within this zone.
(b) The view of large parking areas from public streets shall be minimized through the use of perimeter landscaping and berms.
(c) Off-street parking shall be distributed around buildings in order to ensure pedestrian oriented/pedestrian friendly sites where pedestrians and the building architecture, rather than the automobile and the parking lot are the primary focus.
Amended June 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2011
(d) Not more than half (50%) of the parking shall be located between the principle building and the primary interior roadway.
(e) Not more than one-third (33%) of parking shall be located between the principle building and Route 81.
(1) The secondary frontage street shall have not more than 25% of the parking located between the buildings and the secondary street.
(f) The following parking lot or parking structure arrangements are considered to meet these parking requirements and are encouraged:
(1) Parking primarily or entirely surrounded by the buildings (courtyard effect);
(2) Large parking areas that are screened from Route 81 by the principle building(s).
(3) Parking distributed around three sides of the principle building(s), provided that not more than 33% of the parking is located between the building(s) and Route 81.
(g) Front yard setbacks may be used for parking or circulation.
20.9.4 Landscaping Amount:
(a) Parking lots located between a building and Route 81 (without any other intervening building) shall provide at least 22 square feet per parking space as landscaped area.
(b) This landscaped area may include islands between bays of parking (see 20.10.5(b) of this section for definition), planted peninsula islands including peninsulas along the perimeter of the parking area, other free-standing landscaped areas (with a minimum dimension of at least eight feet in its narrowest dimension), and any other area approved by the Commission. Not more than two peninsulas may be located back-to-back.
(1) The purpose of the peninsulas is to break up the parking lot. In addition, all front parking areas shall also be landscaped around the perimeter and utilize berming to minimize the view of the parked cars from Route 81 and to highlight the buildings.
(2) Such landscaped area may be used for snow removal storage.
(c) All other parking areas shall meet the landscaping requirements Section 29.
20.9.5 Landscaping Design
Amended June 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2012
(a) Parking area design should to take into account natural features whenever possible, grading of the site, visibility of the site from adjacent public streets, and the even distribution of landscaping throughout the parking area.
(b) Parking areas may be divided into individual bays (a bay is an aisle with a row of parking spaces of each side of the aisle).
(1) Each bay must be separated from other bays by a landscaped island of at least four feet in width the entire length of the bay.
(2) Terminal islands shall separate the bay from any driveways or access ways.
(3) Parking areas are to be divided by landscaped islands at least two parking spaces deep at every row of parking.
(4) Landscaped islands shall occur at least every 10 parking spaces.
(5) It is not necessary that such islands align with each other from bay to bay.
(c) Incentives listed in Section 20.6 of these regulations may be available for the construction of structured parking facilities.
20.9.6 Loading Docks/Receiving Areas:
(a) Loading docks/receiving areas shall be screened from public roads or residential zones.
(1) Sufficient on-site vehicular maneuvering area must be provided; trucks going to, or coming from, loading docks shall not require maneuvering movements within the public highway.
(2) The number of loading spaces shall be sufficient to accommodate the anticipated loading requirements of building users, which requirements shall be in accordance with industry practice, but not to exceed said requirement.
(b) No trash loading, removal or compaction, truck deliveries or pickups, or other such operations shall be permitted between the hours of 10:00 pm and 7:00 am unless the applicant submits evidence that sound barriers between all areas for such operations effectively reduce noise emission to a level of 45 db, as measured at the lot line of any adjoining property.
Amended June 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2013
20.10 Pedestrian/Bicyclist Circulation
20.10.1 Sidewalks are required along site frontage on Route 81.
20.10.2 All Route 81 sidewalks shall be constructed to Town and State specifications.
20.10.3 Wetland access or access paths/boardwalks or pedestrian access ways located within a site are encouraged, provided that such alternative sidewalks interconnect to existing or future walkways on abutting properties, and their inclusion in a development may result in eligibility for incentives noted in Section 20.7.
20.10.4 The applicant is required to provide site interior walkways that link street/drive walks within the site and is encouraged to provide connecting access to existing or future multimodal trail systems.
20.11 Trash Storage and Collection
20.11.1 Trash Storage and Collection areas, when visible from adjoining properties and/or public streets, shall be screened, recessed, or enclosed.
(a) While screens and recesses can effectively mitigate visual impacts, the selection of inappropriate screening materials can exacerbate the problem. Screening materials shall match the overall site design.
(b) Appropriate locations for Trash Storage and Collection areas include areas between buildings, where more than one building is located on a site and such buildings are not more than 40 feet apart, or on those sides of buildings that do not have customer entrances. For a site designed with a “cluster” or “village” concept, Trash Storage and Collection areas should be common areas should be shielded by appropriate screening, as described in Subsection (a).
20.11.2 Areas for truck parking, trash collection or compaction, or other such trash-related uses shall not be visible from abutting streets or adjacent residential zones.
20.12 Materials Required for Formal Submission of all Applications to the Commission or Board:
The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
20.12.1 Staff report of Pre-Application Conference discussions and plan changes, where applicable.
20.12.2 Report from the Tree Warden with respect to compliance with Section 20.9.3 of these Regulations.
20.12.3 A Shopping Cart Management Plan, when applicable.
Amended June 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2014
20.12.4 A streetscape rendering encompassing the view of the site from any public road and one hundred feet (100’) to either side of the site.
20.12.5 A traffic study.
20.12.6 A Site Access Plan.
20.12.7 A statement describing which incentives are sought under Section 20.7 of these Regulations and their extent.
(a) In deciding whether to grant the Public Amenity Bonus and incentives the Commission must find that the requested incentives will better conform with the Town Plan of Conservation and Development and the purposes of this Regulation.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2101
Section added 4/1/2016
Section 21
Floating Zones
21.1 Pursuant to the requirements set forth in this Section 21, the Town of Clinton may allow Floating Zone Districts within the boundaries of the town. Such Floating Zone Districts may overlay one or more existing zoning districts.
21.2 Procedures to Amend the Zoning Regulations and the Zoning Map to Permit Floating Zoning Districts: The procedures to amend the Zoning Regulations and the Zoning Map to permit a Floating Zone District are as follows:
21.2.1 If a Floating Zoning District is proposed to be comprised of more than one (1) parcel, the owners of all parcels within the proposed district must sign the application.
21.2.2 Application Requirements: Petitions to amend the Zoning Regulations and the Zoning Map to allow a Floating Zone shall include the following information:
(a) A map shall be submitted, meeting the requirements for accuracy to Class A-2 standards, drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals fifty feet (1”=50’), covering the area of the proposed change. Said map shall also show all areas within five hundred feet (500’) of the proposed change and, for the area of the proposed change, shall include the following information:
(1) Existing topography with 2’ contours shall meet the requirements for accuracy to Class A-2 standards
(2) Existing and proposed grades at two foot (2’) intervals, referenced to an existing or established published benchmark. Topographical information shall meet the requirements for accuracy of Class T2 standards as contained in the Standard for Surveys and Maps in the State of Connecticut. The plan must include the following:
(i) Existing structures;
(ii) Existing roads and rights-of-way;
(iii) Major topographic features; and
(iv) Limits of inland wetlands, watercourses and floodplains as mapped in the field by a qualified Soil Scientist and plotted by a Connecticut Licenses Land Surveyor.
(3) Existing land uses and zoning within five hundred feet (500’) of the area to be rezoned;
(4) Names of all property owners located within five hundred feet (500’) of the boundary of the property to be rezoned, as listed on the Town’s Assessor’s records.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2102
Section added 4/1/2016
(5) Proposed site plan within the area to be rezoned, showing approximate location and size of proposed buildings, structures and parking.
(b) A draft of a proposed amendment to the text of the Zoning Regulations to create the proposed Floating Zone. Such proposed amendment shall include, without limitation:
(1) Name of the proposed Floating Zone;
(2) A statement describing or otherwise identifying eligible locations in which to “land” the proposed Floating Zone;
(3) A statement specifying how the regulations governing the proposed Floating Zone will relate to the Zoning Regulations in the underlying zone;
(4) A statement describing the purposes of the proposed Floating Zone;
(5) A statement of the General Requirements (bulk, area, setback, etc.) to apply within the proposed Floating Zone; and
(6) A statement of the uses permitted within the proposed Floating Zone.
(c) Public Hearing: The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on any application for a Floating Zone in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.14.3.
(1) In addition, the applicants or their agent shall post a sign in accordance with Section 4.14.3(a) and provide evidence of the notice’s posting in the form of photographs, to the Land Use Office.
(2) The applicant(s) shall provide notice by mail to all property owners within five hundred feet (500’) of the parcel for which a Zone Change is requested.
(i) Such mailing shall be sent to at least one owner of each such property not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than ten (10) days before the date set for the public hearing, by transmitting the text of the public hearing notice as provided by the Commission or its agent.
(ii) The applicant(s) shall provide a copy of the list of property owners within five hundred feet (500’) including names of all the property owners, street address per the Assessor’s map and
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2103
Section added 4/1/2016
Assessor’s map(s) and parcel number(s) for each property. Such list shall be provided at the time of application submission.
(iii) Evidence of such mailing, in the form of United States Post Office Certificates of Mailing, shall be submitted to the Land Use Office not less than five (5) calendar days prior to the hearing date.
(iv) Failure to provide notice as required herein may result in denial of the application.
(d) Decision Process: The final approval to proceed with a development project in a Floating Zone District is a multi-step process. An applicant must first obtain approval of the proposed amendment of the Zoning Regulations and the Zoning Map which creates the Floating Zone. Next, the applicant must obtain approval to “land” the Floating Zone on a specific site. Finally, the applicant must seek separate approval of any Site Plan and/or Special Exception application under the requirements of Sections 11 and 12 of these Regulations before any site work can be performed on the site.
(1) The applicant(s) shall submit the application to amend the Zoning Regulations and the Zoning Map, together with all the required supporting materials, to the Land Use Office. If the Applicant seeks to “land” a Floating Zone on a specific site, the Applicant may, with the permission of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, concurrently file an application for that purpose.
(2) If an application to “land” a Floating Zone is filed concurrently, the Commission shall hold separate public hearings for (1) the application to amend the Zoning Regulations and the Zoning Map and (2) the application to “land” the Floating Zone.
(3) For the convenience of the Commission, and, in the Commission’s sole discretion, both public hearings may be opened and held simultaneously provided, each application shall be voted upon separately as part of that application’s specific public hearing.
(4) In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, the Commission must hold a separate public hearing on any Site Plan and/or Special Exception application. No application for any such Site Plan and/or Special Exception application may be filed before the application to amend the Zoning Regulations and Zoning Map has been approved and the amended Zoning Regulations and Map have become effective.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2104
Section added 4/1/2016
(5) An applicant may, with the permission of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, file its Site Plan and/or Special Exception application concurrently with an application to “land” the Floating Zone.
(6) If an application for a Site Plan and/or Special Exception application is filed concurrently with an application to “land” a Floating Zone, the Commission shall hold separate public hearings for (1) the application to “land” the Floating Zone and (2) the Site Plan and/or Special Exception application.
(7) For the convenience of the Commission, and, in the Commission’s sole discretion, both public hearings may be opened and held simultaneously provided, each application shall be voted upon separately as part of that application’s specific public hearing.
(e) Approval Considerations:
(1) As an exercise of its legislative authority, the Commission may approve, approve with modifications, or deny any application to amend the Zoning Regulations and the Zoning Map to permit a Floating Zone or to “land” such Floating Zone.
(2) As an exercise of its administrative authority, the Commission may approve, approve with modifications, or deny any Site Plan and/or Special Exception application filed in connection with such Floating Zone consistent with the requirements of Sections 11 and 12 of these Regulations as amended, if at all, by the regulations establishing the proposed Floating Zone.
(3) The Commission may also require that certain amenities, such as improved or natural open space areas or community facilities, be allocated to particular phases of the development so as to ensure that such amenities proceed apace with the other components of the development.
(4) In considering any petition to amend the Zoning Regulations and the Zoning Map to permit a Floating Zone, the Commission shall make a written finding, whether the proposed zone change is consistent with the standards and purposes of a Floating Zone as set forth in this section and is consistent with the Plan of Conservation and Development.
(f) Modification of Approved Zoning Map Amendments:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2105
Section added 4/1/2016
(1) Approved Floating Zones shall be reflected as zoning map amendments following the procedure to approve a zoning map amendment as set forth in Section 4.14.3 of these Regulations.
(2) The Commission may waive any of the application requirements contained in this section in the event of minor modifications for which such requirements are not necessary in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission to adequately review and decide the application for modification. Such waiver shall only be granted upon a written finding that the requirements proposed to be waived are not necessary and an affirmative majority vote of the members present and voting.
(g) Expiration of Floating Zone Districts:
(1) Special Exception approval for all phases of development within an approved Floating Zone must be obtained no later than five (5) years following the approval of the Floating Zone, or, in the event of an appeal of such approval, within five (5) years following the final adjudication of the appeal that the Floating Zone is valid (“final approval”).
(2) All components of the Floating Zone shall be completed in accordance with Section 4.17 of these Regulations after final approval of the Floating Zone, provided that the Commission may grant extensions of time where the developer demonstrates that it is making a good faith effort to complete the development and there are no outstanding violations of these regulations or the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations with respect to the Floating Zone.
(3) Any failure to meet these deadlines shall result in the expiration of the Floating Zone approval. In such event the prior zoning district or districts shall be automatically re-established for all subject properties.
21.3 List of Floating Zoning Districts: The Town of Clinton contains the following Floating Zone(s):
21.3.1 Main Street District-1
(a) The Main Street District-1 (MSD-1) is a zoning district that functions as a Floating Zone.
(1) The provisions of the MSD-1 will apply only to specific properties that are rezoned to an MSD-1 designation by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(i) Upon rezoning to MSD-1 designation, a unique, numbered zoning district classification (MSD-1) will be created on the
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2106
Section added 4/1/2016
Zoning Map of the Town of Clinton, and shall become an integral part of the zoning for the land included within that MSD-1and shall establish the zoning standards for that MSD-1.
(2) The zoning district only exists within the text of these Regulations and is not placed on the Clinton Zoning Map until approval of an application to create a particular MSD-1 and to affix that zoning district to a specific property(s).
(3) The creation of an MSD-1 can only be fully accomplished by approval of a Zoning Map amendment, the approval of an application to “land” the proposed Floating Zone on a specific site, and the approval of the associated Special Exception application and accompanying Site Plan (See Section 21.2.2(c)(2) above). All such approvals must be secured before site development can begin.
(i) Such detailed Site Plan must comply in all respects with applicable Special Exception/Site Plan requirements, and any other applicable provisions of these Regulations.
(4) Eligibility:
(i) Only a lot or a group of lots which are to be combined with a minimum lot size of sixty thousand square feet (60,000 sq. ft.) is eligible to be designated as a MSD-1.
(ii) Only a lot or group of lots which are designated as I-1, B-2 or B-3 are eligible to be designated as a MSD-1
(b) Approved Location(s) of MSD-1:
(1) INTENTIONALLY OMITTED AT THIS TIME. THIS SECTION WILL BE ADDRESSED AS PART OF THE APPLICATION TO “LAND” THE FLOATING ZONE AND WILL REQUIRE A WRITTEN FINDING THAT THE “LANDING” OF THE FLOATING ZONE IS CONSISTENT WITH THE TOWN OF CLINTON’S PLAN OF CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT.
(c) Relationship to Zoning Regulations: Unless provided otherwise in this Section, uses within the MSD-1 shall be subject to all provisions and definitions of these Regulations. However, because the intent of the MSD-1 is to provide flexibility in design standards in order to achieve important design objectives as described herein, in cases of conflict with other provisions of these Regulations including the zoning definitions, the provisions of this Section 21 shall prevail.
Unless expressly prescribed by this Section 21, all uses, dimensional, architectural, bulk, location, landscaping, parking, and lighting requirements for an MSD-1 and all Standards for Special Exceptions (Section 12) shall be
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2107
Section added 4/1/2016
established by the Commission in its sole legislative discretion as part of an approved zone change adopted pursuant to this Regulation.
(1) In exercising its legislative discretion to approve a Floating District pursuant to this Regulation, the Commission is hereby empowered to establish ranges of acceptable values for dimensional, bulk and parking requirements.
(2) This provision shall specifically include, but not be limited to the following:
(i) Approval of the uses set forth herein shall be in lieu of compliance with the use provisions of Section 27;
(ii) Approval of Standards for Special Exceptions in accordance with this Regulation shall be in lieu of compliance with Section 12 (Standards for Special Exceptions) of these Regulations;
(iii) Approval of bulk and setback requirements in accordance with this Regulation shall be in lieu of compliance with Section 26 of these Regulations;
(iv) Approval of signage requirements in accordance with this Regulation shall be in lieu of compliance with Section 34 of these Regulations;
(v) Approval of parking in accordance with this Regulation shall be in lieu of compliance with Section 33 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) of these Regulations;
(vi) The intent of this Section is that any compliance issues which can be addressed at the level of detail afforded by the zone change application shall not be revisited in the individual Special Exception applications.
(vii) All provisions of the Subdivision and Zoning Regulations which have not been modified or eliminated by this Section shall pertain to floating zones, together with the requirements of Section 11, Special Exceptions.
(d) Purposes of MSD-1: In conformance with the Town of Clinton’s Plan of Conservation and Development, the purposes of the MSD-1 are as follows:
(1) To extend greater and more convenient opportunities for traditional main street working, shopping and access to important services to all residents of the Town;
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2108
Section added 4/1/2016
(2) To encourage a more efficient use of land and public services by promoting compact development of commercial uses appropriate to traditional village community living in appropriate locations;
(3) To provide convenient uses, including commercial, civic and open space uses, in a traditional main street configuration typical of towns and villages in New England;
(4) To ensure that new development in the district will be compatible with historic commercial development patterns in the Town and the New England region and that will create a strong sense of community identity;
(5) To promote developments where the physical, visual and spatial characteristics are established and reinforced through the consistent use of compatible design and architectural design elements. Such elements shall relate the design characteristics of each individual structure or development in a harmonious manner, resulting in a coherent overall development pattern, architectural design, and streetscape;
(6) To design, to the extent reasonable under the specific circumstances, existing buildings with historical and/or architectural features which enhance the visual character of the community, and preserve historic streetscapes;
(7) To enhance the function of main street building locations as a focal point where needs of the community’s residents can be efficiently and centrally served;
(e) General Requirements:
(1) Area, Bulk and Height:
(i) Each area to be developed shall include a minimum square of sixty feet by sixty feet (60' x 60') within and upon which a building may be constructed.
(ii) The maximum ground coverage (impervious surfaces) shall not exceed eighty percent (80%).
(iii) The maximum building height shall not exceed the maximum building height permitted in the underlying zoning district. If the MSD is to be “landed” on a site comprised of more than one
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2109
Section added 4/1/2016
zone, the requirements of the more restrictive zone shall control.
(2) Setbacks:
(i) Minimum setback from front line: eight feet (8')
(ii) Minimum setback from any lot line other than a front ten feet (10')
(3) Building Standards:
(i) Each building shall be served by a public water supply or water system approved by the local Health District - Connecticut River Area Health District.
(ii) Utilities serving the building or accessory building or structure shall be buried underground as feasible.
(iii) The building shall be served by a sewage disposal system approved by the local Health District - Connecticut River Area Health District, or Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP).
(4) Off-Street Parking:
(i) The provisions of Section 33 of these Regulations do not apply PROVIDED HOWEVER, that the applicant demonstrates that parking to be provided is adequate for the proposed use.
(ii) The view of large parking areas from public streets shall be minimized through the use of perimeter landscaping and berms.
(iii) Front yard, side yard and rear yard setbacks may be used for parking or circulation.
(5) Storm Water Management:
(i) The MSD-1 shall provide for the maintenance or reduction of pre-development level storm water runoff from the site upon completion.
(6) Landscaping:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2110
Section added 4/1/2016
(i) To the greatest extent possible, mature trees shall be retained on-site. The Commission may require trees based on the number of parking spaces.
(ii) Utility terminal boxes and connections placed aboveground shall be adequately landscaped to screen them from view and shall be shown on initial and final plans.
(iii) The Commission recognizes that the utility companies have the final decisions as to locations and therefore the locations shown on the plans are the suggested locations, though efforts should be made to encourage the utility companies to site terminal boxes per design plans
(iv) At the discretion of the Commission, trees shall be planted adjacent to parking areas for screening, if feasible.
(7) Emergency Vehicle Access:
(i) All access driveways must provide adequate fire truck and emergency vehicle access.
(8) Sidewalks:
(i) The site shall include on-site sidewalks which shall comply with Town standards.
(9) Shopping Cart Management Plan:
(i) Any retail establishment with shopping carts shall provide a written plan to manage retrieval of shopping carts.
(f) Uses Permitted in the MSD-1: The following uses are allowed within the MSD-1, whether in separate buildings or in mixed use buildings:
(1) Community Facility
(i) Senior Center
(ii) Place of Worship, Parish Halls
(iii) Fraternal Societies
(iv) Libraries
(v) Charitable Institutions
(vi) Museums
(2) Commercial
(i) Financial Institution (including drive-through windows)
(ii) Personal Services Establishment
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2111
Section added 4/1/2016
(iii) Professional Office
(iv) Restaurant
(v) Retail Establishments
(vi) Pharmacy (including drive-through windows for Pharmacy purposes only)
(vii) Medical Clinics
(viii) Theater
(ix) Research Facility
(x) Accessory Structures and Uses
(3) Buildings, uses and facilities of the Town of Clinton.
(4) Residential
21.3.2 Affordable Housing District-1
(a) The Affordable Housing District-1 is a zoning district that functions as a floating zone.
(1) The provisions of the ADH-1 will apply only to the specific properties that are rezoned to an AHD-1 designation by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(i) Upon rezoning to AHD-1 designation, a unique, numbered zoning district classification (AHD-1) will be created on the Zoning Map of the Town of Clinton, and shall become an integral part of the zoning for the land included within that AHD-1 and shall establish the zoning standards for that AHD-1.
(2) Such AHD-1 zoning district only exists within the text of these Regulations, and shall not be placed on the Clinton Zoning Map, until approval of an application to “land” an AHD-1 district on a specific site in accordance with a specific development proposal.
(3) The creation of an AHD-1 district designation can be accomplished only by (a) approval of a zoning map amendment “landing” the proposed AHD-1 district on a specific site, and (b) a Site Plan approval for a specific development proposal (see Section 21.2 above). All such approvals must be secured before site development can begin. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Section 21.2(d) above, however, application to “land” an AHD-1 district on a specific site and for Site Plan approval for a specific development proposal, may be filed concurrently and, if so, public hearings on such applications, as applicable, may be opened and heard simultaneously. Such hearings may also be opened and heard simultaneously with the public hearing
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2112
Section added 4/1/2016
on the application to amend the Regulations to include this Section 21.3.2.
(i) An application for Site Plan approval under this Section 21.3.2 shall comply in all respects with Site Plan requirements of Section 10 of these Regulations, and any other applicable provisions of these Regulations except as may be overridden by Section 8-30(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes or as otherwise expressly provided in this Section 21.3.2.
(4) Eligibility and Standards: Application under this Section 21.3.2 may only be made in connection with an “affordable housing development” as defined in Section 8-30g(a)(1) of the Connecticut General Statutes, and shall be subject to the following additional eligibility requirements and standards:
(i) Only a lot or group of lots in the R-60, R-40, R-30, R-20 or R-10 districts shall be eligible to be designated as an AHD-1 district.
(ii) A maximum of five (5) acres may be utilized for building units and all other associated site improvements, including septic systems and driveways (but excluding areas in which the only disturbance consists of regrading or landscaping).
(iii) Dwelling units may contain no more than two bedrooms each.
(iv) No use shall be permitted in an AHD-1 district except residential uses and uses customarily accessory and incidental to residential uses.
(b) Approved Location(s) of AHD-1:
(1) 8 Liberty Place, Assessor’s Map 54, Block 53, Lot 20. Underlying zone: R-60.
(c) Relationship to Other Zoning Regulations: Unless provided otherwise in this Section 21.3.2, uses within the AHD-1 district shall be subject to all provisions and definitions of these Regulations. However, in cases of conflict with other provisions of these Regulations, the provisions of this Section 21.3.2 shall prevail.
(1) Units Per Building/Number of Buildings: There shall be no restriction on the number of buildings per lot. Each building shall have two or more independent dwelling units.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2113
Section added 4/1/2016
(2) Parking Standards: Parking standards shall be as set forth in Section 33.11 of these Regulations, except as follows:
(i) Minimum number of spaces: The minimum number of spaces required shall be no less than one (1) space per bedroom.
(3) Lot Requirement Standards: Lot requirement standards, as set forth in Section 26.10 of these Regulations for the underlying zone prior to the AHD-1 designation being “landed”, shall apply except as follows:
(i) Maximum Ground Coverage: Maximum Ground Coverage shall be twenty-five percent (25%).
(d) Intent and Purpose: This regulation is adopted for the following purposes:
(1) To address the significant underserved market for affordable housing, as described in the 2015-2025 Clinton Plan of Conservation and Development (See p. 91);
(2) To encourage the construction of housing that is both affordable as defined by state statutes and is consistent with design and construction standards present in the community; and
(3) To assist the Town of Clinton in complying with the State Zoning Enabling Act, CGS §8-2, by adopting zoning regulations that encourage multi-family dwellings and promote housing choice and economic diversity, including housing for low and moderate income households.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2201
Section 22
Village Zone (VZ)
22.1 Statement of Purpose: The East Main Street corridor from the Indian River east to the intersection with Route 145 on the north side of East Main Street and to the intersection with Beach Park Road on the south, maintains the character and scale of a small New England village. It is an area of mixed civic, commercial and residential uses, characterized by a development pattern of larger governmental and religious structures set on generous open lots, combined with older building, which are primarily residential in scale, located close to the road with parking located to the side or rear of the building. The purpose of this District is to ensure that new development or redevelopment of land within the District is consistent and compatible with the traditional character of the East Main Street streetscape, including the following objectives:
22.1.1 Keep intact the concentration of civic buildings and existing open lawns as the central focal point of the town’s civic activities;
22.1.2 Maintain a village scale by preventing erection of new buildings, except for civic buildings, which are noticeably larger than the residential scale building which predominate the streetscape;
22.1.3 Retain a mix of residential, commercial, public and municipal uses;
22.1.4 Reduce visual clutter and establish architectural, landscaping and signage standards which foster area identity, reflecting the Long Island Sound shore nature and history of Clinton; and
22.1.5 Promote the East Main Street corridor as an attractive extension of the central business district, encouraging pedestrian activity between the two districts.
22.2 Permitted Uses: The Commission encourages mixed uses within a single structure or within a complex of structures. Commercial uses may be located on the ground floor with offices or apartments on the upper floors, in accordance with these Regulations. Refer to Section 27 for the uses and type of permit required.
22.3 Design Standards: Site design, architectural design, and scale and massing of buildings shall be of such character as to harmonize and be compatible within the Village Zone (VZ). The intent of these standards is not to require historically accurate design or duplication of architectural detail of other structures within the district, but rather to encourage the use of elements, which are common to the existing streetscape.
22.3.1 Site Development: Building setback from the street, side setbacks from adjacent buildings and orientation of the axis of buildings shall be consistent with and recognize the rhythm, spacing and orientation of other adjacent buildings. The primary visual focus of the site shall be the front yard area and the front building façade.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2202
(a) Applications for this district that change the appearance of the structures facing East Main Street, shall include a streetscape rendering encompassing the East Main Street view of the site and one hundred feet (100’) to either side of the site.
(b) Off-street parking shall be located in side and rear yards only, and shared parking areas may be established for adjacent lots. Each site shall be designed to encourage pedestrian use along East Main Street, and non-residential uses shall be designed to facilitate pedestrian movement within each site.
22.3.2 Building Form and Materials: These standards are intended to promote new development of such residential scale and character as to harmonize with adjacent buildings and the East Main Street streetscape.
(a) Lengthy unbroken façades parallel or visible to East Main Street shall not be permitted. The maximum horizontal length of an unbroken façade visible to East Main Street shall not exceed thirty feet (30’). Façade offsets shall be sufficient to create a strong shadow line.
(b) On lots where street frontage limits building width and on other lots where appropriate, the buildings shall be oriented so that the narrow end (short axis) is facing the street side.
(1) The building width facing the street shall not exceed forty-five feet (45’).
(c) Roof structures shall be in accordance with the existing architectural character of the area as seen from any public way. Roofs shall project enough beyond the façade to create an overhang and cast a shadow.
(d) Mechanical equipment shall be concealed within the roof or enclosed within a structure. Where this is not possible, mechanical elements shall be located so that they are not visible from public streets or adjacent residential uses. Mechanical equipment located at ground level shall be screened and landscaped.
(e) Accessory structures shall be located in the rear or side yards only. There shall be no accessory structures located in the front yard.
(f) Particular attention shall be given to architectural detail and landscaping of the side of the building facing East Main Street, so that there appears to be an entrance at the front of the structure.
(g) Open porches are encouraged and may be used as display areas for commercial and service uses located within the building.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2203
(h) Materials used in construction or reconstruction shall be consistent and compatible with materials found in similar structures throughout the VZ.
22.3.3 Parking Requirements: Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with Section 33 of these Regulations, and with the following additional provisions:
(a) No off-street parking for structures built after the implementation of the VZ regulations shall be located in the front yard facing East Main Street.
(1) If a change of use requires that the number of parking spaces be increased for a structure built before the implementation of these Regulations, the added parking spaces must be located to the rear of a line drawn parallel to the street line at a distance of not less than the closest distance to any part of the building to the street line.
(b) For all structures built after the implementation of these Regulations, all parking on the lot shall be located to the rear of a line drawn parallel to the front lot line at a distance not less than the closest part of the building to the front lot line.
(c) All off-street parking areas, whether serving a single lot or multiple lots, shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 33.
(d) Parking in side and rear yards shall be buffered from neighboring property by a five foot (5’) wide landscaped buffer area unless joint parking is approved by the Commission. Each lot shall have its own buffer, and the presence of a buffer on the adjacent lot shall not suffice.
(1) The Commission may also approve common access driveways to joint parking areas. All proposals for joint parking and common access shall be accompanied by an easement. The easement shall include a written agreement providing for maintenance of the access and parking area and associated landscaping. The easement shall be filed on the Clinton Land Records in the Town Clerk’s Office within one year of the approval by the Commission, but no later than the commencement of improvements.
(e) In addition, any parking spaces which are visible from East Main Street shall have a landscaped buffer strip, not less than five feet (5’) in width and provided with a six inch (6”) bituminous concrete or granite curb, separating such parking area from every lot line.
22.3.4 Sidewalks:
(a) All new development or enlargement of existing development shall include the installation of a sidewalk meeting the requirements of this Section, unless a
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2204
conforming sidewalk exists. The Commission shall determine when enlargement of existing development requires the installation of a sidewalk.
(b) Sidewalks shall be provided along the entire street frontage on East Main Street and along connecting side streets within the VZ. Sidewalks shall be provided from the frontage sidewalk to the primary building entrance and from the parking area to the primary entrance and other entrances.
(c) All sidewalks shall be constructed of brick, slate, concrete, or suitable paving blocks, and shall have a minimum of five feet (5’).
22.3.5 Landscaping:
(a) The area between the front of the building and the sidewalk shall be landscaped in a manner complementary to the scale and style of the building.
(1) There shall be no structure, fence, wall or planting in excess of three feet (3’) located within the front yard, with the exception of any buffer areas required by these Regulations.
(2) Low hedges, board, picket or wrought iron fences and stone walls are appropriate for the Village Zone. Window boxes, planters and flowerbeds are encouraged.
(3) Commercial establishments may provide benches or other outdoor seating for customers and other pedestrians as part of the front landscape design.
(b) All building foundations shall be landscaped with appropriate shrubs.
(c) All freestanding signs shall have appropriate landscaping at the base of the sign.
(d) All service areas, storage areas and trash receptacles shall be screened by fencing and planting.
(e) Street trees shall be planted at a minimum distance of one (1) tree for every fifty feet (50’) of frontage. Every lot shall have a least one street tree. Suitable existing trees may be used to meet this requirement. All street trees shall be of a type, size and location approved by the Commission.
(f) Any disturbed portion of lot which is not used for buildings, structures, accessory uses, parking, loading or sidewalks shall be landscaped and maintained in such a manner as to minimize sediment and erosion, dust and stormwater runoff.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2205
(g) Any screening, landscaping and/or paving required by these Regulations or as part of a Site Plan approval shall be maintained by the property owner in good condition through the period of use of the property.
22.3.6 Lighting: Exterior lighting shall be of a style and character that is harmonious with the character of the VZ. Lighting shall be properly scaled for pedestrians.
(a) Lighting structures in parking areas shall not exceed twelve feet (12’) in height.
(b) Luminaries shall have shielded light sources to prevent glare and the casting of light outside of the property limits.
(c) Pedestrian walkways may be illuminated by light bollards or other low level lighting standards with shielded light sources.
(d) Building mounted flood lighting is prohibited within the VZ.
(e) Indirect lighting, which is not directed at property boundaries, is encouraged.
Effective July 1, 2018
1
Section 23 Transit Oriented Development Overlay (TODO)
ALTERNATE VERSION PREPARED PER PZC REQUEST FROM 2/5/2018 PUBLIC HEARING
23.1 Purpose: The purpose of the Clinton Station TOD Overlay Zone (TODO) is to create a new, mixed-use, transit-friendly, walkable, concentrated development that adds both residential and commercial vitality to Clinton Center, connects to surrounding neighborhoods and historic areas, and leverages both the presence of the Clinton Train Station and the existing Unilever structures as focal points.
23.2 General Intent: The intent of the TODO is:
a. To encourage redevelopment of large properties within ¼ mile walking distance of the Clinton Train Station and Clinton Center;
b. To encourage a transit-friendly, flexible, and vibrant mix of uses;
c. To promote a uniform and appropriate design for the entire Station area that respects the historic uses and proximate residential neighborhoods;
d. To promote higher residential densities that maximize the limited potential for redevelopment within walking distance of mass transit;
e. To promote pedestrian-friendly development in Clinton Center and Station area;
f. To create additional east-west vehicular circulation north of Route 1 and the Rail line;
g. To promote shared parking in Clinton Center and Station area;
h. To maintain appropriate residential character and traffic flow in surrounding neighborhoods;
i. To promote development in accordance with the Clinton Plan of Conservation & Development
23.3 Boundaries
23.3.1: Properties eligible to be subject to the TODO shall be a minimum of ten (10) acres in size and be located within a ¼ mile radius of the Clinton Train Station (Map 44, Block 29, Lot 5A);
23.3.2: A collection of multiple contiguous properties, at the written agreement of all property owners involved, may be combined to create an eligible overlay property;
23.4 Procedures to Apply for Development Within Overlay Zone: The procedures to permit a development proposal within the TODO are as follows:
Effective July 1, 2018
2
23.4.1: Application of Overlay Zone. The applicant seeking to develop a property using the provisions of the TODO must first (or simultaneously with a Special Exception application, described below) submit an application to propose the property be subject the Overlay Zone. This application shall consist of:
23.4.1.1: A narrative description of the purpose of the application and the proposed development activities, including a discussion of how the goals of the Plan of Conservation & Development would be advanced by applying the Overlay regulations to the property;
23.4.1.2: A schematic master plan, developed at a scale not less than one inch equals fifty feet (1”=50’), of the proposed site development, including approximate locations of proposed buildings, structures, parking areas, roadways, pedestrian facilities (sidewalks and pathways), public amenities (seating, recreation areas, generalized landscaping) and public utility areas (eg. wastewater disposal and stormwater management);
23.4.2: The submission and review of a Special Exception application shall follow the procedures detailed in Section 4 of these Regulations.
23.4.3: Public Hearing. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on any application for an Overlay Zone and the corresponding Special Exception in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.31.
23.4.3.1: In addition to the foregoing, the applicant(s) or their agent shall post a sign in accordance with Section 4.39 and provide evidence of this posting in the form of photographs to the Land Use Office.
23.4.3.2: The applicant(s) shall provide notice by mail to all property owners within five hundred feet (500’) of the parcel for which a Zone Change is requested.
(i) Such mailing shall be sent to at least one owner of each such property not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than ten (10) days before the date set for the public hearing, by transmitting the text of the public hearing notice as provided by the Commission or its agent.
(ii) The applicant(s) shall provide a copy of the list of property owners within five hundred feet (500’) including names of all the property owners, street address per the Assessor’s map and parcel number(s) for each property. Such list shall be provided at the time of application submission.
Effective July 1, 2018
3
(iii) Evidence of such mailing, in the form of United States Post Office Certificates of Mailing, shall be submitted to the Land Use Office not less than five (5) calendar days prior to the hearing date.
(iv) Failure to provide notice as required herein may result in denial of the application.
23.4.3.3: If an application to apply the provisions of the Overlay Zone is filed concurrently, the Commission shall hold separate public hearings for (1) the application to amend the Zoning Map and (2) the development proposal Special Exception
(i) For the convenience of the Commission, and, in the Commission’s sole discretion, both public hearings may be opened and held simultaneously provided, each application shall be voted upon separately as part of that application’s specific public hearing.
(ii) In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, the Commission must hold a separate public hearing on any Special Exception application.
23.4.4: Approval Considerations
23.4.4.1: As an exercise of its legislative authority, the Commission may approve, approve with modifications, or deny any application to amend the Zoning Map to apply the terms of the Overlay Zone.
23.4.4.2: As an exercise of its administrative authority, the Commission may approve, approve with modifications, or deny any Special Exception application filed in connection with such Overlay Zone consistent with the requirements of Sections 11 and 12 of these Regulations as amended.
23.4.4.3: The Commission may also require that certain amenities, such as improved or natural open space areas or community facilities, be allocated to particular phases of the development so as to ensure that such amenities proceed apace with the other components of the development.
23.4.4.4: In considering any petition to amend the Zoning Map to apply the terms of an Overlay Zone, the Commission shall make a written finding, whether the proposed change is consistent with the standards and purposes of the TODO as set forth in this section and is consistent with the Plan of Conservation and Development.
23.5 Permitted Uses: Permitted uses are commercial, institutional, cultural, residential, municipal, indoor recreation, artisan and light manufacturing. Mixed uses, including live-
Effective July 1, 2018
4
work units, are allowed both across the total site development plan and within individual buildings. See Section 27.3 for specific permitted uses.
23.5.1: Changes to use within the site and buildings following approval of the site plan as part of the original Special Exception application shall be subject to review by the Commission or its designated agent but shall not require a new Special Exception application. The Commission or its designated agent shall determine whether the proposed changes of use are permitted, as well as whether the proposed changes are likely to significantly impact public health and safety considerations.
23.5.1.1: If the Commission or its designated agent determines, based on information provided by the applicant, that the proposed changes are not likely to result in significant increases to parking, traffic, or wastewater generation or demand, he/she is authorized to review and approve the changes on a staff level;
23.5.1.2: If the Commission or its designated agent determines, based on information provided by the applicant, that proposed changes are likely to result in significant increases to parking, traffic, or wastewater generation or demand, he/she shall require the applicant to submit a new Special Exception application;
23.5.2: Addition of new buildings or structural expansion of buildings shown on the previously approved site plan shall require the submission of a new Special Exception application.
23.6 Prohibited Uses: See Section 27.3 of the Clinton Zoning Regulations for a complete list of permitted uses. Uses not listed in Section 27.3 are prohibited. Additional specifically prohibited uses include the following:
23.6.1: Gasoline service stations; automotive, boat, recreational vehicle, truck, and similar sales, service, and repair garages. Public display of any vehicle for sale is strictly prohibited. “Boat” shall not include non-motorized boats up to 16 feet in length (e.g. canoes, kayaks).
23.6.2: Drive-up windows;
23.6.3: Arcades, except as a minor accessory use (not to exceed 5% of the gross floor area);
23.6.4: Adult-oriented businesses (including but not limited to adult bookstores, adult theatres, massage parlors, and similar establishments);
23.6.5: Tattoo establishments;
Effective July 1, 2018
5
23.6.6: Massage Parlors;
23.6.7: Firearms sales, except as a minor accessory use (not to exceed 5% of the gross floor area)
23.7 Design Standards: The Design Standards of Section 30 and the visual glossary and guidance of Appendix B of the Clinton Zoning Regulations shall apply to all new construction. In addition, the site plan shall reflect the following elements:
23.7.1: The preservation of defined historic structures and/or their facades shall be prioritized to the greatest extent practicable. In the case of industrial facilities on the National Register of Historic Places, the Commission, at its discretion, may require the preservation of historic building facades as a condition of approving the usage of Overlay Zone regulations;
23.7.2: Architectural character of new structures shall reinforce a traditional New England village character, with a focus on pitched roofs, an orientation to street and pedestrian network, articulated entries, and a human scale;
23.7.3: Development density shall be concentrated at southeastern portion of district, near the rail station and shall be lower where adjacent to existing residential neighborhoods on North High Street and John Street;
23.7.4: Safe, convenient, and ADA-compliant pedestrian circulation through the site, and from the site to the Train Station and Clinton Center/Route 1 should be emphasized;
23.7.5: Multi-function retail or community marketplaces are encouraged as ground floor uses, particularly within existing buildings;
23.8 Height, Area, Yard, and Density Requirements:
23.8.1: Maximum height of new structures shall be four full stories or fifty feet (50’), whichever is lower;
23.8.2: Maximum building coverage shall be 30% of the site, unless structured parking, compliant with design standards of Section 30 of these Regulations, is provided, in which case maximum building coverage shall be 50%;
23.8.3: Maximum impervious surface coverage shall be 70%;
23.8.4: Front, side, and rear yard setbacks shall be fifty feet (50’) from all property boundaries. Existing structures situated closer to current property boundaries may be expanded along a parallel line such that no portion of the newly-constructed building extends any closer to the closest property line than the current portion;
Effective July 1, 2018
6
23.8.5: There is no maximum residential density (units/acre) based on Zoning Regulations; all maximum density limits shall be based on public water capacity and the limitations of on-site wastewater disposal according to the Department of Public Health and/or Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, as may be applicable;
23.9 Parking Requirements: It is the intent of these Regulations to create off-street parking that is multi-functional and innovative, reflecting the site’s utility as a transit-friendly neighborhood and the presence of the Train Station immediately adjacent.
23.9.1: The provisions of Section 33.11 do not apply do developments located within this zone. The applicant must demonstrate that parking is adequate to the proposed use(s);
23.9.2: The applicant must demonstrate that safe loading and access by trucks and other delivery vehicles is accommodated in the Site Development Plan;
23.10 Housing. If the proposed development includes multiple housing units, the following standards shall apply:
23.10.1 Minimum Density. In no event shall the density of any multiple-unit housing development be less than 1.25 times the density of the underlying residential or mixed-use district.
23.10.2 If allowable by soil conditions, the minimum density of a duplex or townhouse-style dwelling shall be 10 dwelling units per acre and the minimum density of a multi-family dwelling shall be 20 dwelling units per acre. Applicant shall provide analysis of density calculations
23.10.4 Affordability Plan. Each applicant for multiple housing units within the TODO, if the proposal includes restricted Affordable Housing units, will provide an affordability plan that will detail the administration, monitoring, and enforcement of the dwelling units to be sold or rented at below-market rates as described above. The plan will include proposed deed restrictions or covenants, lease agreements, common interest ownership documents, bylaws, rules and regulations, sample income calculations, and any other information as the Commission may require to establish compliance with this Section and Conn. Gen. Stats. §8-13m. to 8-13x.
23.10.5 Designation of Administering Agency. The applicant will, if the proposal includes restricted Affordable Housing units, indicate the name, address, and other contact information for the agency that will administer the sale or rental of
Effective July 1, 2018
7
the dwelling units that are subject to the below-market sale or rental in accordance with this Section.
23.10.6 Dwelling units may be offered for sale or rental in individual, public, cooperative, or condominium ownership. Documentation as to management, organization, and incorporation of applicable ownership associations will be submitted to the PZC at the time of filing the application for a TODO development.
23.10.7 Dwelling units will have no fewer than one (1) bedroom and no more than three (3) bedrooms. Live-work units or open studio units without a separated bedroom are allowable if unit size is more than 500 square feet.
23.10.8 Affordable units, if the development includes such restricted units, shall be of a construction quality and design that is comparable to market-rate units within the development, and shall be dispersed throughout the development.
23.11 Materials Required for Formal Submission of All Applications to the Commission: The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, in addition to the following:
23.11.1: Staff report of Pre-Application Conference discussions and applicability of concept to goals of Plan of Conservation & Development;
23.11.2: A streetscape rendering encompassing the view of the site from any public road and one hundred feet (100’) from all roadway approaches to the site;
23.11.3: A traffic study, prepared by a licensed professional engineer;
23.11.4: A parking analysis, prepared by a licensed professional engineer, addressing the following:
23.11.4.a Demonstration that parking provided is adequate for combined uses;
23.11.4.b Calculation methodology;
23.11.4.c Indication if shared parking is being used;
23.11.4.d Provisions for reserve parking; and
23.11.4.e Proposed parking management procedures for Train Station use
23.11.5: A site access and pedestrian circulation plan demonstrating the following:
23.11.5.a Location and dimension, and materials of all sidewalks, pathways, and dedicated pedestrian facilities;
Effective July 1, 2018
8
23.11.5.b Identification and detailing of any wayfinding signage and pathway lighting; and
23.11.5.c Narrative and/or visual presentation of how pedestrian facilities internal to the site will be connected with immediately adjacent off-site network
23.12 Performance Standards: Development of the property shall follow the Performance Standards detailed in Section 31 of these Regulations.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2401
Section 24
Reserved for Future Use
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2501
Section 25
Reserved for Future Use
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2601
Section 26
Districts – Lot Requirements - Standards
26.1 Establishment of Districts: For the purpose of these Regulations the town of Clinton is hereby divided districts. Section 26 and 27 list the uses and bulk lot requirements:
26.1.1 Districts that allow a minimum lot size of thirty thousand square feet (30,000 sq. ft.) or less per lot may require a larger lot size under certain conditions as indicated in Subsection 26.4.3 or 3.14.1.
26.2 Zoning Map: The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled “Zoning Map of the Town of Clinton, Connecticut” adopted June 10, 1965, effective June 15, 1965, including any subsequent amendments thereto, which map is hereby declared to be part of these Regulations and is herein after referred to as “Zoning Map”.
26.2.1 Interpretation of the Map: Where a question arises as to exact boundaries of a district, the boundary shall be determined by the Commission.
26.3 Zoning Schedule: The schedules entitled “Schedule of Uses by District” and “Lot Requirements by District” including any subsequent amendments thereto, is hereby declared to be a part of these Regulations and is hereinafter referred to as the “Schedule”.
26.3.1 Uses listed in the Schedule are permitted or prohibited in accordance with the following designation and procedure. Uses not listed are prohibited.
(a) “P” means a use permitted in the district as a matter of right after approval of a Zoning Permit from the ZEO.
(b) “X” means a use prohibited in the district.
(c) “SP” means a use permitted in the district, subject to approval of a Site Plan by the Clinton Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 10.
(d) “SE” means a use permitted in the district, subject to approval of a Special Exception from the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the provisions of Sections 11 and 12.
26.3.2 Prohibited Uses: No land, building or other structure in any district shall be for a use not specified as permitted in this Section.
26.4 Setbacks: No building or other structure shall extend into any setbacks required by these Regulations, except as follows:
26.4.1 Permitted signs as specified in Section 34.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2602
26.4.2 Marquees, canopies, eaves, open fire escapes and similar projections without projecting walls may project not more than five feet (5’) into the required setback area provided that it does not adversely impact the public health or safety.
26.4.3 In Residence Districts and the Village Zone, an unattached accessory building or structure, not exceeding fifteen feet (15’) in height and one hundred square feet (100 sq. ft.) in floor area, may extend to within ten feet (10’) of any property line but shall not extend into the area required for setback from a front property line.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
26.4.4 All lots of the following subdivisions that were developed as either Conservation Subdivisions or Planned Residential Cluster Developments shall have the following setbacks:
(a) Sub. 94: Fox Hill; Sub. 117: Kenilworth IV; Sub. 127: Kenilworth V; Sub. 227: Pembroke West; Sub. 230: Stonewall Acres; and Sub. 264: Taylor Ridge. These Subdivisions are shown on the Zoning Map.
(b) Front Setback: Thirty Feet (30’)
Side Setback: Fifteen Feet (15’)
Rear Setback: Thirty Feet (30’)
(c) Any Conservation Subdivision approved after January 1, 2005 shall utilize the setbacks provided in Section 12.9 of these Regulations.
26.5 Lot Area, Shape, Access and Frontage Requirements:
26.5.1 Area and Shape:
(a) East lot shall have a minimum area as specified for the district in which the lot is located and shall be of such shape that a square with sides equal to the minimum frontage requirements can be placed on the lot in an area (exclusive of those spaces created by front and rear line setbacks) capable of supporting the principal building or residence.
(b) Lot widths may not narrow to less than seventy percent (70%) of the minimum frontage and then widen to accommodate the minimum square.
(c) Wells, septic systems and reserve areas for one hundred percent (100%) leaching field expansion shall be provided on the lot.
26.5.2 Lots of Record; In any zoning district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of these Regulations, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected or reconstructed on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption of amendment of these Regulations.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2603
(a) This provision shall apply even though such lot of record fails to meet the lot and area requirement for the district in which it is located, but shall conform to Section 26.4.4 and Section 29.2 of these Regulations.
26.5.3 Areas of Special Concern:
(a) In Districts requiring thirty thousand square feet (30,000 sq. ft.) and less per lot where the soil is designated “Severe” for septic tank absorption fields, as reported in the USDA Soil Survey of Middlesex County, Connecticut, and as more fully described in the State of Connecticut Public Health Code, Section 19-13-B103d(e), the minimum lot area shall be at least one (1) acre of which there shall be at least thirty thousand (30,000) contiguous square feet of dry land.
(b) The Commission may require a minimum lot area of two (2) acres lying on an aquifer or recharge area for a public water supply or within five hundred feet (500’) of a public water supply reservoir or well.
26.5.4 Access and Frontage: Each lot shall have access to and frontage, as specified in the Lot Requirement Schedules, on an accepted Town road, approved subdivision road or highway as recorded in the Clinton Land Records and/or shown on the current CT Department of Transportation Map TR-27, except:
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(a) Access to a rear lot shall be in accordance with Section 12.10 or 12.8 of these Regulations.
(b) A lawful non-conforming lot, as defined in Subsection 3.13.1 and 3.15.2(b) shall not be excluded under this Section for failure to meet access and frontage requirements.
(c) Frontage for a corner lot shall be the street lines with applying minimum frontage requirements as set forth in the Lot Requirement Schedules shall apply to both streets.
26.5.5 Determination of Compliance:
(a) In determining compliance with minimum lot area and shape requirements, land subject to easements for drainage facilities and underground public utilities may be included.
(b) No street or highway easement or vehicular access, private right-of-way for vehicles, or easement for above ground public utilities may be included.
(c) Conservation easements may be included, but may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the minimum lot requirement.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2604
(d) Areas consisting of inland wetlands, tidal wetlands or watercourses, as defined in Section 3, shall not be used in computing lot area in zones requiring sixty thousand square feet (60,000 sq. ft.) or less per lot.
(e) In zones where minimum lot area exceeds sixty thousand square feet (60,000 sq. ft.) inland wetlands, watercourses or tidal wetlands may be included to meet the minimum lot area in excess of sixty thousand square feet (60,000 sq. ft.) but in no event shall exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the minimum zone requirement.
26.6 Corner Lots: On any corner lot there shall be no building, structure, fence, wall or planting in excess of three feet (3’) in height, as measured from curb line, located within a triangular space on the lot bounded by the two intersecting street lines and a straight line connecting a point fifty feet (50’) from the intersection so as to obstruct a clear line of sight across the triangle.
26.7 Coverage and Bulk:
(Amended 1/1/2015 – Section 25.4.3 deleted)
26.7.1 The aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and other structures on any lot shall not exceed the percentage of lot area specified in the Lot Requirement Schedules.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
26.7.2 The total floor area of all building and other structures on any lot, excluding basements, shall not exceed the percentage of lot area specified in the Lot Requirement Schedules.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
26.8 Special Buffer Requirements:
26.8.1 The intent of this buffer is to prevent easy access and to diminish as much as possible or eliminate sight, sound and odors from Businesses, Industrial and Marine Zones in or onto abutting residentially zoned property as viewed from the second floor living area of existing or potential residential structures. This applies to all projects, whether requiring a Zoning Permit, Site Plan approval, or Special Exception approval.
(a) A buffer of at least fifty feet (50’) in width running continuously along the property line shall be established along the residentially zoned properties abutting any Business, Industrial and/or Marine Zones.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(b) At five feet (5’) to fifteen feet (15’) of depth comprised of two (2) rows of suitable deciduous trees of minimum three inch (3”) caliper, DBH (diameter breast height), or evergreen trees eight feet (8’) in height, spaced fifteen feet (15’) apart and staggered in rows fifteen feet (15’) apart. The space between trees shall be filled with evergreen or deciduous shrub underplanting.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(c) At fifteen feet (15’) to fifty feet (50’) of depth comprised of mixed plantings of suitable evergreen and deciduous trees, arranged in natural groupings, with
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2605
tree quantity based on an average of one tree (minimum two inch (2”) caliper DBH for deciduous, six feet (6’) high for evergreen) per three hundred square feet (300 sq. ft.) of buffer area. The space between trees or tree groupings shall be underplanted with evergreen or deciduous shrubs, with quantity based on one shrub per two hundred square feet (200 sq. ft.) of buffer area. Up to one-third (1/3) of the buffer area may be covered with grasses or ground cover.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(d) Use of existing natural growth for buffer areas is encouraged and such areas may be augmented with additional trees and shrubs to achieve the required density set forth in the previous paragraph.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(e) All types of landscaping materials shall be approved by the ZEO. All landscaping trees, shrubs and fences must be maintained and repaired or replaced within thirty (30) calendar days of notification of such by the ZEO.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
26.8.2 Tidal Wetlands Buffer: A resource protection buffer of no less than fifty feet (50’) shall be established along the upland edge of any tidal wetland as defined by CGS Section 22a-29(2), thereby requiring a minimum buffer of fifty feet (50’). The width of the buffer shall be measured inland from the upland edge of the tidal wetlands except in the case of wetlands bordered by slopes greater than 25% in which case the buffer shall be measured inland from the top of the slope.
(a) The following uses and activities are prohibited within the buffer:
(1) New building construction that increases the building area or footprint including minor additions to existing buildings.
(2) Detached accessory buildings such as garages and sheds.
(3) Pools, tennis courts, patios and terraces.
(4) Driveways, parking areas and other impervious surfaces.
(5) Seawalls, bulkheads, retaining walls, landscaping walls or similar structures.
(6) Grading, excavation or filing, including the construction of new septic systems.
(7) Land clearing, except for minor clearing to allow for appropriate landscaping.
(8) Dumping of lawn clippings and other wastes.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2606
(9) The application of fertilizers and/or pesticides except when necessary to address public health issues as determined by the local health official and/or State Department of Health Services or to control an infestation of invasive vegetative species if authorized by the local Conservation Commission.
(10) The establishment of new lawn areas, and
(11) Extensive clearing or pruning.
(b) The following uses and activities are permitted and/or encouraged within the buffer area:
(1) Preservation of existing native vegetation, including shrubs and trees.
(2) Removal of invasive species and replacement with native species.
(3) Elimination and/or minimization of mowing to encourage a variety of native species including shrubs and trees, and
(4) Planting of native vegetation.
(c) This regulation does not prohibit the continued use, reconstruction or renovation of any septic disposal system, building or other improvement in existence on the effective date of the regulation (March 1, 2005) nor does it prohibit the construction of new improvements necessary for the function of water-dependent uses as defined by CGS Section 22a-93(16) except when those improvements can functionally be located outside the buffer area.
26.9 Excavation and Grading: There shall be no excavation and removal from any lot, and no grading or dumping on any lot, of any earth, loam, topsoil, sand, gravel, clay or stone, except as provided in Section 12.
26.10 Signs: All signs shall conform to the requirements of Section 34.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2607
* Please see Section 26.3.4 for the setbacks for Conservation Subdivisions. These Subdivisions are
shown on the Zone Map.
26.10 Lot Requirement Standards by District: Residential
(Amended 11/1/2012)
Lot and Building Standards R-80
R-60 R-40
R-30 R-20
R-15 R-10
26.10.1
Minimum lot area (in sq. ft.)
80,000
60,000 40,000
30,000 20,000
15,000 10,000
26.10.2
Reserved for Future Use
26.10.3
Minimum lot area for a dwelling (in sq. ft.)
n/a
n/a n/a
n/a n/a
n/a n/a
26.10.4
Minimum square on the lot (in feet) See Section 26.4.1 150 X 150
150
X
150 150 X 150
130
X
130 110 X 110
90
X
90 70 X 70
26.10.5
Minimum lot frontage width at the street line (in feet)
150
150 150
130 110
90 70
26.10.6
Minimum setback from front lot line (in feet)*
50
50 40
35 30
30 25
26.10.7
Maximum setback from front lot line (in feet)*
n/a
n/a n/a
n/a n/a
n/a n/a
26.10.8
Minimum setback from any lot line other than a front or rear lot line (in feet).*
35
35 25
25 20
15 10
26.10.9
Minimum setback from any lot line other than a front or rear lot line for two-family dwellings (in feet).
n/a
n/a n/a
30 25
n/a n/a
26.10.10
Minimum setback from rear lot line (in feet)*
50
50 40
35 30
30 25
26.10.11
Minimum setback from Residence or Village Zone District boundary line (in feet)
n/a
n/a n/a
n/a n/a
n/a n/a
26.10.12
Maximum number of stories for a building.
3
3 3
3 3
3 3
26.10.13
Maximum height for a building structure.
35
35 35
35 35
35 35
26.10.14
Maximum ground coverage as percent of lot area as defined in Section 3.
10%
10% 10%
15% 15%
15% 20%
26.10.15
Maximum floor area as percent of lot area including all stories (See Section 3)
20%
20% 20%
30% 30%
30% 40%
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2608
* Please see Section 26.3.4 for the setbacks for Conservation Subdivisions. These Subdivisions are
shown on the Zone Map.
Lot and Building Standards R-80
R-60 R-40
R-30 R-20
R-15 R-10
26.10.16
Minimum floor area for a one-story dwelling (in sq. ft.)
1,000
1,000 1,000
1,000 900
900 900
26.10.17
Minimum total floor area on all floors for a split-level dwelling (in sq. ft.)
1,200
1,200 1,200
1,200 1,000
1,000 1,000
26.10.18
Minimum floor area for two-story dwelling (in sq. ft.)
(a)
Ground floor
800
800 800
800 750
750 750
(b)
Total floor area
1,200
1,200 1,200
1,200 1,000
1,000 1,000
26.10.19
Minimum floor area for each family in a two-family dwelling (in sq. ft.)
n/a
n/a n/a
500 500
n/a n/a
26.10.20
Maximum floor area on ground floor for any one building (in sq. ft.)
n/a
n/a n/a
n/a n/a
n/a n/a
26.10.21
Maximum footprint of any single building, except as otherwise specified in these Regulations (in sq. ft.)
(Amended 1/1/2015) n/a
n/a n/a
n/a n/a
n/a n/a
May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2609
26.11 Lot Requirement Standards by District: Non-Residential:
Lot and Building Standards
VZ
EMVD
IDZ
B-1
B-2
B-3
B-4
M
I-1
I-2
IP
26.11.1
Minimum lot area (in sq. ft.)
10,000
10,000
200,000
200,000
10,000
10,000
20,000
10,000
20,000
40,000
80,000
26.11.2
Reserved for Future Use
26.11.3
Minimum lot area for a dwelling (in sq. ft.)
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
10,000
10,000
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
26.11.4
Minimum square on the lot (in sq. ft.) See Section 26.4.1
70
X
70
70
X
70
300
X
300
300
X
300
60
X
60
60
X
60
80
X
80
60
X
60
80
X
80
100
X
100
100
X
100
26.11.5
Minimum lot frontage at the street line (in feet)
70
70
300
300
60
60
80
60
80
100
100
26.11.6
Minimum setback from the front lot line (in feet)
15
15
50
50
25
25
25
25
25
50
50
26.11.7
Maximum setback from front lot line (in feet)
30
30
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
26.11.8
Minimum setback from any lot line other than a front or rear lot line (in feet)
10
10
50*
50
10
10
10
10
15
25
25
26.11.9
(Space intentionally left blank)
26.11.10
Minimum setback from rear lot line (in feet)
10
10
50*
50
10
10
10
10
15
25
25
26.11.11
Minimum setback from Residence or Village Zone District boundary line (in feet)
n/a
n/a
100
100
50
50
50
50
50
50
100
26.11.12
Maximum number of stories for a building
3
3
3*
3
3
3
3
3
--
--
--
26.11.13
Maximum height for a building structure (in feet)
35
35
45*
40
40
35
40
30
35
50
50
26.11.14
Maximum ground coverage as percent of lot area as defined in Section 3
60%
60%
80%
80%
60%
90%
80%
90%
75%
75%
75%
26.11.15
Maximum floor area as percent of lot area including all stories (Section 3).
50%
50%
40%
40%
40%
200%
100%
100%
200%
100%
50%
26.11.16
Minimum floor area for one-story dwelling (in sq. ft.)
1,000
1,000
n/a
n/a
900
900
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2610
Lot and Building Standards
VZ
EMVD
IDZ
B-1
B-2
B-3
B-4
M
I-1
I-2
IP
26.11.17
Minimum total floor area on all floors for split-level dwelling (in sq. ft.)
1,000
1,000
n/a
n/a
1,000
1,000
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
26.11.18
Minimum floor area for two-story dwelling (in sq. ft.)
26.11.19
(a)
1,000
1,000
n/a
n/a
750
750
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
26.11.20
(b)
1,500
1,500
n/a
n/a
1,000
1,000
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
26.11.21
Minimum floor area for each family in two-family dwelling (in sq. ft.)
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
500
500
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
26.11.22
Maximum floor area on ground floor for any one building (in sq. ft.)
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
26.11.23
Maximum footprint of any single building, except as otherwise specified in these Regulations (in sq. ft.)
(Amended 1/1/2015)
10,000
10,000
n/a
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
(Amended 5/15/2019 to add EMVD)
August 15, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2701
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
Section 27
Schedule of Uses by District
27.1 Residential:
Permitted Use R-80
R-60 R-40
R-30 R-20
R-15 R-10
27.1.1
Single-family detached dwelling; not more than one (1) residential structure per lot
P
P P
P P
P P
27.1.2
Two-family dwelling with not more than one (1) residential structure per lot
X
X X
SE SE
X X
27.1.3
Two-family dwellings in more than one structure
(Added 8/15/2016) X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.4
Multiple Unit Dwelling
(Added 8/15/2016) X
X X
X X
X x
27.1.5
Multiple Dwelling Units in Commercial Structures
(Added 6/1/2015) X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.6
Planned Neighborhood Developments
(Added 6/1/2015) X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.7
Common Interest Community Developments
(Added 6/1/2015) X
X X
X X
X SE
27.1.8
Accessory Apartments
SE
SE SE
SE SE
SE SE
27.1.9
Accessory uses customary and incidental to the use of a lot, subject to Sections 28 and 33
P
P P
P P
P P
27.1.10
Outdoor wood-burning furnace
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.11
Customary home occupation in a dwelling
P
P P
P P
P P
27.1.12
(a)
Mini-estate subdivision SE
SE SE
SE SE
SE SE
(b)
Conservation subdivision
SE
SE SE
SE SE
SE SE
27.1.13
Rear lots
SE
SE SE
SE SE
X X
27.1.14
Planned Residential Development
SE
SE SE
SE X
X X
27.1.15
Housing project for elderly persons, but not including mobile homes or trailers,
X
X X
SE SE
SE SE
27.1.16
Homes for the aged, congregate housing, assisted living facilities and boarding homes for sheltered care, licensed by the State of Connecticut
SE
SE SE
X X
X X
August 15, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2702
Permitted Use R-80 R-60 R-40 R-30 R-20 R-15 R-10
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.1.17
Hospitals, clinics, extended care facilities, long-term facilities, nursing/rest homes, sanatoriums and intermediate care facilities, licensed by the State of Connecticut X
X X
SE SE
SE SE
27.1.18
Day Care Facilities for:
(a)
No more than nine (9) children P
P P
P P
P P
(b)
More than nine (9) children SE
SE SE
SE SE
SE SE
(c)
No more than fifteen (15) adults
SE
SE SE
SE SE
X X
27.1.19
Bed and Breakfast establishments
SE
SE SE
SE SE
SE SE
27.1.20
Motels
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.21
Hotels
(Added 6/1/2015) X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.22
Business and professional offices
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.23
Financial institutions, including drive-up windows
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.24
Retail establishments and personal service facilities, except Shopping Centers, Neighborhood Shopping Centers
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.25
(a)
Shopping Center X
X X
X X
X X
(b)
Neighborhood Shopping Center
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.26
Liquor Stores
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.27
Medical Marijuana Producers and Dispensaries
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.28
Massage Establishments
(Added 1/1/2015) P
P P
P P
P P
27.1.29
Tattoo parlors and/or body piercing salons (except ear piercing)
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.30
Adult Entertainment Business
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.31
Coffee houses, ice cream parlors, other food service establishments occupying not more than two thousand, three hundred square feet (2,300 sq. ft.) where customers are served at counters, with no more than fifty (50) seats.
(Amended 6/1/2015)
X
X X
X X
X X
August 15, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2703
Permitted Use R-80 R-60 R-40 R-30 R-20 R-15 R-10
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.1.32
Restaurants and other food service establishments, where customers are served only when seated at tables or counters. Such uses may include a food take-out service incidental to the primary permitted use, but shall not include establishments where customers are served in motor vehicles including drive-up windows or primarily at food take-out counters.
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.33
Restaurants and other food service establishments where customers are served primarily at food take-out counters.
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.34
Vendors
(Added 7/1/2015)
(a)
Transient P
P P
P P
P P
(b)
Stationary X
X X
X X
X X
(c)
Events
P
P P
P P
P P
27.1.35
Indoor theaters and assembly halls
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.36
Outdoor recreation facilities limited to athletic fields, tennis courts, golf courses, swimming pools, skateboard parks, other than the facilities of the Town of Clinton
SE
SE SE
SE SE
SE SE
27.1.37
Nature preserves and wildlife sanctuaries
P
P P
P P
P P
27.1.38
Bowling alleys and billiard or pool halls
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.39
Commercial recreation facilities, indoor or outdoor, not otherwise specified
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.40
(a)
Riding academies and boarding stables SP
SP SE
SE X
X X
(b)
Commercial kennels
SE
SE SE
SE X
X X
27.1.41
Veterinary hospitals
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.42
The keeping and raising of one (1) horse, pony, sheep, cow, goat, pig, burro, donkey, mule, llama or other similar animal for personal or family purposes as a pet
P
P P
P P
P P
August 15, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2704
Permitted Use R-80 R-60 R-40 R-30 R-20 R-15 R-10
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.1.43
Chickens, or other poultry, rabbits or similar small animals or any combination thereof, not to exceed a total of ten (10) on a lot.
P
P P
P P
P P
27.1.44
Fruit, vegetables or farm stands; farms; and commercial greenhouses. See Section 28.1.4(g)
(Amended 6/1/2014)
(a)
Farm Stand less than 100 sq. ft. P
P P
P P
P P
(b)
Farm Stand more than 100 sq. ft.
SE
SE SE
SE SE
SE SE
(c)
Farms and commercial green houses
SE
SE SE
SE SE
SE SE
27.1.45
Farmer’s Market
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.46
Farm Tourism
SE
SE SE
SE SE
SE SE
27.1.47
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.1.48
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.1.49
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.1.50
Philanthropic, educational or religious uses by a duly incorporated non-profit body or governmental unit, including but not limited to private schools, colleges and universities, museums, libraries, charitable institutions, cemeteries, place of worship, parish halls, fraternal societies and senior centers
SE
SE SE
SE SE
SE SE
27.1.51
Buildings, uses and facilities of the Town of Clinton
(a)
Occupying not more than fifteen thousand square feet (15,000 sq. ft.) of floor area SP
SP SP
SP SP
SP SP
(b)
Occupying more than fifteen thousand square feet (15,000 sq. ft.) of floor area
SE
SE SE
SE SE
SE SE
27.1.52
Buildings, uses and facilities of the State of Connecticut, Federal Government and other governmental agencies
SE
SE SE
SE SE
SE SE
27.1.53
Railroad rights-of-way and passenger stations including customary accessory services therein but not including switching, freight yards, freight terminals or storage sidings P
P P
P P
P P
August 15, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2705
Permitted Use R-80 R-60 R-40 R-30 R-20 R-15 R-10
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.1.54
Public utility substations and public utility water supply reservoirs, wells, water towers and water treatment facilities SE
SE SE
SE SE
SE SE
27.1.55
Communication towers not regulated as to location by the State of Connecticut
SE
SE SE
SE SE
SE SE
27.1.56
Alternate energy systems
(a)
Conforming to the maximum height requirements in Section 26
P
P P
P P
P P
(b)
Exceeding the maximum height requirement in Section 26
SE
SE SE
SE SE
SE SE
27.1.57
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.1.58
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.1.59
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.1.60
The manufacturing, processing or assembling of goods when:
1. Accessory and subordinate to a permitted use conducted on the same premises;
2. Located within an enclosed building; and
3. Such manufacturing, processing or assembling does not occupy more than one-third (1/3) of the floor area of the premises containing and occupied by the permitted use.
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.61
The manufacturing, processing or assembling of goods
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.62
Warehousing, and wholesale businesses
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.63
Self-Storage Warehouses
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.64
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.1.65
Marinas, docks, wharves, slip basins and landings for boats including the storage, repair and servicing of boats
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.66
Sale of boats and marine equipment, engines, supplies and provisions for boats
X
X X
X X
X X
August 15, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2706
Permitted Use R-80 R-60 R-40 R-30 R-20 R-15 R-10
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.1.67
Manufacturing and rebuilding of boats
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.68
The processing, storage and sale of fish, shellfish and lobster from predominately local catches
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.69
Marine contractor’s business, associated buildings and storage yards
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.70
Contractor’s businesses, associated buildings and storage yards
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.71
Excavation or deposit of materials
SE
SE SE
SE SE
SE SE
27.1.72
Funeral Homes
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.73
Research laboratories, associated offices and buildings
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.74
Self-service cleaning establishments (Laundromats)
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.75
Printing establishments.
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.76
Storage of material which is dangerous due to explosion, extreme fire hazard or radioactivity, beyond that required for personal residential use.
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.77
Commercial oil, propane or gasoline storage tanks
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.78
Gasoline filling stations
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.79
Motor vehicle and limited repairer service
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.80
Establishments for the sale of new or used vehicles
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.81
Motor vehicle detailing and car washing facilities
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.82
Commercial or industrial solid waste, construction or demolition debris disposal, recycling, material transfer, or outdoor storage of materials not associated with a retail or contractor business (Added 8/15/2018)
X
X X
X X
X X
27.1.83
(Reserved for Future Use)
August 15, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2707
Permitted Use R-80 R-60 R-40 R-30 R-20 R-15 R-10
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.1.84
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.1.85
(Reserved for Future Use)
Effective May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2707
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.2
Non-Residential:
Permitted Use
EMVD
VZ
IDZ
B-1
B-2
B-3
B-4
M
I-1
I-2
IP
27.2.1
Single-family detached dwelling; not more than one (1) dwelling per lot
SP
P
X
X
SE
X
X
X
X
X
X
27.2.2
Two-family dwelling with not more than one (1) dwelling per lot
SE
SE
X
X
SE
X
X
X
X
X
X
27.2.3
Two-family dwellings in more than one structure
(Added 8/15/2016)
SE
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
27.2.4
Multiple Unit Dwellings
(Amended effective 7/1/2018)
SE
X
X
X
SE
X
X
X
X
X
X
27.2.5
Multiple Dwelling Units in Commercial Structures
(Added 2/1/2015 & Amended 6/1/2015 & 4/1/2016)
SE
X
SE
X
X
X
X
SE
X
X
X
27.2.6
Planned Neighborhood Developments
(Added 2/1/2015)
X
X
SE
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
27.2.7
Common Interest Community Development
(Added 6/1/2015)
SE
X
SE
X
X
X
X
SE
X
X
X
27.2.8
Accessory Apartments
SE
SE
X
X
SE
SE
SE
X
X
X
X
27.2.9
Accessory uses customary and incidental to the use of a lot, subject to Sections 28 and 33
SP
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
27.2.10
Outdoor wood-burning furnace
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
27.2.11
Customary home occupation in a dwelling
P
P
X
X
P
P
P
X
P
P
X
27.2.12
(a)
Mini-estate subdivision
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
(b)
Conservation subdivision
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
27.2.13
Rear lots
SE
SE
X
X
SE
X
SE
X
X
SE
SE
27.2.14
Planned Residential Development
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
27.2.15
Housing project for elderly persons, but not including mobile homes or trailers,
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
X
X
X
27.2.16
Homes for the aged, congregate housing,
X
X
X
X
SE
X
SE
X
X
X
X
May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2708
Permitted Use VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-
4
M I-1 I-2 IP
Permitted Use EMVD VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 M I-1 I-2 IP
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
assisted living facilities and boarding homes for sheltered care, licensed by the State of Connecticut
27.2.17
Hospitals, clinics, extended care facilities, long-term facilities, nursing/rest homes, sanatoriums and intermediate care facilities, licensed by the State of Connecticut
X
X
X
X
SE
X
SE
X
X
X
X
27.2.18
Day Care Facilities for:
(a)
No more than nine (9) children
SP
P
SE
P
P
P
P
X
X
P
X
(b)
More than nine (9) children
SP
SP
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
X
SE
X
(c)
No more than fifteen (15) adults
X
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
X
SE
X
27.2.19
Bed and Breakfast establishments
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
X
SE
X
27.2.20
Motels
SE
SE
X
X
SE
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
X
27.2.21
Hotels
X
X
SE
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
27.2.22
Business and professional offices
(a)
With a ground floor area of less than or equal to 5,000 sq. ft.
SP
SP
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
(b)
With a ground floor area of more than 5,000 sq. ft.
SE
SE
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
(c)
Occupying less than or equal to 15,000 sq. ft.
n/a
n/a
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
(d)
Occupying more than 15,000 sq. ft.
n/a
n/a
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
27.2.23
(a)
Financial institutions
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
X
SE
X
(b)
With drive-up window
X
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
X
SE
X
27.2.24
Retail establishments and personal service facilities, except Shopping Centers, Neighborhood Shopping Centers
(a)
With a ground floor area of less than or equal to 5,000 sq. ft.
SP
SP
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2709
Permitted Use VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-
4
M I-1 I-2 IP
Permitted Use EMVD VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 M I-1 I-2 IP
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
(b)
With a ground floor area of more than 5,000 sq. ft.
SE
SE
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
(c)
Occupying less than 15,000 sq. ft.
n/a
n/a
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
(d)
Occupying more than 15,000 sq. ft.
n/a
n/a
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
SE
X
(e)
Drive-up window
X
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
X
SE
X
27.2.25
(a)
Shopping Center
X
X
SE
SE
X
X
SE
X
SE
SE
SE
(b)
Neighborhood Shopping Center
X
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
X
27.2.26
Liquor Stores
X
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
X
SE
X
27.2.27
Marijuana Producers and Dispensaries
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
27.2.28
Massage Establishments
(Added 1/1/2015)
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
27.2.29
Tattoo parlors and/or body piercing salons (except ear piercing)
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
X
X
X
X
27.2.30
Adult Entertainment Business
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
X
X
X
X
27.2.31
(a)
Coffee houses, ice cream parlors, other food service establishments occupying not more than two thousand three hundred square feet (2,300 sq. ft.) where customers are served at counters, with no more than fifty (50) seats
(Amended 2/15/2015 & 6/1/2015)
SE
SE
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
X
(b)
With drive-up window.
X
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
X
27.2.32
Restaurants and other food service establishments, where customers are served only when seated at tables or counters. Such uses may include a food take-out service incidental to the primary permitted use, but shall not include establishments where customers are served in
May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2710
Permitted Use VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-
4
M I-1 I-2 IP
Permitted Use EMVD VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 M I-1 I-2 IP
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
motor vehicles including drive-up windows or primarily at food take-out counters.
(a)
With indoor seating for no more than sixty (60) people
SE
SE
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
(b)
With indoor seating for more than sixty (60) people
X
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
(c)
With outdoor seating for no more than twenty (20) people. An outdoor eating area may be located in conjunction with a restaurant with indoor seating
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
27.2.33
(a)
Restaurants and other food service establishments where customers are served primarily at food take-out counters.
X
X
SE
X
X
X
SE
X
X
X
X
(b)
Drive-up Window
X
X
SE
X
X
X
SE
X
X
X
X
27.2.34
Vendors
(Added 7/1/2015)
(a)
Transient
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(b)
Stationary
SP
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
(c)
Event
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
27.2.35
Indoor theaters and assembly halls
(a)
Occupying less than or equal to 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area
SE
SE
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
X
X
X
X
(b)
Occupying more than 15,000 sq. ft.
SE
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
X
X
X
27.2.36
Recreation facilities limited to athletic fields, tennis courts, golf courses, swimming pools, skateboard parks, other than the facilities of the Town of Clinton
X
X
SE
SE
X
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2711
Permitted Use VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-
4
M I-1 I-2 IP
Permitted Use EMVD VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 M I-1 I-2 IP
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.2.37
Nature preserves and wildlife sanctuaries
P
P
X
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
27.2.38
Bowling alleys and billiard or pool halls
X
X
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
X
X
X
X
27.2.39
Commercial recreation facilities, not otherwise specified
(Amended 3/8/2019)
(a)
Indoor Type A, in which a change of use is proposed for an existing structure of any size or as part of a legally authorized reconstruction of a building that was damaged by an act of nature, fire, etc.
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
SE
X
(b)
Indoor Type A, with a footprint not to exceed 70,000 sq. ft.
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
(c)
Indoor Type B, with a footprint not to exceed 40,000 sq. ft.
X
X
SE
X
X
X
X
X
SE
SE
SE
(d)
Outdoor
X
X
SE
X
X
X
SE
X
X
X
X
27.2.40
(a)
Riding academies and boarding stables
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
P
P
P
(b)
Commercial kennels
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
27.2.41
Veterinary hospitals
(a)
With a ground floor area of less than or equal to 5,000 sq. ft.
SE
SE
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
(a)
Occupying less than or equal to 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area
n/a
n/a
X
X
SP
SP
SP
X
SP
SP
X
(b)
Occupying more than 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area
n/a
n/a
X
X
X
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
X
27.2.42
The keeping and raising of one (1) horse, pony, sheep, cow, goat, pig, burro, donkey, mule, llama or other similar animal for personal or family purposes as a pet on any lot having a minimum lot area of forty thousand square feet (40,000 sq. ft.); one
X
X
X
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2712
Permitted Use VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-
4
M I-1 I-2 IP
Permitted Use EMVD VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 M I-1 I-2 IP
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
additional animal may be maintained on the lot for each additional forty thousand square feet (40,000 sq. ft.)
27.2.43
Not more than ten (10) chickens, or other poultry, rabbits or similar small animals or any combination thereof, not to exceed a total of ten (10) on a lot, provided that the subject lot meets the minimum lot size requirement for the zone it’s located in. This does not apply to farms as farms are defined.
X
X
X
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
27.2.44
Fruit, vegetables or farm stands; farms; and commercial greenhouses. See Section 28.1.4(g)
SE
X
X
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
27.2.45
Farmer’s Market
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
27.2.46
Farm Tourism
X
X
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
SE
27.2.47
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.2.48
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.2.49
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.2.50
Uses by a duly incorporated non-profit body or governmental unit
(a)
Philanthropic uses, included but not limited to museums, libraries, charitable institutions, fraternal societies and senior centers
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
SE
(b)
Educational uses, including but not limited to private schools, colleges and universities
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
SE
(c)
Religious uses, including but not limited to places of
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
SE
May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2713
Permitted Use VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-
4
M I-1 I-2 IP
Permitted Use EMVD VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 M I-1 I-2 IP
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
worship and parish halls
(d)
Cemeteries
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
SE
27.2.51
Buildings, uses and facilities of the Town of Clinton
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
27.2.52
Buildings, uses and facilities of the State of Connecticut, Federal Government and other governmental agencies
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
27.2.53
Railroad rights-of-way and passenger stations including customary accessory services therein but not including switching, freight yards, freight terminals or storage sidings
SP
P
X
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
27.2.54
Public utility substations and public utility water supply reservoirs, wells, water towers and water treatment facilities
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
27.2.55
Communication towers not regulated as to location by the State of Connecticut
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
27.2.56
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.2.57
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.2.58
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.2.59
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.2.60
The manufacturing, processing or assembling of goods when:
1.Accessory and subordinate to a permitted use conducted on the same premises;
2. Located within an enclosed building; and
3. Such manufacturing, processing or assembling does not occupy more than one-third (1/3) of the floor area of the premises containing and
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2714
Permitted Use VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-
4
M I-1 I-2 IP
Permitted Use EMVD VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 M I-1 I-2 IP
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
occupied by the permitted use.
27.2.61
The manufacturing, processing or assembling of goods
(a)
Occupying less than or equal to 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
SP
SP
SP
(b)
Occupying more than 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
SE
SE
27.2.62
Warehousing, and wholesale businesses
(a)
Occupying less than or equal to 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
SP
SP
SP
(b)
Occupying more than 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
SE
SE
27.2.63
Self-Storage Warehouses
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
SE
SE
27.2.64
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.2.65
Marinas, docks, wharves, slip basins and landings for boats including the storage, repair and servicing of boats
SE
SE
SE
X
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
X
27.2.66
Sale of boats and marine equipment, engines, supplies and provisions for boats
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
27.2.67
Manufacturing and rebuilding of boats
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
27.2.68
The processing, storage and sale of fish, shellfish and lobster from predominately local catches
(a)
Occupying not more than 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area
X
X
X
X
SP
X
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
(b)
Occupying more than 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area
X
X
X
X
SE
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2715
Permitted Use VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-
4
M I-1 I-2 IP
Permitted Use EMVD VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 M I-1 I-2 IP
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.2.69
Marine contractor’s business, associated buildings and storage yards
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
X
X
X
27.2.70
Contractor’s businesses, associated buildings and storage yards
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
X
SE
SE
X
27.2.71
Excavation or deposit of materials
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
27.2.72
Funeral Homes
SE
SE
X
X
SE
SE
SE
X
SE
SE
X
27.2.73
Research laboratories, associated offices and buildings
SE
X
SE
X
X
X
X
X
SE
SE
SE
27.2.74
Self-service cleaning establishments (Laundromats)
X
X
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
X
27.2.75
Printing establishments.
(a)
Occupying less than or equal to 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area
SP
SP
SE
X
X
SP
SP
X
SP
SP
SP
(b)
Occupying more than 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area but less than or equal to 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area
SE
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
SP
SP
SP
(c)
Occupying more than 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
SE
SE
27.2.76
Storage of material which is dangerous due to explosion, extreme fire hazard or radioactivity, beyond that required for personal residential use.
X
X
X
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
27.2.77
Commercial oil, propane or gasoline storage tanks
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
X
SE
SE
X
27.2.78
Gasoline filling stations
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
X
X
SE
X
27.2.79
Motor vehicle and limited repairer service
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
X
X
SE
X
27.2.80
Establishments for the sale of new or used vehicles
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
X
X
SE
X
27.2.81
Motor vehicle detailing and car washing facilities
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
X
X
SE
X
May 15, 2019 TOWN OF CLINTON 2716
Permitted Use VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-
4
M I-1 I-2 IP
Permitted Use EMVD VZ IDZ B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 M I-1 I-2 IP
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.2.82
Commercial or industrial solid waste, construction or demolition debris disposal, recycling, material transfer, or outdoor storage of materials not associated with a retail or contractor business:
a) Less than 250’ from existing residentially-zoned land
b) More than 250’ from existing residentially-zoned land
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
SE
SE
27.2.83
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.2.84
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.2.85
(Reserved for Future Use)
August 15, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2717
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.3 Floating Zones:
Permitted Use
AHD-1
27.3.1
Single-family detached dwelling; not more than one (1) residential structure per lot
P
27.3.2
Two-family dwelling with not more than one (1) residential structure per lot
P
27.3.3
Two-Family dwellings in more than one structure
SP
27.3.4
Multiple Unit Dwelling
SP
27.3.5
Multiple Dwelling Units in Commercial Structures
(Added 6/1/2015)
X
27.3.6
Planned Neighborhood Developments
(Added 6/1/2015)
X
27.3.7
Common Interest Community Developments
(Added 6/1/2015)
SE
27.3.8
Accessory Apartments
X
27.3.9
Accessory uses customary and incidental to the use of a lot, subject to Sections 28 and 33
P
27.3.10
Outdoor wood-burning furnace
X
27.3.11
Customary home occupation in a dwelling
P
27.3.12
(a)
Mini-estate subdivision
X
(b)
Conservation subdivision
X
27.3.13
Rear lots
X
27.3.14
Planned Residential Development
X
27.3.15
Housing project for elderly persons, but not including mobile homes or trailers,
SP
27.3.16
Homes for the aged, congregate housing, assisted living facilities and boarding homes for sheltered care, licensed by the State of Connecticut
SE
August 15, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2718
Permitted Use ADH-1
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.3.17
Hospitals, clinics, extended care facilities, long-term facilities, nursing/rest homes, sanatoriums and intermediate care facilities, licensed by the State of Connecticut
X
27.3.18
Day Care Facilities for:
(a)
No more than nine (9) children
P
(b)
More than nine (9) children
SE
(c)
No more than fifteen (15) adults
SE
27.3.19
Bed and Breakfast establishments
X
27.3.20
Motels
X
27.3.21
Hotels
(Added 6/1/2015)
X
27.3.22
Business and professional offices
X
27.3.23
Financial institutions, including drive-up windows
X
27.3.24
Retail establishments and personal service facilities, except Shopping Centers, Neighborhood Shopping Centers
X
27.3.25
(a)
Shopping Center
X
(b)
Neighborhood Shopping Center
X
27.3.26
Liquor Stores
X
27.3.27
Medical Marijuana Producers and Dispensaries
X
27.3.28
Massage Establishments
(Added 1/1/2015)
P
27.3.29
Tattoo parlors and/or body piercing salons (except ear piercing)
X
27.3.30
Adult Entertainment Business
X
27.3.31
Coffee houses, ice cream parlors, other food service establishments occupying not more than two thousand, three hundred square feet (2,300 sq. ft.) where customers are served at counters, with no more than fifty (50) seats.
(Amended 6/1/2015)
X
August 15, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2719
Permitted Use ADH-1
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.3.32
Restaurants and other food service establishments, where customers are served only when seated at tables or counters. Such uses may include a food take-out service incidental to the primary permitted use, but shall not include establishments where customers are served in motor vehicles including drive-up windows or primarily at food take-out counters.
X
27.3.33
Restaurants and other food service establishments where customers are served primarily at food take-out counters.
X
27.3.34
Vendors
(Added 7/1/2015)
(a)
Transient
P
(b)
Stationary
X
(c)
Events
P
27.3.35
Indoor theaters and assembly halls
X
27.3.36
Outdoor recreation facilities limited to athletic fields, tennis courts, golf courses, swimming pools, skateboard parks, other than the facilities of the Town of Clinton
X
27.3.37
Nature preserves and wildlife sanctuaries
P
27.3.38
Bowling alleys and billiard or pool halls
X
27.3.39
Commercial recreation facilities, indoor or outdoor, not otherwise specified
X
27.3.40
(a)
Riding academies and boarding stables
X
(b)
Commercial kennels
X
27.3.41
Veterinary hospitals
X
27.3.42
The keeping and raising of one (1) horse, pony, sheep, cow, goat, pig, burro, donkey, mule, llama or other similar animal for personal or family purposes as a pet
X
August 15, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2720
Permitted Use ADH-1
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.3.43
Chickens, or other poultry, rabbits or similar small animals or any combination thereof, not to exceed a total of ten (10) on a lot.
X
27.3.44
Fruit, vegetables or farm stands; farms; and commercial greenhouses. See Section 28.1.4(g)
(Amended 6/1/2014)
(a)
Farm Stand less than 100 sq. ft.
X
(b)
Farm Stand more than 100 sq. ft.
X
(c)
Farms and commercial green houses
X
27.3.45
Farmer’s Market
X
27.3.46
Farm Tourism
X
27.3.47
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.3.48
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.3.49
Philanthropic, educational or religious uses by a duly incorporated non-profit body or governmental unit, including but not limited to private schools, colleges and universities, museums, libraries, charitable institutions, cemeteries, place of worship, parish halls, fraternal societies and senior centers
X
27.3.50
Buildings, uses and facilities of the Town of Clinton
(a)
Occupying not more than fifteen thousand square feet (15,000 sq. ft.) of floor area
X
(b)
Occupying more than fifteen thousand square feet (15,000 sq. ft.) of floor area
X
27.3.51
Buildings, uses and facilities of the State of Connecticut, Federal Government and other governmental agencies
X
27.3.52
Railroad rights-of-way and passenger stations including customary accessory services therein but not including switching, freight yards, freight terminals or storage sidings
X
August 15, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2721
Permitted Use ADH-1
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.3.53
Public utility substations and public utility water supply reservoirs, wells, water towers and water treatment facilities
X
27.3.54
Communication towers not regulated as to location by the State of Connecticut
X
27.3.55
Alternate energy systems
(a)
Conforming to the maximum height requirements in Section 26
P
(b)
Exceeding the maximum height requirement in Section 26
SE
27.3.56
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.3.57
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.3.58
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.3.59
The manufacturing, processing or assembling of goods when:
1.Accessory and subordinate to a permitted use conducted on the same premises;
2. Located within an enclosed building; and
3. Such manufacturing, processing or assembling does not occupy more than one-third (1/3) of the floor area of the premises containing and occupied by the permitted use.
X
27.3.60
The manufacturing, processing or assembling of goods
X
27.3.61
Warehousing, and wholesale businesses
X
27.3.62
Self-Storage Warehouses
X
27.3.63
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.3.64
Marinas, docks, wharves, slip basins and landings for boats including the storage, repair and servicing of boats
X
27.3.65
Sale of boats and marine equipment, engines, supplies and provisions for boats
X
August 15, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2722
Permitted Use ADH-1
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.3.66
Manufacturing and rebuilding of boats
X
27.3.67
The processing, storage and sale of fish, shellfish and lobster from predominately local catches
X
27.3.68
Marine contractor’s business, associated buildings and storage yards
X
27.3.69
Contractor’s businesses, associated buildings and storage yards
X
27.3.70
Excavation or deposit of materials
X
27.3.71
Funeral Homes
X
27.3.72
Research laboratories, associated offices and buildings
X
27.3.73
Self-service cleaning establishments (Laundromats)
X
27.3.74
Printing establishments.
X
27.3.75
Storage of material which is dangerous due to explosion, extreme fire hazard or radioactivity, beyond that required for personal residential use.
X
27.3.76
Commercial oil, propane or gasoline storage tanks
X
27.3.77
Gasoline filling stations
X
27.3.78
Motor vehicle and limited repairer service
X
27.3.79
Establishments for the sale of new or used vehicles
X
27.3.80
Motor vehicle detailing and car washing facilities
X
27.3.81
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.3.82
Commercial or industrial solid waste, construction or demolition debris disposal, recycling, material transfer, or outdoor storage of materials not associated with a retail or contractor business (Added 8/15/2018)
X
27.3.83
(Reserved for Future Use)
August 15, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2723
Permitted Use ADH-1
P - Zoning Permit from ZEO Required X - Prohibited in District
SP – Site Plan approval from PZC Required SE - Special Exception approval from PZC Required
n/a - Not applicable
27.3.84
(Reserved for Future Use)
27.3.85
(Reserved for Future Use)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2801
Section 28
Accessory Uses, Home Occupations
and Alternate Energy Systems
28.1 Accessory Uses:
28.1.1 An accessory use is an additional use for which a Zoning Permit is required.
28.1.2 It shall be accessory only to a permitted use.
28.1.3 The accessory use shall be located on the same lot with the permitted use to which it is accessory.
28.1.4 Accessory uses may include the following and shall be subject to all applicable Regulations and the additional specific standards set forth below:
(a) Off-street parking.
(b) In non-residential zones, storage of contractors’ equipment, building supplies or similar material.
(1) Such outside storage shall not to be located within twenty feet (20’) of any property line.
(c) In non-residential zones, storage of a commercial vehicle exceeding one and one-half (1½) tons gross vehicle weight.
(d) In residential zones, off-street parking spaces.
(1) No more than one commercial vehicle, not to exceed one and one-half (1½) ton gross vehicle weight is permitted.
(i) Any such vehicle shall not be parked within any setback area on any lot.
(e) Facilities for the storage of a reasonable quantity of retail merchandise and supplies.
(f) A kennel for three (3) or more dogs owned by the occupant of the dwelling unit and not used for boarding or other commercial services, provided that any run, building, or enclosures connected therewith shall not be less than fifty feet (50’) from any property or street line.
(g) Fruit, vegetable or farm stands with a footprint of less than one hundred square feet (100 sq. ft.) for the seasonal sale of merchandise produced on the premises.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2802
(h) Livestock:
(1) All livestock shall be kept in a building, stable or enclosure, not less than the legal setback for the appropriate zone for any abutting residential or Village Zone property and one hundred feet (100’) from any well or water body from which water is taken for human consumption.
(2) Manure shall be kept in a covered, watertight pit or chamber and shall be removed at least once a week during the period from May 1 to October 1 and during such other months at intervals sufficiently frequent to maintain sanitary conditions satisfactory to the Director of Health.
(3) There shall be no more than one horse, pony, sheep, cow, goat, pig, burro, donkey, mule, llama or other similar animal for personal or family purposes as a pet per forty thousand square feet (40,000 sq. ft.) of land.
(4) There shall be no chickens, or other small animals kept on any lot that does not meet the minimum lot size requirement for the zone it’s located in.
(5) All chickens and other small animals shall be confined to an enclosure or building, not less than the legal setback for the appropriate zone for any abutting residential or Village Zone property.
(i) Swimming pools, in-ground and above ground.
(j) The storage of travel trailers/campers provided that the vehicle shall not be stored in any front or side yard on any lot within the town of Clinton.
(1) In addition, no travel trailer/camper vehicle may be occupied as an accessory use for more than fourteen (14) days in any one (1) calendar year.
(k) Storage trailers, subject to the following conditions:
(1) The storage trailer must be structurally sound and pose no detriment to public health, safety or property value.
(2) The storage trailer must meet the same standards as a conventional structure.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2803
(3) The storage trailer shall be located so that it does not take up parking spaces required for other uses on the site and does not obstruct emergency access or other essential circulation patterns.
(4) Any landscaping or natural vegetation disturbed by the placement of a storage trailer shall be restored immediately upon removal of the trailer.
(5) The ZEO may require that storage trailers be screened from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties and that appropriate landscaping, fencing or other screening be provided.
(6) The aggregate area covered by storage trailers shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total floor area of all buildings on the site.
(l) Incidental retail use in approved warehouses, provided that no more than 10% or 2,500 sq. ft., whichever is less, of the total floor area is used for the retail use.
(m) Outside storage areas, including the outside storage or display of merchandise, supplies, machinery and solid wastes, but not including areas used for parking of registered motor vehicles in daily use, shall not extend into the areas required for setbacks from a property line or Residential District boundary line. This section does not apply to Contractor’s Businesses and Storage Yards with an approved Special Exception permit.
(Amended 11/1/2016)
(1) Any outside storage area shall be enclosed except for necessary access drive, by building and/or fences, walls, embankments or evergreen shrubs or trees so as to screen the storage area from view from any other lot or from any street. Outside storage areas shall be limited in extent on any lot as follows:
District Percentage of Lot Area
B-1, B-2, B-3, IP, VZ
10%
B-4, M
75%
I-1, I-2
25%
(2) In areas that have been approved for outside storage, there shall be no servicing of vehicles, machinery or other items stored outside, except in Marine Zones.
(n) Outdoor Entertainment: Outdoor entertainment, limited to musical concerts, performing arts recitals, exhibitions, fairs/festivals and arts and crafts shows, are permitted subject to the following:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2804
(1) Outdoor entertainment events shall be held only in the Business, Marine and Village Zone Districts.
(2) Outdoor entertainment events shall end prior to 10:00 p.m. There shall be no more than two events, which may last up to three days, per property, per calendar year.
(i) Any property owned by a philanthropic, governmental, educational or religious entity is exempted from the number of events provision.
(3) The facilitators of outdoor entertainment events shall obtain a Zoning Permit from the ZEO at least two weeks prior to the event.
(o) Temporary Health Care Structures:
(Added 1/1/2018)
(1) Definitions: As used in this subsection, the following terms are defined as follows:
(i) “Caregiver” means a relative, legal guardian or health care agent who is responsible for the unpaid care of a mentally or physically impaired person.
(ii) “Mentally or physically impaired person” means a person who requires assistance, as certified in writing by a physician licensed in this state, with two or more activities of daily living, including, but not limited to, bathing, dressing, grooming, eating, meal preparation, shopping, housekeeping, transfers, bowel and bladder care, laundry, communication, self-administration of medication and ambulation.
(iii) ”Temporary health care structure” means a transportable residential structure that provides an environment in which a caregiver may provide care for a mentally or physically impaired person and that (1) is primarily assembled at a location other than the site of installation; (2) has one occupant who is the mentally or physically impaired person; (3) is not larger than five hundred (500 sq. ft.) gross square feet; (4) is not places on or attached to a permanent foundation; and (5) compliances with the applicable provisions of the State Building Code, Fire Safety Code and Public Health Code.
(2) A temporary health care structure shall be allowed as an accessory use in the following Zoning Districts:
(3) The temporary health care structure must be placed in conformance with all setback requirements, coverage limits and maximum floor area
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2805
ratio limitations that apply to accessory structures as of October 1, 2017.
(4) No person shall install a temporary health care structure without first obtaining a zoning permit from the ZEO.
(i) A permit may only be obtained for property which is owned by the caregiver or the mentally or physically impaired person and used as his or her primary residence.
(ii) The applicant shall be required to send notice of the permit application, by certified or registered mail, to each person appearing of record as an owner of a property which abuts the property upon which the temporary health care structure is proposed to be installed. The notice shall be sent not later than three (3) business days after the permit application is submitted to the ZEO by the applicant.
(5) Each temporary health care structure must be accessible to emergency vehicles and be connected to private water or septic systems, or to water, sewer and electric utilities that serve the primary residence.
(i) Approval for these systems must be obtained from the regional health district.
(6) Not more than one (1) temporary health care structure shall be installed on a lot.
(7) No signage, advertising or otherwise promoting the existence of the temporary health care structure shall be permitted either on the exterior of the structure or elsewhere on the lot.
(8) On each April 1st following the installation of the temporary health care structure and each year thereafter, the applicant shall provide written evidence of compliance with this Section, as long as the temporary health care structure remains on the property.
(i) The ZEO reserves the right to inspect the temporary health care structure at reasonable time convenient to the caregiver.
(9) Any temporary health care structure installed pursuant to this Subsection shall be removed not later than one hundred and twenty (120) days after the mentally or physically impaired person no longer occupies the structure or no longer qualifies as a mentally or physically impaired person.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2806
(10) The ZEO may revoke any zoning permit issued pursuant to this Subsection upon a finding that the provisions of this Subsection are being violated by the permit holder.
28.1.5 In addition to the requirements of Section 4 of these Regulations for a Zoning Permit, the following information shall be submitted:
(a) A Statement of Use describing the accessory use and stated the permitted use to which it is accessory.
28.2 Home Occupations: A home occupation or professional office in a dwelling unit is an additional use for which a Zoning Permit is required.
28.2.1 Occupations shall be subordinate and incidental to residential use of the lot.
28.2.2 There shall be only one (1) home occupation per residential unit.
28.2.3 The person conducting the home occupation shall reside in the principal residential structure on the lot.
28.2.4 There shall be no more than one (1) non-resident persons employed in connection with such occupation.
28.2.5 The area of the home occupation may be located in the principal or an accessory structure, provided that the floor area used for the home occupation shall not exceed the equivalent of twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of the principal residential structure.
28.2.6 There shall be no indication on the lot, except for permitted signs and required off-street parking, that a home occupation is being conducted on the premises.
28.2.7 Articles sold on the premises, as part of a customary home occupation, must be only those created thereon.
28.2.8 There shall be no display of merchandise, either exterior or interior, visible from any public way or adjacent property, on the premises in connection with the occupation.
28.2.9 All licensed professionals, including, but not limited to, doctors, dentists, lawyers, real estate brokers, architects, engineers, land surveyors, and the like, shall conduct business on an appointment-only basis. No clients/patients shall be housed overnight.
28.2.10 The home occupation and there conduct thereof shall not impair the residential character of the premises nor impair the reasonable use, enjoyment and value of other residential property in the neighborhood.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2807
28.2.11 Such occupation shall not create any objectionable noise, smoke, odor, toxic fumes, vibration, radio interference, or other unsuitable conditions that would set the dwelling apart from its surroundings or degrade residential property in the neighborhood.
28.2.12 The home occupation shall be operated in its entirety within an enclosed structure.
28.2.13 Deliveries of materials or products that are related to the home occupation shall not be made prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. and the trucks shall not block the roadway.
28.2.14 There shall be no outside storage of materials or product.
28.2.15 The area used for the home occupation shall meet all applicable ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) requirements.
28.2.16 In addition to the requirements of Section 4 of these Regulations for a Zoning Permit, the following information shall be submitted:
(a) A Statement of Use describing the accessory use and stated the permitted use to which it is accessory.
(b) All appropriate State and Federal licenses and permits shall be obtained by the owner/operator prior to any application under this Regulation.
28.2.17 By November 1st of each calendar year, the owner/occupant of the premises shall file with the ZEO an affidavit of residency and continuation of the Home Occupation in accordance with the original Zoning Permit that was approved.
28.2.18 Each Zoning Permit shall automatically terminate when the applicant no longer resides in the dwelling unit.
28.2.19 Nothing in Section 28.2 is intended to assume that the existence of a computer or other communication devices constitutes a home occupation. Qualifying factors for a home occupation include signage, off-street parking, display of merchandise, delivery of materials or products, client traffic, filing of trade name certificate or personal property taxes, advertising or factors that would negatively impact the residential properties.
(Amended 6/1/2014)
28.3 Alternate Energy Systems: Solar collectors and wind generators are an additional accessory use for which a Zoning Permit is required.
28.3.1 The applicant shall demonstrate to the ZEO that this alternate energy system complies with the lot standards specified in the Schedules.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2808
28.3.2 For wind generators, the applicant shall demonstrate that the tower and rotor are engineered and commercially available.
(a) For those that are designed by a professional registered in the State of Connecticut, the applicant shall demonstrate that the system is designed to prevent over-speeding and excessive pressure on the tower structure.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2901
Section 29
Non-Conformities
Mobile Homes/Trailers
29.1 Non-Conforming Lot: Nothing in these Regulations shall prevent the construction, enlargement, extension or structural alteration of a building or other structure or the use of a lot, as defined, which does not conform to the area and shape requirements of these Regulations, subject to all of the following provisions:
29.1.1 The lot shall have access as required by Subsection 26.4.4.
29.1.2 The use, building or other structure on such lot shall conform to all other applicable requirements of these Regulations.
29.1.3 If used for a dwelling, the lot shall have a minimum area of five thousand square feet (5,000 sq. ft.).
29.1.4 Any lot which does not conform to the above provisions shall not be used or shall be used only for a nursery, truck garden, farm or permitted off-street parking and no building or other structure shall be established in connection therewith.
29.1.5 Non-conforming lots that abut each other and are under the same ownership shall be deemed one lot.
(Amended 1/1/2016)
29.2 Non-Conforming Buildings or Structures:
29.2.1 No non-conforming building or structure shall be expanded or enlarged unless such expansion or enlargement is in conformity with all applicable requirements of these Regulations.
29.2.2 No non-conforming building or structure, if once changed to conform or more nearly conform with these Regulations, shall thereafter be change so as to be non-conforming again.
29.2.3 Any non-conforming building or structure or one or more of a group of non-conforming buildings or structures which has been or may be damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot, terrorism, act of God or any governmental authority, may be reconstructed and used as before if it is completed within twenty-four (24) months after the damage is sustained.
29.2.4 Except in the event of fire or other casualty as provided in Subsection 29.2.3, nothing in this Section shall be deemed to prohibit work on any non-conforming building or structure when necessary to protect the public health or safety and/or when ordered by the Building Official, Fire Marshal or the Director of Health, provided that such work does not increase the non-conformity. Nothing in this Section shall be
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2902
deemed to prohibit work on ordinary repair and maintenance of a non-conforming building or structure or replacement of existing materials with similar materials.
29.2.5 No change of title, possession or right of possession shall be deemed to affect the right to continue a non-conforming building or other structure.
(Amended 1/1/2016)
29.3 Non-Conforming Uses: Any use of land, buildings and other structures lawfully existing on the effective date of these Regulations, or any amendment hereto, and which does not conform to one or more of the provisions of these Regulations, may be continued in accordance with the following provisions:
29.3.1 No non-conforming use shall be enlarged and no non-conforming use of land, buildings or other structures shall be extended to include any land, building or other structure, or portion thereof, which is not subject to such non-conformity. Any non-conforming use of a building or other structure, or portion thereof, however, may be extended to include any portion of the building or structure manifestly designed for such use.
29.3.2 No non-conforming use, if once changed to conform or more nearly conform with these Regulations, shall thereafter be changed so as to be non-conforming again.
29.3.3 No change of title, possession or right of possession shall be deemed to affect the right to continue a non-conforming use.
29.4 Subdivision: No lot or land shall be subdivided, sold, encumbered or transferred so as to make a lot non-conforming or more non-conforming, to make any use, building or other structure non-conforming or more non-conforming, to reduce any setback, open space or off-street parking and loading spaces to less than is required by these Regulations or to make any non-conforming setback, open space or off-street parking or loading space more non-conforming.
29.5 Junk Yard: Any motor vehicle recycler’s business (as defined in CGS Section 14-67g) shall be completely surrounded with a solid fence at least eight feet (8’) high with a suitable gate, which shall be locked except during work hours of such junk yard. All unregistered motor vehicles, used parts, old iron, metal, glass, paper and any other junk material or cutting up of parts such as vehicles must be carried on within this enclosure. Any existing motor vehicle junk yard shall have four (4) months from the effective date of this amendment to commence and fifteen (15) months from the effective date to complete said fencing. Upon application, the Commission may modify the requirements of this Subsection for special reasons affecting the subject premises.
29.6 Mobile Homes/Trailers: A mobile home/trailer shall only be used or occupied within the town of Clinton as stipulated by this Section.
29.6.1 Mobile Home(s)/Trailer(s)-Parks: As a dwelling or for living quarter when such mobile home/trailer conforms to all applicable ordinances of the Town of Clinton and is located in a trailer park for which a Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 2903
issued in accordance with this Section. No trailer park shall be established, and any trailer park existing on June 15, 1965, the effective date of these Regulations, shall be discontinued within ninety (90) days after the effective date of these Regulations, unless a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall have been issued by the ZEO certifying that the trailer park conforms to the following standards:
(a) The mobile home/trailer park shall be lawfully in existence on the effective date of these Regulations.
(b) The mobile home/trailer park shall contain a specific maximum number of prepared and usable trailer sites accommodating a specific maximum number of trailers, which number of site and trailers shall not exceed the number for which the trailer park was designed and improvements were installed on the effective date of these Regulations.
(c) Satisfactory provision is made for water supply, sewage disposal and refuse storage and collection approved by the Director of Health for the Town of Clinton.
29.6.2 Temporary Mobile Home Permit: A temporary permit may be issued, except in one hundred (100) or five hundred (500) year flood plains as indicated by the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) of the Town of Clinton, by the ZEO with extensions by the Commission, for the following mobile home/trailer uses as stipulated.
(a) The use of a mobile home for sleeping and living quarters in connection with the permitted construction of a residence by virtue of a validly executed building permit. Such permit for living quarters shall be limited to the owner of the premises being constructed and their immediate family and such use shall terminate and the mobile home shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) days from the date of completion of the construction of said residence or upon the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for said residence; or six (6) months from the date of issuance of said temporary permit, whichever shall occur first.
(b) The use of a mobile home as a field office, tool shop or storage shed in connection with a bona fide construction operation and provided the same shall not be used for sleeping or living quarters. Permit may be issued for six (6) months.
(c) Renewal: Upon review of the circumstances, the ZEO may extend the temporary permit for one additional period not to exceed six (6) months. Application for further extensions must be made to the Commission. Continuous construction in compliance of the building permit is required for the maintenance of the temporary permit.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3001
Section 30
Design Standards
30.1 Purpose: The purpose of Design Review is to respect, preserve and enhance the significant streetscapes, historic areas, and, in general, the overall character of the community. It is also the intent of these Regulations to provide flexibility in the application process and to improve communication and participation between developers and the Town early in the design process.
30.2 Scope:
30.2.1 Applicability: This Section shall apply to any new construction, substantial reconstruction or rehabilitation of buildings for which a zoning permit is required. These Regulations shall not apply to the Village Zone, any Village District established under Connecticut General Statutes §8-2j, or any local Historic District established under Connecticut General Statutes §7-147a.
30.2.2 Exceptions:
(a) Single family residential buildings, including their fences and accessory structures related to their residential uses.
(b) Structures located on farms and used for farm purposes; or
(c) Repairs to buildings where such repairs involve the replacement of existing building elements with like materials, colors, etc. and such repairs do not expand or decrease the area, or the vertical or horizontal footprint of the building, or change the roof line or roof type, or add or remove building elements.
30.3 Design Review Standards:
30.3.1 Design Context: These Regulations seek to preserve and maintain the character of areas of commercial and industrial development within the Town of Clinton. Conformance with adjacent setbacks, façades, and height of buildings within 200 feet of new developments, redevelopments, and rehabilitations is required. All new construction, renovations, and additions shall conform with the principles of walkability and maintain a pedestrian scale. Consult Appendix B for illustrations of Standards defined herein.
30.3.2 Site Design: Locally significant features of the site such as distinctive buildings or sight lines of vistas from within the surrounding area shall be integrated onto the site design.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3002
(a) Orientation and Location: Principal façades of new construction should face the same direction as the rest of the buildings on the street. The prevailing setback line at the street should be preserved. The new façade should be flush with its neighbors.
(1) Setback: Buildings or structures will follow the required setbacks of their zone, subject to the following additional limitations:
(i) To the extent possible, the main façade of any new construction should be located at a depth of no more than five (5) feet of the depth of the main façade of the average of principal structures.
(ii) Where existing adjacent buildings are nonconforming by violating the required setback, new buildings should be flush with the required minimum zoning setback.
(iii) Where buildings are staggered, a new construction may be set back inconsistent from neighboring principal structures if there is additional landscaping, or if the discrepancy of adjacent buildings is more than 10 feet, the building should be no more than 10 feet from the building setback line.
(b) Shaping and Massing: New construction should incorporate massing, building shapes, and roof shapes that are present in surrounding buildings.
(c) Height:
(1) The height of new buildings should be within one (1) story of the height of adjacent buildings.
(2) Story heights should be maintained within the range of those in surrounding buildings.
(3) Multi-story mixed-use buildings are encouraged.
(d) Landscaping: The landscape design shall complement the surrounding area’s landscape patterns. For new construction, existing trees should be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(e) Open Space: Open spaces within the proposed development shall reinforce open space patterns of the surrounding area, in form and siting.
(f) Sidewalks: Pedestrian accommodation must be provided within the site and connected to adjacent sites where there are existing sidewalks.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3003
(g) Vistas: Consideration to significant features, distinctive buildings, or sight lines of vistas from within and around the surrounding area is encouraged.
30.3.3 Building Design:
(a) Size, scale, & proportion: New construction should relate to the dominant proportions, size, and scale of nearby buildings. The average height and width of the surrounding buildings determines a general set of proportions for an infill structure or the bays of a larger structure. Long low buildings are inappropriate amid taller structures. New buildings should not visually overpower surrounding buildings.
(b) Materials: Building materials should be compatible with those of surrounding buildings. Traditional common materials such as brick, stone, and wood are preferred. An infill façade should be comprised of materials similar to the adjacent façades.
(1) Use wood as the time-honored tradition of shoreline structures whether as siding or trim materials (i.e. shiplap, shingle, clapboard, or board and batten).
(2) Construct institutional uses of brick in downtown; full-size brick veneer (not artificial veneer) is preferable to brick tile.
(3) Use mortar masonry veneer and bullnose pieces to give the appearance of structural masonry.
(4) Wrap masonry around corners; terminate only at an interior corner to transition materials.
(5) Tile, stucco, or metal wall surfaces should be avoided, as they are not typical building materials in Clinton.
(6) Detail any poured-in-place or pre-cast concrete as a basic building material or finished with special consideration in formwork, pigments, or aggregates that can create rich surfaces compatible with surrounding buildings.
(c) Façade:
(1) The rhythm of façades along the street and components thereof should be maintained. New construction should reflect the characteristics of nearby façades. If the site is large, the mass of the façades can be broken into a number of smaller bays to reflect rhythms of the surrounding buildings.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3004
(2) A building façade with an uninterrupted length that is greater than 40 feet long and facing a street, publicly-owned land, or designated common area, such as a parking area, should be articulated into smaller elements or bays, the average length of which will be no greater than 30 feet nor exceed 40% of the façade’s total length, whichever is less.
(3) Uninterrupted means without windows, doors, changes in wall plane, surface ornamentation, or other treatments that cause building façades to be treated as fronts that are related to the street frontage.
(4) Windows, wall panels, pilasters, building bays, and storefronts should be carried across otherwise windowless walls to relieve blank, uninteresting surfaces.
(5) Side and rear façades should be articulated in a manner compatible with the design of the front façade.
(6) Though literal symmetry is not necessary, a general balance between façade elements should be harmonious to the eye.
(7) Recesses should be a minimum of 2 feet deep.
(8) Arcades should not reduce the sidewalk width to less than 4 feet.
(9) Recessed entries, recessed or projecting bays, expression of architectural or structural modules and detail, or variations such as surface relief, expressed joints and details, color and texture should be incorporated across building frontage.
(10) Bay windows, porticos, porches, or historical façade projections should be maintained, where applicable, as subordinate in proportion to the size of the façade.
(11) Balconies and bay windows are encouraged.
(12) Whenever on-site paths run along the edge of a building, use an overhang, awning, canopy, etc. to shade or shelter pedestrians or use continuous arcades, pergolas, etc. to connect buildings to one another.
(13) Include windows, doors, or other signs of human occupancy on any side of a building that has frontage on a sidewalk or street.
(14) Where buildings adjoin in a commercial or mixed-use setting, consider creating or maintaining a visual distinction between the upper and lower floors of multi-story buildings.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3005
(15) Façades in which the 2nd or 3rd story overhangs the 1st story should be avoided.
(16) In order to modulate its scale, separate the base, middle, and top of a multi-story building by articulating with cornices, string cornices, step-back, or other features.
(d) Entry:
(1) Where applicable, as in the Downtown areas, new construction should use window and door openings of design and size typical of those of buildings in the immediate neighborhood.
(2) The main entrance of a building should be given a bold, visible shape that stands out at a point where it can be seen immediately from the main avenues of approach.
(3) Secondary back entries or entrances from courtyards that face the street, rear alleys or parking lots are encouraged to supplement the principal entry.
(4) Transition space along any path that connects street and entrance through a transition space should be marked with a gateway or a change in direction, surface, grade, or view.
(5) Doorways to upper floors should be visually separated from street-level shop entries.
(e) Windows:
(1) The expanse of main floor display windows should be broken up with mullians and muntins.
(2) Windows should be common to the neighborhood and consistent across a majority of the entire exterior of a building.
(f) Roof: Predominant and encouraged roof types in Clinton are gable and hip.
(1) Dormers, lanterns, turrets, eave breaks, or skylights should be added in proportion to the overall size of a roof.
(2) The roof pitch of a gable dormer should match the roof pitch of the primary roof.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3006
(3) The face of a dormer should be minimal in height and made up of mostly window area.
(4) The shape of the roof should be compatible with the prevalent roof type within the neighborhood.
(5) Roof forms should complement the principal building in terms of style, detailing, and materials.
(6) Flat roofs should be avoided. When flat roofs are necessary, they shall include cornice, balustrade, ornamentation, or other variation of silhouette.
(7) Encouraged materials are: slate, wood shingles or shakes, standing seam metal, and asphalt roof shingles.
(8) Roof colors should be neutral in tone.
(g) Mechanical Equipment: Heating, ventilation, or air conditioning equipment shall be shielded so as not to be visible from the street.
30.3.4 Lighting:
(a) Lighting standards: No lighting shall be of such intensity or direction as to create glare on adjacent properties or adjacent streets and highways, within the following limitations (measurement to be taken at property boundaries):
Dark
0.01 fc
Park/Rural
Low
0.1 fc
Residential
Medium
0.2 fc
Commercial, industrial, high-density residential
(1) All exterior luminaries should be downcast with full cut-off shields/shrouds directed inward towards the site and away from oncoming motorists.
30.3.5 Signage: All signage shall be uniform and compatible with the surrounding areas. See Section 34 of the Town of Clinton Zoning Regulations.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3101
Section 31
Performance Standards
31.1 Performance Standards: Land, buildings and other structures may be used subject to the following performance standards:
31.1.1 Dust, Dirt, Fly Ash and Smoke: No offensive dust, dirt, fly ash or smoke shall be emitted into the air.
31.1.2 Odors, Gases and Fumes: No offensive odors or noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases shall be emitted into the air.
31.1.3 Noise: No noise that is objectionable due to volume, intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness shall be transmitted outside the property where it originates.
31.1.4 Wastes: No discharge of hazardous wastes shall be permitted. No offensive washes shall be discharged into any stream or storm drain. Proper provision shall be made for storage and disposal of all hazardous materials, rubbish, garbage and trash.
31.1.5 Vibration: No vibration shall be transmitted outside the property where it originates.
31.1.6 Danger: No material which is dangerous due to explosion, extreme fire hazard or radioactivity shall be used, stored or manufactured except in accordance with the applicable codes and regulations of the Town of Clinton, State of Connecticut and the United States of America.
31.1.7 Drainage: Surface or roof drainage, discharge from pipes or pumps, and diversion of runoff by means of grading, excavating or filling, which create a structural or health hazard or any other nuisance to the owners or occupants of adjacent premises, or to the public by reason of discharge into, onto or across any adjacent building, premises or public thoroughfare shall be abated by the owner of the improperly drainage area.
(a) Appropriate stormwater control structures or measures shall be utilized to protect surrounding properties from adverse impacts due to stormwater runoff.
31.1.8 Lighting: No lighting shall be of such intensity or direction as to create glare on adjacent properties or adjacent streets and highways.
31.1.9 Shopping Cart Management: As shopping carts can become an unattractive facet of retail operation when not actively managed and the outside storage of said carts and parking lots with shopping carts strewn around can detract from even the most attractive building design, the following standards have been developed:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3102
(a) Any retail business that uses shopping carts outside of the building shall have a Commission-approved Shopping Cart Management Plan.
(b) Shopping carts cannot be stored outside overnight.
(c) Shopping carts used at grocery stores shall be returned by employees to the interior of the store after use by the customer.
(d) Failure to maintain the standards of the Management Plan will be subject to enforcement as a zoning violation.
(Added 2/1/2015)
31.1.10 Determination of Compliance: In the event of doubt as to whether the proposed use will conform to the above performance standards, the ZEO shall disapprove the application for a Zoning Permit. The applicant for a Zoning Permit may apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a determination as to compliance with the performance standards.
31.2 Parking and Loading: Parking and loading spaces shall be provided off the street for any use of land, buildings and other structures in accordance with Section 33, unless otherwise noted.
(Amended 2/1/2015)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3201
Section 32
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
32.1 Statutory Authorization: The legislature of the State of Connecticut has, in CGS Section 8-2, delegated the responsibility to local zoning commissions to adopt regulations requiring proper provision for soil erosion and sediment control and certification of any Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. In order to carry out these objectives, the following requirements and standards have been adopted as part of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Clinton.
32.2 Exemptions: The following activities shall be exempt from submission of a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan:
32.2.1 A single-family dwelling that is not part of a subdivision.
32.2.2 Cultivation of the soil for the production and harvesting of crops.
32.3 Definitions: As used in these Regulations, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows:
32.3.1 Certification: A signed, written approval by the Zoning Enforcement Officer that a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan complies with the applicable requirements of these Regulations.
32.3.2 Development: Any construction or grading activities to improved or unimproved real estate.
32.3.3 Disturbed Area: An area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed, leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion.
32.3.4 Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
32.3.5 Grading: Any excavation, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill), or stockpiling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition.
32.3.6 Inspection: The periodic review of sediment and erosion control measures shown on the certified plan.
32.3.7 Sediment: Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported or has been moved from its site or origin by erosion.
32.3.8 Soil: Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3202
32.3.9 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan (Erosion Plan): A scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is multimedia to, a map and narrative.
32.4 Activities Requiring a Certified Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan (hereinafter called “Erosion Plan”): Whenever a proposed activity shall cause disturbance of an area cumulatively in excess of ten thousand square feet (10,000 sq. ft.), an Erosion Plan is required.
32.5 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan:
32.5.1 Certification: To be eligible for certification, an Erosion Plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from stormwater runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended. Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with prior approval of the Commission.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
32.5.2 Said Erosion Plan shall show the name and address of the proposed use, the name and address of the owner/agent of the property, and the name and address of the developer, if different from the owner, and shall contain, but not be limited to:
(a) Narrative: A copy of a narrative describing:
(1) Proposed alteration of the area to be developed.
(2) The schedule for grading and construction activities, including:
(i) Start and completion dates
(ii) Sequence of grading and construction activities
(iii) Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures
(iv) Sequence for final stabilization of the project site
(3) The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities.
(4) The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities.
(5) The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3203
(6) The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities.
(7) A contingency or revisited Erosion Plan when inspection of the site indicates unforeseen erosion or sedimentation problems.
(8) The name and address of the engineer or contractor responsible for the monitoring of operational and maintenance procedures for erosion and sediment control. Provided it is practical to do so, the narrative may be printed on the site plan.
(b) Site Plan Map: A copy of the site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1” =40’), showing the name and address of the owner of the lot, the name and address of the developer, if different from the owner, date and scale and including, without being limited to, the following:
(1) The location of the proposed development and adjacent property owners.
(2) Existing structures on the project site, if any.
(3) Contours at two-foot (2’) intervals.
(4) Existing and proposed topography, including soil types, wetlands, watercourses and water bodies.
(5) Proposed area alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads and, if applicable, new property lines.
(6) Location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management facilities.
(7) Sequence of grading and construction activities.
(8) Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures.
(9) Sequence for final stabilization of the development site.
(c) Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the applicant or requested by the ZEO.
32.6 Minimum Acceptable Standards:
32.6.1 Erosion Plan shall be developed in accordance with these Regulations using the principles as outlined in Chapters 3 and 4 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended. Such Erosion Plan shall result in a development that:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3204
(Amended 101/2013)
(a) Minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction.
(b) Is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed.
(c) Does not cause off-site erosion and/or sedimentation.
32.6.2 The minimum standards for individual measures are those in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended. The ZEO may grant exceptions to these standards when requested, in writing by the applicant, if technically sound reasons are presented and may seek the advice and guidance of the Connecticut River Coastal Conservation District prior to granting any such exceptions.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
32.6.3 The appropriate method from Chapter 9 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended, shall be used in determining peak flow rates and volumes of run-off unless an alternative method is approved by the ZEO. The ZEO may seek advice from the Connecticut River Coastal Conservation District as to the adequacy of any proposed alternative method.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
32.7 Issuance or Denial of Certification:
32.7.1 The ZEO shall:
(a) Certify that the Erosion Plan, as filed, complies with all the requirements and objectives of these Regulations, or
(b) Deny certification of an Erosion Plan that does not meet the requirements and objectives of these Regulations.
32.7.2 The ZEO shall keep a record of its decisions, including the reasons for arriving at its conclusions.
32.7.3 Nothing in these Regulations shall be construed as extending the time limits for the approval of any application under CGS Chapter 124.
32.7.4 Prior to certification, any Erosion Plan submitted to the ZEO may be forwarded for review to the Middlesex County Soil and Water Conservation District which may make recommendations concerning such Plan, provided however, that such review shall be completed within thirty (30) days of the receipt of such Erosion Plan by the Middlesex County Soil and Water Conservation District.
32.7.5 The ZEO may forward a copy of the development proposal to the Inland Wetlands Commission, the Town’s Engineer, or other review agency or consultant for review and comment.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3205
32.8 Conditions Relating to Soil Erosion and Sediment Control:
32.8.1 Performance Bond: Performance Bonds guaranteeing the control of soil erosion and sedimentation as certified in the Erosion Plan. (Refer to Section 8: Bonding)
32.8.2 Site development shall not begin unless the Erosion Plan is certified, a Zoning Permit issued and the control measures and facilities scheduled for installation prior to site development are installed and functional.
32.8.3 Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as scheduled according to the certified Erosion Plan.
32.8.4 All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure the compliance of the certified Erosion Plan.
32.9 Inspections: Inspections shall be made by the ZEO during development to ensure compliance with the certified plan and that control measures and facilities are properly performed or installed and maintained. The ZEO may require the permittee to verify through progress reports that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed according to the certified plan and are being operated and maintained.
32.10 Amendments to Erosion Plan: In the even a contingency plan has not been submitted or does not provide for unforeseen substantive changes in the Erosion Plan, written request may be made to the ZEO for an amendment to the certified Erosion Plan. The request shall contain, but not be limited to:
32.10.1 A description of the changes requested.
32.10.2 Any technical changes necessitated thereby.
32.10.3 Contingency control measures or facilities to be installed and maintained.
32.10.4 Changes in scheduling.
32.10.5 Any other information which the applicant or ZEO may deem necessary to a proper consideration of the request for amendment, together with, if necessary, additional maps or drawings.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3301
Section 33
Parking
33.1 General: On all premises developed or redeveloped after the adoption of these Regulations, parking facilities shall be provided off the street or highway right-of-way which shall be sufficient to accommodate the motor vehicles of all occupants, employees, customers, deliveries and other persons normally visiting the premises at any one time. Off-street parking and loading spaces required by this Section shall be permanently maintained and available for the duration of the use of the land, buildings and other structures for which such spaces are required. Additional parking or loading spaces shall be provided when required as a result of expansion of any conforming use or change of use provided the standards hereinafter set forth can be met.
(Amended 9/1/2002)
33.2 Definitions: For the purposes of this Section, a parking space and a loading space are defined as follows:
33.2.1 Aisle: The driving portion of the parking area. The aisle provides access to each space.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
33.2.2 Angled: Any parking space that is not parallel to the curb or aisle.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
33.2.3 Bikeway: Any road, street, path or way which in some manner is specifically design for bicycle travel, regardless of whether such facilities are designed for the exclusive use of bicycles or are to be shared with other transportation modes.
(Amended 6/1/1996 & 10/1/2013))
33.2.4 Parking Area: The portion of a lot set aside, marked, posted or intended for parking, including total of circulation areas, loading and unloading areas, parking spaces and aisles, landscaped areas, bikeways and walkways.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
33.2.5 Shared Parking: When parking spaces are shared among different structures or uses, or among mixed uses, and can include properties with different owners.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
33.3 Classification of Uses: Whenever two or more classifications provided in Section 33.11 shall apply to a use of land, buildings or other structures, the standard requiring the larger number of parking spaces shall apply, assuming the uses will not occur simultaneously or at overlapping times.
Where separate buildings or other structures, or parts of a building or structure are used simultaneously or at overlapping times for purposes requiring different amounts of parking spaces, the number shall be determined by adding the number of spaces required for the area devoted to each type of use.
(Amended 9/1/1996)
33.4 Parking in Excess of the Maximum: The Commission may approve parking lots with more spaces than the allowed maximum provided that all of the spaces above the maximum
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3302
number are composed of a pervious surface, and where adequate stormwater management is provided.
(Added 10/1/2013)
33.4.1 The Commission may also approve parking lots where additional impervious parking spaces above the allowed maximum space where the use of pervious spaces would not be environmentally sound.
(Added 10/1/2013)
33.5 Off-Site Parking Spaces: Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in these Regulations, all required off-street parking shall be located on the lot for which a use is proposed, except that the Commission may approve an arrangement which allows the dedication of parking on another site to serve a proposed use. All parking on another site must be located on a lot no more than five hundred feet (500’) from the building or use being served.
(Amended 10/1/2013)
33.6 Shared Parking: The Commission encourages parking lots for different structures or uses, or for mixed uses, to be shared in any zoning district. At the applicant’s request, shared parking may be provided, subject to the following provisions:
(Added 10/1/2013)
33.6.1 A reciprocal written agreement has been executed by all the parties concerned that assures the perpetual joint use of such common parking, a copy of which has been submitted to and is acceptable to the Commission. The Commission may forward such agreements to Counsel for review.
(Added 10/1/2013)
33.6.2 The Commission shall require the applicant to provide a parking study with all information deemed necessary to its decision-making on a shared parking arrangement. This information includes but is not limited to:
(Added 10/1/2013)
(a) The type and hours of operation and parking demand for each use;
(b) A site plan for displaying shared use spaces in the lot and walking distance to the uses sharing the lot;
(c) A description of the character of land use and parking patterns of adjacent land uses; and
(d) An estimate of anticipated turnover in parking space use over the course of 12 to 24 hours at the site.
33.6.3 Parking spaces to be shared must not be reserved for individuals or groups on a 24-hour basis.
(Added 10/1/2013)
33.6.4 Uses sharing the parking facility do not need to be contained on the same lot, but shall be a maximum of five hundred feet (500’) from the closest parking space in the parking lot which is to be used and allow for safe, convenient walking for most parkers, including safe pedestrian crossings, signage and adequate lighting. The applicant may request to be excused from the maximum allowable distance from
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3303
the use to the parking may be approved by the Commission with written justification and supporting information provided by the applicant.
(Added 10/1/2013)
33.6.5 If the Conditions for shared parking become null and void and the shared parking arrangement is discontinued, this will constitute a violation of Zoning Regulations for any use approved expressly with shared parking. The applicant must then provide written notification of the change to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and within sixty (60) days of that notice, provide a remedy satisfactory to the Commission to provide adequate parking.
(Added 10/1/2013)
33.7 Reduction in Parking Space Requirements for Shared Parking: Where shared parking is provided among a mix of land uses, the Commission may allow the following, at the applicant’s request:
(Added 10/1/2013)
33.7.1 Up to 30% of the parking space required for the predominant use on a site may be shared with other uses operating during the same time of day and days of the week. The predominant use is considered to be that which requires the most parking of those sharing the parking facilities.
33.7.2 Up to 75% of the parking spaces required for uses such as theaters, public auditoriums, bowling alleys, nightclubs, movie theaters and similar predominantly evening uses may be shared with uses such as banks, offices, and similar predominantly daytime uses.
33.7.3 Up to 75% of the parking spaces required for uses such as churches and other uses exclusively in operation during the weekend may be shared with uses such as medical offices, banks and other similar uses predominantly in operation on weekdays.
33.8 Excusals: Except for buildings or parts of buildings used for residential use, all or part of the off-street parking requirements may be excused by the Commission where the proposed site planning, design and construction includes the following:
(Added 10/1/2013)
33.8.1 Sufficient publicly owned parking spaces within five hundred feet (500’) of the proposed development site.
33.8.2 Access to a regularly scheduled transit stop within five hundred feet (500’) of the proposed development, with service available during commuting hours.
33.8.3 Direct access from a bikeway to the proposed development.
33.9 Parking Reduction Requests: In the case that an applicant believes that the required parking amounts are in excess of what is needed for the proposed use, the applicant may submit a request with justification to the Commission for a reduction in parking space requirements. The Commission will consider and act on this request concurrent with and as part of the application process.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3304
(Added 10/1/2013)
33.10 Design and Construction Standards: All off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following standards:
33.10.1 Minimum Design Requirements: At a minimum all parking lots shall:
(Added 10/1/2013)
(a) Have a minimum stall size of 9’ x 18’.
(b) Have rectangular parking stalls.
(c) Have aisle widths and parking angles in a minimum as follows:
Parking Angle Minimum Aisle Width Direction of Flow
45º
12’3”
One way
50º
12’9”
One way
55º
13’3”
One way
60º
14’3”
One way
65º
15’2”
One way
70º
16’
One way
75º
24’
Two way
90º
24’
Two way
(d) Have no greater than 5% slope
(e) Have a number and location of access drives compatible with traffic circulation patterns both within the site and on the abutting street system
(f) Provide sufficient stacking area (area where car may need to wait in line to exit onto the street or to enter to circulate in the parking lot) for two (2) vehicles at the inbound access drives to the site
(g) No parking space shall be designed to allow a vehicle to protrude or overhang a sidewalk or any landscaped area
(h) Minimize potential conflict points between pedestrians, bicycles and motor vehicles.
(i) Required off-street parking facilities shall be maintained as long as the use or structure exists for which the facilities are designed to serve
33.10.2 All parking areas shall be designed in such a manner that any vehicle entering or leaving the parking area from or to a public or private way shall be traveling in a forward motion.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3305
33.10.3 All access driveways for parking areas and/or loading areas shall be located in such a way that any vehicle entering or leaving such areas shall be clearly visible for a reasonable distance to any pedestrian or motorists approaching such driveway from a public or private street.
33.10.4 All entrances and exits to all parking areas shall be clearly marked.
33.10.5 Access driveways for one-way traffic shall have a minimum width of fourteen feet (14’) where one-way traffic is anticipated and a minimum width of twenty-four feet (24’ where two-way traffic is anticipated. Driveways in the Village Zone and commercial and industrial districts shall not be more than thirty feet (30’) wide at the right-of-way line and fifty feet (50’) at the curb line.
(Amended 6/1/1997)
33.10.6 All parking and loading spaces shall be located so that any vehicles entering or leaving the spaces do not block any entrance driveway.
33.10.7 All exits and entrances shall be so located as to provide the least amount of interference with the movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
33.10.8 All off-street parking shall be suitably improved, graded, stabilized and maintained so as to cause no nuisance or danger from dust or from storm flow onto any public street.
(Added 10/1/2013)
33.10.9 All parking spaces, except those provided in connection with residential dwellings, shall be setback from the street no less than ten feet (10’).
(Added 10/1/2013)
33.10.10 Pedestrian Safety; Off-street parking spaces shall be suitably separated from the building in such a way as to assure safe movement of pedestrian traffic to all major entrances of the building served by any of the following means: a six (6’) wide concrete walk with an eight inch (8”) high concrete safety curb; six inch (6”) high pre-cast concrete curbs in such a manner as to provide a four foot (4’) side vehicle-free passageway; any combination of landscaping and walkway which establishes a four foot (4’) wide vehicle-free passageway; or by any other manner as may be approved by the Commission.
33.10.11 Fire Lanes: No parking shall be permitted in those areas designated as fire lanes on any site plans approved under these Regulations or established by the Town’s Fire Marshal.
33.10.12 Reserve Parking: In non-residential districts where the gross floor area on a site exceeds ten thousand square feet (10,000 sq. ft.) and for houses of worship located in Residential Zones or the Village Zone, the Commission may approve the substitution of a reserve parking area in lieu of up to twenty percent (20%) of the required number of marked spaces.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3306
(a) The reserve area must be suitable for parking development and shall be designated as an integral part of the overall parking layout and designated as “reserve spaces” on the site plan. The reserve parking area shall be reasonably flat and well-drained and suitable for overflow parking.
(Amended 9/1/1996 & 6/1/1997)
(b) The reserve area shall be suitably grassed, landscaped and maintained, shall be kept free of obstructions, shall be accessible from the marked parking area and have reasonable direct access to building entrances and shall be available for overflow parking during peak traffic periods.
(1) If the ZEO finds that the number of marked parking spaces is inadequate for actual use, the ZEO shall report such finding to the Commission.
(2) The Commission may, at its discretion, notify the owner of the property that the reserve area must be properly maintained, or may require full development of the reserve parking area within six (6) months of notification.
(3) Failure of the owner to comply with this requirement may be grounds for revocation of the Certification of Zoning Compliance and render the property in violation of Zoning Regulations.
(c) The approval of such a reserve parking area shall be applicable only to the particular use or occupancy of the land, buildings or other structures specified in the application, and such approval shall become null and void in the event that such use or occupancy is changed to another use or occupancy.
33.10.13 Lighting: All commercial, industrial and multi-family residential parking lots, including reserve parking areas as approved under 33.10.12 above, shall be illuminated to an average level of one-half (½) foot candle per square foot.
(a) Lighting standards in parking lots shall not exceed fifteen feet (15’) in height, except that in parking lots containing more than two hundred spaces, light poles are permitted to a height of thirty feet (30’), provided that the level of light shall not be less than one-half (½) foot candle per square foot.
(b) Luminaries shall have shielded light sources to prevent glare.
(c) Pedestrian ways shall be illuminated by light bollards or other low level lighting standards with shielded light sources.
(d) Required lighting shall be arranged and installed to minimize glare on adjacent property and on adjacent streets.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3307
(e) Lighting in reserve areas may be of a temporary or permanent design. No blinking, rotating or flashing lighting shall be used unless as part of an approved emergency alarm system.
(f) The design of all light standards shall be compatible with the character of the neighborhood.
(Amended 6/1/1997)
33.10.14 Landscaping: All parking areas shall be designed to provide safe vehicular and pedestrian movement and shall be laid out with landscaped parking islands and other landscaped areas so as to avoid large, unbroken expanses of paving. All parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Any parking area which contains at least ten (10) but not more than forty-five (45) parking spaces shall provide a landscaped buffer strip, not less than ten feet (10’) in width and provided with a six inch (6”) bituminous concrete or granite curb, separating such parking areas from every front property line. Except as otherwise required, such buffer strip shall provide partial visual screening. All freestanding signs shall be located within a portion or an extension of this buffer strip. In addition, a landscaped strip not less than five feet (5’) wide and provided with a six inch (6”) bituminous, concrete or granite curb shall be located along each side or rear lot line. This landscaped strip shall provide partial visual screening from the adjacent properties.
(b) Every parking lot which contains more than forty-five (45) parking spaces shall include landscaped areas amounting to at least ten percent (10%) of the total lot area, exclusive of building coverage. Such landscaped areas shall include landscaped buffer strips along the front, side and rear lot lines. Additional landscaped areas shall be provided in the form of parking islands.
All parking islands and buffer strips shall include a variety of landscaping materials including evergreens and deciduous species. Plantings shall be chosen for their diversity, ease of maintenance, durability and overall aesthetic effect and shall not interfere with the visibility in the parking area.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3308
33.11 Parking Space Standards:
Use Category
Minimum Number of Spaces Required
Maximum Number of Spaces Allowed
33.11.1
One- and two-family dwelling units (including those located within a Planned Residential Development) and accessory apartment
2 spaces per dwelling unit
No maximum
33.11.2
Dwellings with three or more dwelling units
1½ space for each efficiency and 1 bedroom unit, and 2 spaces for each unit with 2 bedrooms or more, located on the same lot as the dwelling units; plus 1 additional space for every 3 units or part thereof for visitors or guests.
2 spaces for each efficiency and 1 bedroom unit and 3 for each unit with 2 bedrooms or more, located on the same lot as the dwelling units; plus 1 additional space for every 3 units or part thereof for visitors or guests.
33.11.3
Home occupations: Those spaces required for the dwelling plus:
33.11.4
(a) Office of a doctor, dentist, etc.
3 spaces
4 spaces
33.11.5
(b) Office of non-medical professional
2 spaces
4 spaces
33.11.6
(c) Home occupation involving direct sales and/or services
2 spaces
6 spaces
33.11.7
(d) Home occupation without direct sales and/or services
1 space per employee. If no employees, no additional spaces required
2 spaces
33.11.8
Elderly housing
1 space per bedroom
1½ spaces per bedroom
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3309
33.11.9
Hospitals, clinics, extended care facilities, long-term care facilities, nursing/rest homes, sanatoriums and intermediate care facilities, homes for the aged, congregate housing, assisted living facilities, and boarding homes for sheltered care.
2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
33.11.10
Day Care Facilities
1 space per 8 clients
1 space per 4 clients
33.11.11
Bed & Breakfasts and Motels
1 space for each sleeping room plus 1 space for every 10 sleeping rooms, plus spaces required for any other related use located on the same lot
1 space for each sleeping room plus 1 space for every 5 sleeping rooms, plus spaces for any other related use located on the same lot
33.11.12
Offices:
(a) Business or professional offices, except medical offices and governmental office space
2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
(b) Medical and dental offices
2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
9 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
33.11.13
Financial Institutions
2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
33.11.14
Retail stores, personal service shops
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
33.11.15
Shopping center or neighborhood shopping center
1 space per 250 sq. ft. gross floor area excluding storage areas
1 space per 250 sq. ft. gross floor area including storage areas
33.11.16
Tattoo parlors and/or body piercing salons
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
33.11.17
Adult entertainment businesses
6 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
11 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3310
33.11.18
Food service establishments where customers are served primarily at counter space
1 space for every 3 permanent seats and 1 space for every 9 sq. ft. of queuing area
1½ spaces for every 3 permanent seats and 1 space for every 9 sq. ft. of queuing area
33.11.19
Restaurants and other food service establishments where customers are served only when seated at tables or counters
6 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area
11 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area
33.11.20
Indoor theaters and assembly halls
1 space for every 4 seats of permanent seating provided
1 space for every 3 seats of permanent seating provided
33.11.21
Limited outdoor recreation facilities
1 space for every 2½ participants who could be using the facility at the same time, plus 1 space for every 3 seats provided for spectators, plus additional parking for any related use located on the same lot
1 space for every 2 participants who could be using the facility at the same time, plus 1 space for every 3 seats provided for spectators, plus additional parking for any related use located on the same lot
33.11.22
Nature preserves and wildlife sanctuaries
2 spaces
No maximum
33.11.23
Bowling Alleys
3 spaces for each alley or lane
5 spaces for each alley or lane
33.11.24
Billiard or pool halls
2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
33.11.25
Indoor recreation facilities
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3311
33.11.26
Outdoor recreation facilities
1 space for every 2½ participants who could be using the facility at the same time, plus 1 space for every 3 seats provided for spectators, plus additional parking for any related use located on the same lot
1 space for every 2 participants who could be using the facility at the same time, plus 1 space for every 3 seats provided for spectators, plus additional parking for any related use located on the same lot
33.11.27
Riding academies and boarding stables
1 space for every 3 stalls
No maximum
33.11.28
Commercial kennels
1 space for every 20 kennels
1 space for every 10 kennels
33.11.29
Veterinary hospitals
2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
9 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
33.11.30
(a) Fruit, vegetable or farm stands and commercial green houses
2 spaces
No maximum
33.11.31
(b) Nurseries and Farms
No minimum required
No maximum
33.11.32
Farmer’s market
2 spaces per vendor
No maximum
33.11.33
Farm Tourism
(a) Indoor uses and events
The number of spaces shall be determined by the parking standards for the uses listed in Section 33.3
(b) Outdoor fairs and markets
2 spaces per vendor or ride
No maximum
(c) Outdoor weddings and reception events
1 space for every 3 chairs at the service or meal, whichever is greater, plus 1 space for every 3 personnel required to serve the event
No maximum
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3312
(d) Outdoor concert events
1 space for every 4 chairs plus 1 space for every 36 sq. ft. of unenclosed area being used for audience seating
No maximum
(e) Outdoor attraction events, other than fairs, markets, weddings, receptions or concerts
1 space for every 36 sq. ft. of ground area in which the public will be allowed access, including ticket sale queuing areas and excluding parking area(s)
No maximum
(f) Other
The Commission shall utilize the standards above and other similar uses in this Section to determine the appropriate number of spaces for any use which does not fit into a classification above.
33.11.34
Philanthropic, educational or religious uses:
(a) House of worship
1 space for every 5 seats provided or 1 space for every 9 sq. ft. if no seating is provided
1 space for every 3 seats provided or 1 space for every 9 sq. ft. if no seating is provided
(b) Library
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
(c) Nursery schools
1 space per 8 clients
1 space per 4 clients
(d) Elementary and junior high schools
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
No maximum
(e) High school
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
No maximum
(f) College and vocational (public and private) institutions
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
No maximum
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3313
33.11.35
Police Department
2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area plus 1 space per squad car, plus 5 spaces for visitors
5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area, plus 1 space per squad car, plus 5 spaces for visitors
33.11.36
Fire Department
2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area, plus 1 space per department vehicle, plus 5 spaces for visitors
5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area, plus 1 space per department vehicle, plus 5 spaces for visitors
33.11.37
Municipal meeting rooms
6 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
11 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
33.11.38
Post office
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
33.11.39
Public utility substations and public utility water supply reservoirs, wells, water towers and water treatment facilities
2 spaces
No maximum
33.11.40
Communication towers
2 spaces
No maximum
33.11.41
Manufacturing, processing or assembling of goods
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
33.11.42
Warehouses (excluding self-storage or outside storage facilities), wholesale business, contractor’s businesses
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
33.11.43
Storage facilities other than warehouses
(a) Self-storage
1 space for every 20 storage units
1 space for every 10 storage units
(b) Outside storage
1 space for every 20 delineated storage areas
1 space for every 10 delineated storage areas
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3314
33.11.44
Marinas
1 space per boat, berth, slip or mooring
2 spaces per boat, berth, slip or mooring
No parking space may be used for the sale, service, storage or repair of any kind during the months of May through October
33.11.45
Funeral homes
5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
10 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
33.11.46
Self-service cleaning establishments (Laundromats)
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
33.11.47
Printing establishments
2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
33.11.48
Motor vehicle service facilities:
(a) Gasoline filling stations with no repair facilities
5 spaces, excluding spaces at the pumps
8 spaces, excluding spaces at the pumps
(b) Quick (while-you-wait) repair facilities
2 spaces per service bay, excluding the bay itself
3 spaces per service bay, excluding the bay itself
(c) Motor vehicle repair garages
2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
(d) Establishments for the sale of new or used vehicles
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
(e) Establishments for motor vehicle washing
5 spaces
8 spaces
33.11.49
Other uses
The number of spaces for uses not specifically enumerated in this Section shall be provided as determined by the Commission in order to maintain the purpose and intent of this section.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3401
Section 34
Signs
34.1 Purpose: The purpose of these sign regulations is to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication by discouraging excessive visual competition in signage; to ensure that signs aid orientation and adequately identify uses and activities to the public; to maintain and enhance property values and preserve the small town character of Clinton; to maintain an orderly and attractive community appearance; and to reduce distractions and obstructions from signs which would adversely affect traffic and pedestrian safety, or otherwise endanger public health and safety.
34.2 No sign shall be established, constructed, enlarged, altered, extended or moved except in conformance with these Regulations.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
34.2.1 Permits are required for all signs in excess of four square feet (4 sq. ft.) except as noted in Section 34.7 As-of-Right Signs (Permitted Use).
(Amended 11/1/2012)
34.3 Definitions: For the purpose of this Section, certain terms are defined as follows:
34.3.1 Arcade Sign: Sign with an area of four square feet (4 sq. ft.) or less, orientated perpendicular to and attached to a store front, below the roof and above the walkway to identify the occupant of a store or business from a sidewalk or arcade.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
34.3.2 Banners: Any sign intended to be hung either with or without frames, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind and is considered a “temporary sign” for the purposes of these Regulations. National flags, flags of political subdivisions and symbolic flags of any institution or business shall not be considered banners for the purpose of these Regulations.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
34.3.3 Directory Sign: A freestanding sign, other than an identification sign, listing the names of the various businesses or activities conducted within a building or group of buildings.
34.3.4 Freestanding Sign: A self-supporting sign not attached to a building or wall and in a fixed location. This does not include portable or trailer-type signs.
34.3.5 Hanging Signs: A sign which is attached to a building or wall in a manner so that its leading edge extends more than six inches (6”) beyond the surface to which it is affixed or the architectural feature, pole or frame from which it is suspended. This definition includes arcade signs.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
34.3.6 Illuminated Sign: Any sign that is illuminated in a manner by an artificial light source.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3402
(a) Externally Illuminated: A sign illuminated primarily by light directed toward or across it or by backlighting from a source not within it. Sources of illumination for such signs may be in the form of gooseneck lamps or spotlights.
(b) Internally Illuminated: A sign illuminated with a light source located within the sign and consists of translucent materials with opaque letters and may be used only to identify the premises where located or the enterprise conducted thereon or to publicize the name or the operator or occupant of such premises.
(c) LED Sign: A sign illuminated by a small light source that emits colored light from a very small amount of electricity.
(d) Neon Sign: Any sign which features exposed glass tubing filled with florescent gas.
34.3.7 Monument Sign: A freestanding sign, other than a Directory Sign, intended to identify a Commercial Center facility and have visibility from an interstate highway interchange area
34.3.8 Pennant (Flag): Any geometric shaped cloth, fabric or other lightweight, flexible material normally fastened to a stringer and limited to a maximum sign area of one and one-half square feet (1 ½ sq. ft.) which is secured or tethered so as to allow movement of the sign caused by movement of the atmosphere. A pennant is considered a “temporary sign” for the purposes of these Regulations.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
34.3.9 Pylon Sign: A free standing sign, other than a Directory or Monument Sign, intended to identify Commercial Centers as set forth in Section 34.6.4 and have visibility from an interstate highway and/or a State road adjacent or contiguous to the site. Pylon signs may only be located at an entrance to a Commercial Center and each Commercial Center is limited to one Pylon sign. Pylon signs shall only be allowed in the Interchange District Zone (IDZ).
(Amended 11/1/2016)
34.3.10 Temporary Sign: A banner, pennant or sandwich board. In addition, advertising displays, window signs which is not permanently affixed, or placards of a temporary design. A temporary sign may be displayed for a period of no more than thirty (30) days, unless otherwise specified in these Regulations.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
34.3.11 Tenant Signs: A sign designating an individual tenant in a structure or unit or on a property which is attached to on a directory sign.
34.3.12 Wall Sign: A sign painted on or attached to and erected parallel to the face of, or erected and confined within the limits of, the outside wall of any building and supported by such wall or building and which displays only one advertising surface.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3403
34.3.13 Wayfinding Sign: A sign that includes directory and directional information assisting in the flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic to different tenant businesses within a commercial complex.
34.3.14 Window Sign: A sign painted, etched, applied or affixed in any manner to any exterior window.
34.4 General Standards for Signs: The following standards and provisions are applicable to all signs:
34.4.1 Dimensions of Signs: All dimensions for signs shall be based on measurements to the outside edge of the sign, excluding any structure necessary to support the sign. The areas of the sign shall be computed from either the outer dimensions of the frame or as the area of a quadrilateral including the outer edges of all lettering, whichever is greater.
34.4.2 Maintenance of Signs: All signs shall be maintained in a secure and safe condition.
(a) The ZEO and his/her authorized agent shall inspect and shall have the authority to order the painting, repair or alteration of a sign which shall constitute a hazard to health, safety or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence.
(b) If the defect in the sign is not corrected within ninety (90) days, the Commission may revoke the sign permit and at the owner’s expense, order the removal of said sign.
(c) When a sign permit is revoked, a new application for the sign must be submitted for review and consideration.
34.4.3 Removal of Outdated Signs: Any sign now and hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or product sold shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or lot upon which sign may be found within thirty (30) days of cessation.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
34.4.4 Further Requirements Pursuant to Site Plan and/or Special Exception Applications: In addition to the provisions set forth elsewhere in this Section, the Commission shall have the right to impose further standards regarding the size, height, location and materials of any sign or signs in connection with the granting of approval required under this Section necessary to promote health, safety and general welfare of the community and to otherwise carry out the purposes of these sign regulations as stated in Section 34.1.
34.5 Specific Standards for Signs: The following specific standards are applicable to all signs in the following zoning districts:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3404
34.5.1 Non-Residential Districts: In addition to the standards specified elsewhere in these Regulations, all signs in Non-Residential Districts shall conform to the following additional requirements:
(a) Location: Signs shall meet all setbacks required for buildings and other structures, except as follows:
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(1) In the B-1, B-4 and Industrial Districts, one hanging sign may extend to within ten feet (10’) of any front lot line, provided that no single dimension of said sign exceeds eight feet (8’).
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(2) In the Village Zone, B-2, B-3 and Marine Districts, one hanging sign may extend to within ten feet (10’) of any front lot line, provided that the sign does not exceed eighteen square feet (18 sq. ft.) in area.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(3) An arcade sign oriented perpendicular to the store front and attached to the bottom of an overhanging roof or walkway covering, or store front, not to exceed four square feet (4 sq. ft.).
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(4) As-of-Right signs under Section 34.7, unless otherwise noted.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(5) In Districts where permitted, neon signs are permitted on the inside of windows only.
(i) At no time shall a neon sign be attached to an exterior wall of a building.
(b) Height: Signs in all Non-Residential Districts shall meet the following height standards:
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(1) No portion of any freestanding sign or its support structure shall have a height greater than twenty feet (20’) above the naturally occurring grade.
(2) Any hanging sign or arcade-type sign projecting over a pedestrian way shall be located with its lower edge not less than eight feet (8’) above said pedestrian way.
(c) Area: Signs in all Non-Residential Districts and other than in Shopping Centers as defined in these Regulations shall meet the following area standards:
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(1) In B-1, B-4 and Industrial Districts, the aggregate total area of all signs on any lot shall not exceed forty-eight square feet (48 sq. ft.).
(2) In the Village Zone, B-2, B-3 and Marine Districts, the aggregate total area of all signs shall not exceed thirty-six square feet (36 sq. ft.).
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3405
(3) The area of any walls sign or signs attached to or painted on a building shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the wall on which such sign or signs are attached or painted, or the area limitations as specified in subsections (1) or (2) above, whichever is less.
(4) The area of neon and LED signs are included in the aggregate total area of all signs permitted on a lot.
(i) The square footage of neon and LED signs are measured by a square or rectangle within which all parts of the sign are located.
(5) There shall be no more than three neon and/or LED signs permitted per lot.
(i) Each sign shall not exceed six square feet (6 sq. ft.) with the longest side of the square or rectangle used to measure the sign not to exceed forty-two inches (42”).
(ii) The aggregate area of the three signs shall not exceed fifteen square feet (15 sq. ft.)
(d) Illumination: The following provisions govern the illumination of signs in Non-Residential Districts:
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(1) Internally illuminated signs, including neon and LED signs, are not permitted in the Village Zone.
(2) Neon and LED signs are only permitted in Business Districts and Shopping Centers in accordance with all other provisions located in these Regulations.
(i) All neon and LED signs are to be extinguished at the end of business hours
(3) Illuminated signs shall not be lit during the hours between midnight (12:00 a.m.) and six o’clock a.m. (6:00 a.m.) unless the establishment is legally open for business.
34.5.2 Residential Districts: In addition to standards or provisions specified elsewhere in these sign regulations, signs in all Residential Districts shall meet the following additional standards and provisions:
(a) Location:
(Amended 11/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3406
(1) No freestanding sign shall be located closer than ten feet (10’) to any street line or lot line, except as-of-right signs permitted under Section 34.8 (Temporary Signs) and Subsection 34.5.2(c) (Area) below.
(b) Height: Signs in all Residential Districts shall meet the following height standards:
(1) No portion of any freestanding sign or its support structure shall be greater than five feet (5’) above the naturally occurring grade.
(2) Any hanging sign projecting over a pedestrian way shall be located with its lower edge not less than eight feet (8’) above said pedestrian way.
(c) Area: Signs in all Residential Districts shall meet the following requirements for number and area:
(1) On lots containing a farm, church or place of worship, parish hall, cemetery, museum, school, membership club, philanthropic institution, hospital, recreation facility, nature preserve, wildlife sanctuary, convalescent home, sanitarium, public utility, or building, use or facility of the Town of Clinton, State of Connecticut or federal government, one sign not exceeding sixteen square feet (16 sq. ft.) advertising that use which entitled the lot to the sign is permitted.
(2) On lots with uses not listed above, no more than one (1) sign not exceeding two square feet (2 sq. ft.) in area, identifying the occupant or a use not listed above of the lot shall be permitted.
(Amended 11/1/20012)
(d) Illumination: All lighting of signs in Residential Districts shall be indirect, with the source of illumination not visible from any street or from any lot other than the lot on which the sign is located.
(e) Non-Conforming Signs in Residential Districts: Where a non-conforming use exists in a Residential District, either by nonconformity or by variance, the sign area requirements of the particular use shall be determined by the Commission. The Commission shall take into consideration the type of use, locations, visibility from residential uses, and reasonable needs for advertising the particular use. In no case shall the total sign area on a lot exceed sixteen square feet (16 sq. ft.).
(Amended 11/1/2012)
34.6 Special Use Categories: For properties located in Non-Residential Zones which have more than one use or tenant, special signage standards apply. An overall Sign Design Plan shall be approved prior to the erected or installation of any signs. These properties must be categorized into only one (1) of the following:
34.6.1 Shopping Center:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3407
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(a) Design:
(1) All individual store exterior signs shall be designed as an integral part of the shopping center architectural design and shall be of the same type, character and relative location on the building, so as to provide an integrated, harmonious design.
(2) Signs shall be of an individual letter-type or of sign-board type, but the two types shall not be mixed on the façade of the buildings on any single shopping center.
(3) These shall be no more than two (2) height variations for letters or signboards.
(4) Tenant signs shall be of uniform design including orientation, size and material.
(5) Sign colors and lighting methods shall be coordinated for the shopping center and shall be shown on the Sign Design Plan in sufficient detail to indicate the proposed final sign detail.
(b) Directory Signs: At properties containing a shopping center, one directory sign may be constructed at the entrance to the center.
(1) Height: Such sign shall not exceed a height of twenty feet (20’) above naturally occurring grade.
(2) Area:
(i) Such directory sign shall not exceed a total of thirty-six square feet (36 sq. ft.).
(ii) Each individual tenant or occupant may attach a single tenant sign to the directory sign according to a design plan submitted and approved.
(iii) The total area of the directory sign may be increased by up to four square feet (4 sq. ft.) for each unit in the shopping center.
(iv) In no event shall the total directory sign area including tenant signs exceed eighty-four square feet (84 sq. ft.).
(c) Individual Store Exterior Signs:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3408
(1) The word “store”, as used herein, shall mean a retail store, financial institution, restaurant, personal service establishment, or other permitted use in the particular Shopping Center.
(2) The total exterior sign area on any individual store shall not exceed one square foot (1 sq. ft.) for each linear foot of store front.
(i) The length of the storefront shall be measured on a horizontal line along the front of the store between exterior intersecting walls or between the centers of intersecting party walls.
(3) There shall be only one (1) sign designating the proper name of each individual store on each wall with a public entrance.
(d) Arcade Signs: If a Shopping Center is designed with a courtyard or covered walkway, each store shall be allowed one (1) additional sign not to exceed four square feet (4 sq. ft.) and consistent with a design plan submitted and approved.
(1) Such sign is to be located only in the courtyard or covered walkway and generally at right angles to the front wall and not directly visible from the exterior of the courtyard or covered walkway.
(e) Temporary Advertising Signs: Each store shall be permitted one (1) temporary sign not to exceed six square feet (6 sq. ft.)
34.6.2 Signs for Multiple Tenancy Commercial Buildings:
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(a) Design:
(1) All individual store exterior signs shall be designed as an integral part of the shopping center architectural design and shall be of the same type, character and relative location on the building, so as to provide an integrated, harmonious design.
(2) Signs shall be of an individual letter-type or of sign-board type, but the two types shall not be mixed on the façade of the buildings on any single shopping center.
(3) These shall be no more than two (2) height variations for letters or signboards.
(4) Tenant signs shall be of uniform design including orientation, size and material.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3409
(5) Sign colors and lighting methods shall be coordinated for the shopping center and shall be shown on the Sign Design Plan in sufficient detail to indicate the proposed final sign detail.
(b) Individual Commercial Unit Exterior Signs: Where two or more separate commercial units are located in a structure or structures on one lot, each unit is permitted one square foot (1 sq. ft.) of signage per linear foot of unit frontage.
(c) Directory Signs: One directory sign identifying a multiple tenancy commercial building complex may be constructed on the site.
(1) Height: Such sign shall not exceed a height of twenty feet (20’) above naturally occurring grade.
(2) Area:
(i) Such directory sign shall not exceed a total of thirty-six square feet (36 sq. ft.).
(ii) Each individual tenant or occupant may attach a single tenant sign not to exceed four square feet (4 sq. ft.) to the directory sign.
(3) Tenant signs shall be uniform in design including orientation, size, lettering, color and material.
(4) In no event shall the total directory sign area including tenant signs exceed seventy-two square feet (72 sq. ft.).
(d) Temporary Advertising Signs: Each store shall be permitted one (1) temporary sign not to exceed six square feet (6 sq. ft.)
34.6.3 Multiple Building Complexes:
(Amended 1/11/2012)
(a) Design:
(1) All individual store exterior signs shall be designed as an integral part of the shopping center architectural design and shall be of the same type, character and relative location on the building, so as to provide an integrated, harmonious design.
(2) Signs shall be of an individual letter-type or of sign-board type, but the two types shall not be mixed on the façade of the buildings on any single shopping center.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3410
(3) These shall be no more than two (2) height variations for letters or signboards.
(4) Tenant signs shall be of uniform design including orientation, size and material.
(5) Sign colors and lighting methods shall be coordinated for the shopping center and shall be shown on the Sign Design Plan in sufficient detail to indicate the proposed final sign detail.
(b) Exterior Building Identification Signs: In a complex with more than one principal building, each building, except accessory buildings, shall have a clearly visible exterior symbol identifying each building.
(c) Individual Commercial Unit Exterior Signs: Where two or more commercial units are located in a structure or structures on one lot, each unit is permitted one square foot (1 sq. ft.) of signage per linear foot of unit frontage.
(d) Directory Signs: One directory sign identifying a multiple building complex may be constructed on the site.
(1) Height: Such sign shall not exceed a height of twenty feet (20’) above naturally occurring grade.
(2) Area:
(i) Such directory sign shall not exceed a total of thirty-six square feet (36 sq. ft.).
(ii) Each individual tenant or occupant may attach a single tenant sign.
(iii) Tenant signs shall be uniform in design including orientation, size, lettering, color and material.
(iv) In no event shall the total directory sign area including freestanding signs exceed seventy-two square feet (72 sq. ft.).
(3) Temporary Advertising Signs: Each store or tenant shall be permitted one (1) temporary sign not to exceed six square feet (6 sq. ft.)
34.6.4 Commercial Center:
(a) Design:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3411
(1) All individual store exterior signs shall be designed as an integral part of the shopping center architectural design and shall be of the same type, character and relative location on the building, so as to provide an integrated, harmonious design.
(2) Signs shall be of an individual letter-type or of sign-board type, but the two types shall not be mixed on the façade of the buildings on any single shopping center.
(3) These shall be no more than two (2) height variations for letters or signboards.
(4) Tenant signs shall be of uniform design including orientation, size and material.
(5) Sign colors and lighting methods shall be coordinated for the shopping center and shall be shown on the Sign Design Plan in sufficient detail to indicate the proposed final sign detail.
(b) Exterior Building Identification Signs: In a complex with more than one principal building, each building, except accessory buildings, shall have a clearly visible exterior symbol identifying each building.
(c) Individual Commercial Unit Exterior Signs: Where two or more commercial units are located in a structure or structures on one lot, each unit is permitted one square foot (1 sq. ft.) of signage per linear foot of unit frontage.
(d) Directory Signs: A directory signs identifying a commercial center may have constructed at each entrance to the Commercial Center.
(1) Height: Such sign shall not exceed a height of twenty feet (20’) above naturally occurring grade.
(2) Area:
(i) Such directory sign shall not exceed a total of thirty-six square feet (72 sq. ft.).
(ii) Each individual tenant or occupant may attach a single tenant sign, not to exceed sixty square feet (60 sq. ft.) each.
(iii) Tenant signs shall be uniform in design including orientation, size, lettering, color and material.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3412
(iv) In no event shall the total directory sign area including tenant signs exceed forty-four square feet (44 sq. ft.).
(e) Monument Sign:
(1) Height: Such sign shall not exceed a height of forty-five feet (45‘) above naturally occurring grade.
(2) Area:
(i) Such freestanding sign shall not exceed a total of thirty-six square feet (36 sq. ft.).
(ii) Individual tenants may attach a single tenant sign, not to exceed twelve square feet (12 sq. ft.) each.
(iii) In no event shall the total freestanding sign area including tenant signs exceed sixty square feet (60 sq. ft.).
(f) Wayfinding Signs:
(1) Wayfinding signs shall be provided as necessary throughout the Commercial Center.
(2) Height: Such wayfinding sigh shall not exceed eight feet (8’) above naturally occurring grade.
(3) Area:
(i) In no event shall such wayfinding signs exceed a total area of twenty-four square feet (24 sq. ft.).
(g) Pylon Signs:
(Added 11/1/2016)
(1) Height: Such sign shall not exceed a height of fifty feet (50’) above the naturally occurring grade. Such measurement shall include the base of the sign.
(2) Width: Such sign shall no exceed a width of eighteen feet (18’).
(3) Illumination: Such sign may be internally or externally illuminated. Said illumination must be designed to be uniform in brightness throughout the entire sign.
(4) Tenant Signage: Each individual tenant shall be allocated space on the Pylon sign according to a design plan submitted and approved. The
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3413
design plan shall designate the number of individual panels and the square footage of each panel, which should be proportional.
While individual tenants may be identified by a logo as well as text, the operator of the Commercial Center must demonstrate how the overall pattern of signage is consistent with the design of the Commercial Center as a whole. The name or names of the residential development as approved within the Commercial Center may be included on the Pylon sign in a size proportional to the other individual signs on the Pylon sign.
34.7 As-of-Right Signs: Exempt signs are subject to the limitations of Section 34.9 regarding Prohibited Signs and shall conform to all other standards and provisions of this Section. The following signs do not require a permit unless otherwise stated below.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
34.7.1 Public Signs: Signs of a non-commercial nature and in the public interest, erected by or on the order of a public officer in the performance of a public duty, such as traffic signs, safety signs, memorial plaques, and signs of a historic nature.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
34.7.2 Directional Signs: Private directional signs solely indicating ingress and egress, not to exceed an area of three square feet (3 sq. ft.) nor a height of four feet (4’) above the ground, placed at driveway locations or other locations on the premises where an activity or enterprise is located.
(a) No more than two permanent unlighted directional signs may be located off the premises, provided the sign location does not create a nuisance and/or hazard, and provided that the owner of the sign has permission of the property owner where an off premises sign is located.
34.7.3 Hunting and Fishing, No Trespassing, No Dumping, No Loitering: Signs related to trespassing, hunting, dumping or loitering, not exceeding two square feet (2 sq. ft.) in area.
34.7.4 Identification Signs: Signs identifying names of non-commercial buildings, dates of erection, monuments, commemorative tablets, and the like, when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type construction and permanently affixed to the structure and not exceeding an area of three square feet (3 sq. ft.).
(Amended 11/1/2012)
34.7.5 Decorations: Signs of a primarily decorative nature, clearly customary, provided that such signs are displayed for a period of not more than sixty (60) days in any one year and that such signs are set back ten feet (10’) from all boundary lines of the lot.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
34.7.6 House Identification Signs: No more than two (2) signs, neither exceeding three square feet (3 sq. ft.) in area, identifying the occupant of the house.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3414
34.8 Temporary Signs: The following temporary signs are permitted in all districts in accordance with the standards set forth below in this Section, and other applicable standards in these Regulations. Temporary signs of four square feet (4 sq. ft.) or less do not require a zoning permit, unless otherwise indicated below. Temporary signs are permitted with the limitations indicated below even if such temporary signs result in a total aggregate sign area on the lot in excess of that permitted in Sections 34.5.1(c) (Area) and 34.5.2(c) (Area), but not to exceed forty-eight square feet (48 sq. ft.) per sign.
(Amended 11/1/2012 & 7/1/2013)
34.8.1 Construction Signs:
(a) Construction signs that identify architects, engineers, contractors, and other individuals or firms involved with construction, but not including any advertisement of the project, may be located on the site of a construction project.
(b) Area: The maximum total aggregate area of construction signs shall be as follows:
(1) Residential Districts: Six square feet (6 sq. ft.)
(2) Village Zone District: Thirty-six square feet (36 sq. ft.)
(3) B-2 and B-3 Districts Thirty-six square feet (36 sq. ft.)
(4) Marine District: Thirty-six square feet (36 sq. ft.)
(5) B-1 and B-4 Districts: Forty-eight square feet (48 sq. ft.)
(6) Industrial Districts: Forty-eight square feet (48 sq. ft.)
(Amended 11/1/2012)
34.8.2 Real Estate Signs:
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(a) Except as indicated below, not more than two real estate signs may be located on any lot, advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the signs are displayed.
(b) Such signs shall be removed within one (1) week following sale, rental or lease of the premises.
(c) Area: The maximum total aggregate area of real estate signs shall be as follows:
(1) Residential Districts: Six square feet (6 sq. ft.)
(2) Village District: Thirty-six square feet (36 sq. ft.)
(3) B-2 and B-3 Districts: Thirty-six square feet (36 sq. ft.)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3415
(4) Marine District: Thirty-six square feet (36 sq. ft.)
(5) B-1 and B-4 Districts: Forty-eight square feet (48 sq. ft.)
(6) Industrial Districts: Forty-eight square feet (48 sq. ft.)
(d) Real Estate signs six square feet (6 sq. ft.) or less do not require a permit.
34.8.3 Subdivision Signs:
(a) On subdivisions involving six (6) or more lots, one (1) additional temporary sign advertising the subdivision, developer, and/or realtor, not to exceed twenty square feet (20 sq. ft.) is permitted.
(b) Said sign shall be located at the entrance to the subdivision and shall be removed within one (1) week of the sale or rental of the last lot or structure within the subdivision.
34.8.4 Political Signs:
(a) Political campaign signs and other information pertinent thereto, up to a total of twenty square feet (20 sq. ft.) on each premises.
(b) These signs shall be confined within private property and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the election for which they were involved.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
34.8.5 Temporary Events: Banners, sandwich board signs, or pennants may be permitted for temporary events. A temporary event may include special sales at commercial establishments.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(a) There shall be only one (1) temporary sign erected for any event.
(b) There shall be no more than two (2) events requiring signage per calendar year except for municipally owned properties where there shall be no more than two (2) signs at a time.
(Amended 7/1/2013)
(c) The temporary sign may be erected up to two (2) weeks prior to the event and must be removed within one (1) week following the event.
(d) No temporary sign may remain for a total of no more than thirty (30) days.
34.8.6 Sandwich Board Signs: In non-residential districts, one (1) sandwich board sign, not to exceed six square feet (6 sq. ft.), may be permitted per property.
(Amended 11/1/2012)
(a) Such sandwich board sign must be located on private property.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3416
(b) If the sandwich board sign advertises a use located on a different property, the owner of the property on which the sign is to be located must give permission (via signature on the sign permit application) for the sign to be erected.
34.9 Prohibited Signs: The following signs are expressly prohibited, unless specifically indicated otherwise:
(Amended 11/1/2012)
34.9.1 No sign in any district shall have an area greater than forty-eight square feet (48 sq. ft.) unless otherwise specified herein.
34.9.2 No sign shall be attached to a tree, fence or utility pole or painted or drawn on a rock or other natural feature, except that temporary signs may be attached to fences located on municipal properties.
34.9.3 No sign shall be located within any town or state right-of-way, except for town or state-owned signs.
34.9.4 No sign, together with any supporting framework, shall extend to a height above the maximum building height allowed in any district nor shall a sign project beyond any property line.
34.9.5 No portion of any sign attached to an accessory building shall be permitted within required setback areas.
34.9.6 No sign shall be located on any roof, and no sign attached to or painted on a building shall extend beyond the limits of the wall of the building to which it is attached or on which it is painted.
34.9.7 No sign shall be permitted which has blinking, flashing, fluttering, oscillating, rotating or pulsating lights or other illumination devices which have a changing light intensity or color. Signs giving public service information such as time, date or temperature may be permitted provided that they meet all other provisions of these Regulations. Emergency lights are excluded from this Regulation.
34.9.8 No “feather” or “swooper” flags shall be permitted.
34.9.9 No sign, except for a traffic, regulatory or informational sign shall contain the words “STOP”, “GO SLOW”, “CAUTION”, “DANGER” OR “WARNING”, or shall incorporate red, amber or green lights resembling traffic signals or shall resemble “STOP” or “YIELD” signs in shape and color.
34.9.10 No sign which has any moving parts or assumes any motion, including hanging signs, shall be permitted.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3417
34.9.11 No vehicle or trailer which has attached thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising device for the basic purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property or any other premises shall be parked on the public right-of-way or in any other location which is clearly for the purpose of public visibility. This Section is not intended to prohibit any form of vehicular signage such as a sign attached to a bus or lettered on a motor vehicle but rather to regulate the location of such vehicles.
34.10 All neon signs existing prior to March 1, 2004 may be continued under the provision of Section 29 (Non-Conformities) of these Regulations. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued by the ZEO for such applicants who provide the ZEO with the number of neon signs, the square footage of each neon sign and the aggregate total area of the neon signs on the lot, together with credible evidence, e.g. photographs, that such neon signs legally existed prior to March 1, 2004.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3501
Section 35
Storage Tanks
35.1 Scope: The purpose of this Section is to regulate all underground and aboveground storage tanks that hold fuel oil and chemicals, and which are currently excluded from regulations of the State Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP).
35.2 Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases when used in this Section shall have the meanings ascribed to them below, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
35.2.1 Aboveground: Any facility or component of a facility that has ninety-one percent (91%) or more of its capacity at or above the surface of the ground.
35.2.2 Aboveground Tanks: All aboveground containers used for residential fuel oil storage and nonresidential fuel oil as well as those for storing hazardous materials.
35.2.3 ASTM: American Society for Testing Materials.
35.2.4 CFR: Code of Federal Regulations.
35.2.5 Fuel Oil: Oil or petroleum-based liquids used for heating or cooking purposes, including, but not limited to diesel fuel, #2 fuel oil., propane or kerosene.
35.2.6 Hazardous Materials: Any material defined by 40 CFR Part 261, Subpart C as may be amended from time to time, generally having the characteristics of one (1) or more of the following: ignitability, corosivity, reactivity or toxicity, but not including a hazardous waste currently regulated by the State Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
35.2.7 Listed: Approved by the Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection in accordance with Section 22a-449(d)-1 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, as may be amended from time to time.
35.2.8 NFPA: National Fire Protection Association.
35.2.9 Nonresidential Fuel Oil Storage: Storage of less than twenty-one hundred (2,100) gallons of fuel oil at nonresidential locations.
35.2.10 Piping: Any pipes intended to regularly hold or convey fuel oil or hazardous materials.
35.2.11 Residential Fuel Oil Storage: Storage of fuel oil at any residential building, regardless of volume stored.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3502
35.2.12 Underground: Any facility or component of a facility that has ten percent (10%) or more of its capacity below the surface of the ground and not readily visible for inspection.
35.2.13 Underground Tanks: All underground containers used for residential fuel oil storage and nonresidential fuel oil storage as well as those for storing hazardous materials.
35.3 Registration of Existing Tanks:
35.3.1 Owners of all existing underground tanks shall register the tanks with the ZEO on a form provided by the ZEO. Information to be provided shall include, but is not limited to:
(a) Address of tank location
(b) Approximate location of a tank in relation to nearby building(s)
(c) Approximate date of installation
(d) Type of material tank consists of and approximate volume
(e) Diameter and length of all buried piping
(f) Copy of manufacturer’s warranty, if available
(g) Type of material tank contains
(h) Such other information as may be required
35.3.2 This registration shall be complete by July 1, 2015.
35.4 New Installations: No underground or aboveground tanks shall be installed at any facility, such as a home or business, unless the installation complies with the requirements in this Section.
35.5 Permits: A permit to install an underground or aboveground tank must be completed by the applicant and approved by the ZEO prior to the initiation of any work. The permit shall contain the tank’s street address, location on the property and the type of tank, as well as other information deemed appropriate by the ZEO.
35.6 Tank Types:
35.6.1 All new underground tanks shall be listed, double-walled steel or single-walled fiberglass reinforced plastic tanks. Steel tanks must be cathodically protected for a minimum of thirty (30) years, and equipped with a permanent cathodic protection monitoring device and be externally coated with a factory-applied coating designed to retard corrosion in underground locations. Fiberglass-reinforced plastic tanks must be chemically compatible with the material to be contained, as determined by the tank manufacturer.
35.6.2 All new aboveground tanks shall be UL approved tanks installed in accordance with all state and local building codes. The tanks shall be installed inside of a
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3503
secondary containment unit that is equal to or greater than one half of the capacity of the primary storage tank.
35.7 Installation: Installation of all tanks and related components shall conform to NFPA 30, as amended, and the manufacturer’s installation specifications; whichever imposes the most stringent requirements. Within thirty (30) days after the completion of the installation, but prior to the use of the tank, the owner of the tank must submit a statement to the ZEO, signed by the tank installer, certifying that the installation has been carried out in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
35.8 Piping: All piping must be installed by a plumber licensed in the state. Sleeving shall be provided at all points where the supply or return piping is underground, as well as through the foundations all or if this piping is to be buried in or below a concrete floor, it shall be sleeved in at least a four-inch diameter schedule 40 plastic conduit meeting the requirement of ASTM D-1785 or equivalent, with appropriate tight joints. All piping and the tank shall hold an air pressure of five pounds per square inch gauge (5 psig) for at least ten (10) minutes after backfilling, but prior to use. A statement certifying the successful completion of this air test must be signed by the plumber and submitted to the ZEO within thirty (30) days of the test, but prior to use of the piping.
35.9 Inspection: As further assurance that installations are performed in accordance with applicable requirements, as detailed above, an inspection of all installations must be made by the ZEO and Fire Marshal, who must be notified at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to an installation.
35.10 Life Expectancy:
35.10.1 The life expectancy of all fiberglass-reinforced plastic underground tanks installed after July 1, 2015 shall be indicated in the manufacturer’s corrosion warranty. The life expectancy for all cathodically protected underground tanks installed after July 1, 2015 shall be as that indicated in the tank manufacturer’s corrosion warranty.
35.10.2 This life expectancy can be extended for up to five (5) additional years beyond this life expectancy if no leaks have been detected previously and no leaks are detected in this extended life expectancy, as detailed in Subsection 35.13 of these Regulations.
35.11 Leaks: If any tank or piping is determined to have a leak at any time, use of the tank shall be immediately discontinued, the tank shall be emptied and the ZEO notified within two (2) business days.
35.11.1 The ZEO, in consultation with the Department of Energy and Environmental Protections, shall have the right to require that reasonable efforts be taken to recover lost products and remove and properly dispose of contaminated materials, such as soil.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3504
35.11.2 If only the piping is leaking, it may be replaced or repaired as necessary, in general conformance with the requirements for piping in the “New Installation” section of these Regulations.
35.11.3 If the tank leaks before the life expectancy has been reached or in the extended life expectancy, it shall be substantially emptied and removed or abandoned in accordance with NFPA-30. This removal or abandonment must be done within ninety (90) days of the detection of a leak.
35.12 Abandonment or Removal: After the life expectancy, or the extended life expectancy, has been reached, the tank shall be substantially emptied and removed or abandoned in accordance with NFPA-30. This removal or abandonment must be achieved within six (6) months after reaching the life expectancy or extended life expectancy, whichever is applicable.
35.13 Leak Detection:
35.13.1 All underground tanks shall be monitored by the tank owner for excessive, unanticipated product loss on a regular basis. This monitoring shall consist of the following minimum procedures, or an equivalent method approved by the ZEO.
(a) Records shall be kept of average product use per degree-day for each heating fuel tank. If this ration shows and increase or decrease greater than ten percent (10%) in any single monitoring period, further investigation shall be initiated to determine the cause.
(1) Such further investigation may include but not be limited to review of product use at location of tank, visual inspection of the tank components or the use of more sophisticated leak detection methods.
(2) If this further investigation fails to identify the cause of the product loss, the ZEO shall be notified within two (2) business days. The ZEO shall exercise general oversight in the determination and investigation of any apparent leaks at this stage. The ZEO shall have the right to require precisions hydrostatic testing and/or partial or entire excavation of the tank and related components, if necessary.
(b) These monitoring reports and any supporting documentation of product use shall be submitted to the ZEO annually on July 1st or upon his request.
35.14 Appeals: Any person aggrieved by a decision of the ZEO in relation to the provisions of this article may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Board shall schedule a public hearing after proper notice to investigate into the facts and vacate, modify or affirm the decision of
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON 3505
the ZEO. Any such action by the Board shall be recorded on the permit and/or registration form for such tank.
35.15 Penalties: Any person who violates any provision of this article including the failure to register an underground tank pursuant to Section 35.3.1 shall be subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day or portion thereof during which a violation is maintained. The ZEO may also enforce the provisions of these Regulations by seeking injunctive relief in a Court of competent jurisdiction.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON A-A1
Appendix A
Land Use Applications
§ 296-2. Authorization and purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of CGS §8-1c, the Town of Clinton does hereby establish a schedule of reasonable fees for the purpose of funding the approximate actual municipal administrative cost of reviewing, evaluating and processing of applications by the Town of Clinton land use regulatory commissions.
§ 296-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article the following definitions apply:
LAND USE APPLICATION – Any application to a land use regulatory commission within its statutory jurisdiction, which is herein referred to as “application”.
LAND USE REGULATORY COMMISSION – The Clinton Planning and Zoning Commission, The Clinton Zoning Board of Appeals and the Clinton Inland Wetlands and Conservation Commission, which are herein referred to individually as “commission”.
REVIEW, EVALUATION AND PROCESSING – All functions performed in connection with or associated with a land use application by a land use regulatory commission, including but not limited to fees and expenses relating to the administrative handling of the application and consultant expenses in direct connection with the technical review of the application including both preapproved and post-approval costs associated with the application, such as engineering review of construction plans and inspections of improvements during construction to assure compliance.
§296-4. Fee Schedule
The base fees as set forth in this article are due and payable to the Town of Clinton upon submission of a land use application, unless another date for the payment is specified herein.
A. Planning and Zoning Commission.
(1) Zoning.
(a) Zoning Permit: $15.
(b) Zoning permit (Issued after construction):
[1] First occurrence per offense (by person or entity): $250.
[2] Second occurrence per offense (by person or entity): $500.
[3] Third occurrence per offense (by person or entity): $750.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON A-A2
[4] Fourth Occurrence per offense (by person or entity): $1,000.
(c) Home Occupation Permit: $20.
(d) Outdoor Entertainment Permit: $15.
(e) Sign Permit: $20.
(f) Vendor’s Permit: $15.
(g) Certificate of zoning compliance: $50.
(h) Coastal Area Management (CAM) application:
[1] Residential: $30.
[2] Commercial: $75.
(i) Amendment request for regulation or zone change: $250, plus actual cost of legal notices in excess of $50.
(j) Gravel excavation or dumping: $150.
[1] Plus, Month permit (per month if less than one year): $25.
[2] Or, plus year permit (per year): $150.
[3] Or, plus renewals or extensions (per year): $150.
(k) Special exception, Planning and Zoning Commission: $100.
[1] New Construction
(a) Plus, per each square foot of building: $0.15.
(b) Plus, per parking space: $5.
[2] Change of Use:
(a) Plus, per each square foot of building for which the change applies: $0.15.
(b) Plus, per parking space: $5.
(l) Site plan application: $75.
[1] New Construction
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON A-A3
(c) Plus, per each square foot of building: $0.10.
(d) Plus, per parking space: $5.
[2] Change of Use:
(c) Plus, per each square foot of building for which the change applies: $0.10.
(d) Plus, per parking space: $5.
(m) Re-noticing due to applicant error, withdrawal, or postponement (at applicant’s request) to be paid by applicant at cost).
(n) Additional fees per application:
[1] Microfilming: $10.
[2] Department of Energy and Environmental Protection: As determined by DEEP
(2) Subdivision.
(a) Subdivision application: $100.
[1] Plus, per lot: $150.
[2] Plus, per linear foot of road: $1.
(b) Resubdivision application $150.
[1] Plus, per lot: $150.
[2] Plus, per liner foot of road: $1.
(c) Additional fees per application.
[1] Microfilming: $10.
[2] Department of Energy and Environmental Protection: As determined by DEEP
B. Zoning Board of Appeals
(1) Zoning Board of Appeals application for variance: $200.
(2) Coastal area management (CAM) application:
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON A-A4
(a) Residential: $30.
(b) Commercial: $75.
(3) Certificate of Approval of Location, Dealer’s & Repair’s Licenses: $150.
(4) Appeal of decision of Zoning Enforcement Officer: $100.
(5) Re-noticing due to applicant error withdrawal, or postponement (at applicant’s request) to be paid by applicant at cost.
(6) Additional fees per application:
(a) Microfilming: $10.
(b) Department of Energy and Environmental Protection: As determined by DEEP
C. Aquifer Protection Agency
(1) Residential: $100.
(2) Commercial: $200.
(3) Single Family Home: $15.
D. Inland Wetlands and Conservation Commission.
(1) Regulated Activity (within zero to 50 feet of or in wetlands or watercourses):
(a) Residential uses: $125 plus $40 per lot.
(b) Commercial and industrial uses: $300.
(c) Significant activity fee (Section 2.20.1): $250.
(2) As-of-right (logging, farm ponds, agricultural): $35.
(3) Activity within 100 feet of wetlands (Commission permit)
(a) New residential structure: $75.
(b) New commercial or industrial lot: $100.
(c) Addition to existing structure on residential lot: $50.
(d) Addition to existing structure on commercial or industrial lot: $75.
(4) Activity within 100 feet of wetlands (wetland enforcement officer permit). Issued for the following activities within 51 feet to 100 feet of the wetlands: decks, porches,
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON A-A5
residential additions, sheds, pools, fences, minor driveway work, stone walls and test holes.
(a) Residential lot: $35.
(b) Commercial or industrial lot: $50.
(c) Deep test pits, per lot: $20.
(5) Boundary change/verification of Inland Wetlands Official Map.
(a) New subdivisions (residential or industrial): $250.
(b) New commercial or industrial development: $250
(c) Existing residential lot: $25.
(d) Existing commercial/industrial lot: $100.
(6) Modification of previous approval:
(a) Residential lot: $25.
(b) Commercial or industrial lot: $50.
(7) Additional fees per application.
(a) Microfilming: $10.00
(b) Department of Energy and Environmental Protection: As determined by DEEP
(8) Re-noticing due to applicant error, withdrawal, or postponement (at applicant’s request) to be paid by applicant.
§296-5. Consultant expenses.
A. Prior to or contemporaneous with the filing of an applicant, the applicant shall advise the commission in writing as to the professional evidence by way of testimony or certification that it intends to submit as part of or in support of said application. Such written statement shall include the specific areas of expertise (e.g. traffic and hydrology) in which the commission may require the technical assistance of consultants.
B. A commission may charge fees in addition to the base fees set forth above set forth in order to obtain additional technical assistance in reviewing and evaluating an application where the commission determines, based upon information provided or required to be provided by the applicant, that the nature, size or intensity of the land use application shall require services of consultants not provided for within the fees set forth in §296-4.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON A-A6
C. The commission shall determine the amount of the fee in addition to the base fee required for the review, evaluation and processing of the subject application at the same rate that they are charged.
D. An applicant may provide the written statement required under Subsection A and request a determination by the commission as to whether additional technical assistance will be required and the amount of the additional fee prior to submission of the application. Payment of the additional fee shall be made upon submission of the application or within 30 days of the determination of the required additional fee by the Commission, whichever shall later occur.
E. Failure to provide the statement required under Subsection A or to pay the additional fee required hereunder may render the application incomplete under the commission regulations.
§ 296-6. Duplication of review.
In making a determination as to whether additional technical assistance will be required, each commission shall give due consideration to and shall use to the extent feasible the technical assistance that may have been engaged by another commission in reviewing the same application so as to eliminate duplication of consultant review fees.
§ 296-7. Determination that fees are not required.
A commission may by resolution determine that base fees, or portions thereof, are not required in particular cases of resubmission of a disapproval application or an application to revise an approved application or in cases where the application changes are minor. Boards, commissions and departments of the Town of Clinton are exempt from fee requirements.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON A-B1
Appendix B
Illustrations
Arcade: A covered passageway with arches along one or both sides.
(http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e4/Tripoli_Sidewalk.jpg/220px-Tripoli_Sidewalk.jpg)
Balustrade: A railing supported by balusters, especially an ornamental parapet on a balcony, bridge or terrace.
(https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/14/Balustrade_%28PSF%29.png/1024px-Balustrade_%28PSF%29.png)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON A-B2
Basement: That portion of a building having its floor entirely sub-grade (i.e. below ground level) on all sides.
Walkout: A floor of a building that is partially sub-grade and has independent access to the outside.
(http://cdn.finelinehomes.com/blog-images/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/walkout-basement.jpg)
Bay Window: A window built to project outward from an outside wall.
Board and Batten: Boards fitted together by halving so that each overlaps the one below.
(https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/42/ca/d3/42cad3bd4ab678dad3b3c69343b878ed.jpg)
Clapboard: A long, think, flat piece of wood with edges horizontally overlapping in series, used to cover the outer walls of buildings.
(https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/42/ca/d3/42cad3bd4ab678dad3b3c69343b878ed.jpg)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON A-B3
Cornice: Any horizontal decorative molding that crowns a building or furniture element over a door, window or the top edge of a pedestal or along the top of an interior wall.
Dormer: A roofed structure, often containing a window, that project vertically beyond the plane of a pitched roof.
(http://thecraftsmanblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/dormers.jpg)
Gable Roof: A roof with two sloping sides and a gable at each end.
(https://d12m281ylf13f0.cloudfront.net/images10/1-43-4cropped.jpg)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON A-B4
Hip Roof: A roof with the ends inclined, as well as the sides.
(https://d12m281ylf13f0.cloudfront.net/images10/1-1-2.jpg)
Lantern: A daylighting cupola element.
(http://www.pitt.edu/~medart/image/glossary/LANTERN.JPG)
Lot Lines:
Diagram courtesy of Town of Canton, CT
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON A-B5
Lot Types:
Diagram courtesy of Town of Canton, CT
Mullions: A vertical bar between the panes of glass in a window.
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON A-B6
Muntins: A bar or rigid supporting strip between adjacent panes of glass.
Pergola: An archway in a garden or park consisting of a framework covered with trained climbing or trailing plants.
(http://tate-fencing.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/pergola-construction-2.jpg)
Pilaster: A rectangular column, especially one projecting from a wall.
(https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/24/Pilaster_(PSF).png)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON A-B7
Portico: A structure consisting of a roof supported by columns at regular intervals, typically attached as a porch to a building.
(https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/7e/f0/bd/7ef0bdbe380011e08fc46f3201810976.jpg)
Setbacks:
Diagrams courtesy of Town of Canton, CT
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON A-B8
Shingle: A thin oblong piece of material, such as wood or slate, that is laid in overlapping rows to cover the roof or sides of a house or other building.
(https://d12m281ylf13f0.cloudfront.net/images10/Racked-shingle-diagram2.jpg)
Shiplap: Boards fitted together by having so that each overlaps the one below.
(https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/42/ca/d3/42cad3bd4ab678dad3b3c69343b878ed.jpg)
Size, Scale, Proportion: Development should reflect a pedestrian scale, attention to the streetscape, size of adjacent buildings, and a sense of proportion that promotes Clinton’s community character.
GOOD DESIGN
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON A-B9
BAD DESIGN
(http://static1.squarespace.com/static/53dd6676e4b0fedfbc26ea91/54b6c509e4b062126976d942/56e08f9059827e35364d7980/1457628806688/REI+side.jpg?format=1500w)
Step-back: A step-like recession in a wall, also called a setback.
(http://qcode.us/codes/southsanfrancisco/qcode_files/image109.jpg)
String Cornice or String-Course Cornice: A horizontal band or course, as of stone, projecting beyond or flush with the face of a building, often molded and sometimes richly carved.
(http://chestofbooks.com/architecture/Building-Construction-V3/images/23-String-Course-Cornice-392.jpg)
January 1, 2018 TOWN OF CLINTON A-B10
Turret: A small tower, usually one forming part of a larger structure.
(https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/da/e0/2c/dae02cd5b0353d5df50fd1aee98eb57e.jpg)
Yards:
Diagrams courtesy of Town of Canton, CT