Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 4-12-2001]
§ 1-1. Adoption.
The compilation of the ordinances and administrative regulations of the
Town of Colchester, codified and consolidated into parts, chapters and
sections in the form attached hereto and made a part hereof, is hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Town of
Colchester, Connecticut," hereinafter called the "Code." All provisions
contained in the compilation provided for herein and known as the "Code of
the Town of Colchester" shall be in force and effect on and after the effective
date of this ordinance.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those ordinances and administrative regulations in force immediately
prior to the enactment of the Code by this ordinance, are intended as a
continuation of such ordinances and administrative regulations and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance or regulation. All such provisions
are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as
to their adoption by the Town Meeting.
§ 1-3. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
All ordinances and administrative regulations or parts thereof of the Town
of Colchester of a general and permanent nature in force on the date of the
adoption of this ordinance which either are inconsistent with any provisions
of the Code or have not otherwise been addressed by specific language
in the Code are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this
ordinance.
§ 1-4. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this ordinance
or of any ordinance or regulation appearing in the Code or included in this
Code through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate
the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, article or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
ordinances or administrative regulations known collectively as the "Code
of the Town of Colchester," or any new ordinances or administrative
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
regulations, when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the
intention of the Board of Selectmen and/or the Town Meeting to be a
part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that
reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this ordinance
shall affect the status of any ordinance or regulation contained herein, and
such ordinances and administrative regulations may be amended, deleted
or changed from time to time as the Board of Selectmen and/or Town
Meeting deems desirable pursuant to Charter Section 403.
§ 1-6. Gender-neutral language.
Whenever in the Code, in describing or referring to any person, party,
matter or thing, any word importing the singular number or masculine
gender is used, the same shall be understood to include and to apply to
several persons or parties as well as to one person or party and to females
as well as males, and to bodies corporate as well as individuals, and to
several matters and things as well as one matter or thing.
§ 1-7. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Town Clerk of the Town of
Colchester upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Board of
Selectmen, which Board may also arrange by resolution for procedures for
the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-8. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances and administrative regulations
for publication as the Code of the Town of Colchester, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such ordinances or administrative regulations have
been made, except as have been made by formal amendment thereto.
Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances and administrative
regulations. It is the intention of the Town Meeting that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances and administrative
regulations had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Changes made throughout the Code.
(1) Statutory references. Statutory references throughout the Code have
been updated to refer consistently to "C.G.S.§ _____."
(2) Nomenclature changes. Throughout the Code, the following
nomenclature changes have been made:
(a) "Police Commission" has been changed to "Board of Police
Commissioners."
(b) "Building Inspector" has been changed to "Building Official."
C. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-5 COLCHESTER CODE § 1-8
1:4
(Chapter and section number references are to the legislation as it has been
renumbered and appears in the Code.)
Chapter 4, Adult-Oriented Businesses (9-12-1996)
Section 4-8A(2) is amended to delete "or any rule or regulation adopted by
the Board of Selectmen pursuant to this ordinance."
Chapter 7, Alcoholic Beverages
Article II, Town Recreation Facility (7-8-1982)
7-2, the definition of "TOWN RECREATIONAL FACILITY" is amended to
add the words "and such other land which may be acquired from time to
time which has been set aside for recreational purposes."
Chapter 18, Boards, Committees and Commissions
Article III, Parks and Recreation Commission (4-17-1962, as amended)
An unnumbered paragraph in original Section 213.2 providing for the
amendment of the ordinance to change "Board" to "Commission" and
"Board of Recreation" to "Parks and Recreation Commission" is deleted.
Article VIII, Police Commission (7-25-1990)
A. Section 18-32 is amended to delete "of such department" after
"removal of police officers."
B. Section 18-33 is amended to delete "of such police department" from
the end of the section.
Chapter 27, Building Demolition
Article I, General Regulations (7-16-1992)
Section 27-3 is amended to add the following wording to the first sentence:
"other than for a building situated in a designated historic district or on
the National Register of Historic Places or nominated for such status or a
building at the address listed on Appendix I of the Lusignan Historical and
Architectural Survey."
Chapter 67, Food Establishments (4-16-1991)
A. Section 67-5 is amended to change the second sentence to add the
boldfaced wording: "The fees stated in § 67-3 shall cover (4)
quarterly inspections."
B. Section 67-6 is amended to change the reference to "Sec. 3 above" to
"Section 901.4" (now § 67-5).
Chapter 81, Library (8-4-1904)
Section 81-2 is amended to change "further the following public library bylaws
that the Town Treasurer" to "Following the public library bylaws, the
Town Treasurer."
Chapter 109, Roads (3-10-1987)
A. Section 109-10B(1)(f) is amended to insert a period after "street" and
capitalize "Paving" so that two sentences are created.
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
B. Section 109-10B(2) is amended by deleting "and the requirements of
this document."
Chapter 129, Taxation
Article III, Solar Energy Exemption (4-5-1978)
A. Section 129-5 is amended to change "October 1, 1991" to "October 1,
2006."
B. Section 129-6 is amended to add "active" before "solar heating or
cooling."
C. Section 129-8, the definition of "ACTIVE SOLAR ENERGY HEATING
OR COOLING SYSTEM" is amended to add "active" before "solar
energy heating or cooling."
§ 1-8 COLCHESTER CODE § 1-8
1:6
Chapter 4
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93.
§ 4-1. Findings and purpose.
The Town Meeting of the Town of Colchester, Connecticut, finds:
A. Adult-oriented business require supervision from the Town's public
safety and zoning enforcement agencies in order to protect and preserve
the health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such establishments, as
well as the health, safety and welfare of the Town's citizens.
B. This chapter is designed to protect retail trade, prevent crime, maintain
property values, preserve the quality of neighborhoods and residential
districts and address related concerns about littering, traffic and public
indecency.
C. Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and
towns in the United States indicate that:
(1) A large number of persons, primarily male, frequent adult-oriented
businesses, especially those which provide closed booths, cubicles,
studios and rooms for the private viewing of so-called adult motion
pictures and/or video tapes and/or live entertainment.
(2) Closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms within adult-oriented
businesses have been used by patrons, clients or customers of such
adult-oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in certain
sexual acts.
(3) Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent such
establishments in order to provide sex for hire to the patrons, clients
or customers of such establishments within such booths, cubicles,
studios and rooms.
(4) Doors, curtains, blinds and/or other closure installed in or on the
entrances and/or exits of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms
that are closed while such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms are
in use encourage patrons using such booths, cubicles, studios and
rooms to engage in sexual acts therein with prostitutes, thereby
prompting and encouraging prostitution and the commission of
sexual acts that cause blood, semen and urine to be deposited on
the floors and/or walls of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms,
which deposits could prove detrimental to the health and safety of
other persons who may come into contact with such deposits.
(5) Persons under the age of 18 may be attracted to adult-oriented
businesses and seek to enter or loiter about them without the
knowledge or permission of their parents and guardians.
(6) When adult-oriented businesses are in the immediate proximity to
other adult-oriented businesses, residential areas or other uses of
§ 1-8 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 4-1
4:7
public assembly, there can be a deleterious effect upon adjacent
areas. Special regulation of these adults uses is therefore necessary
to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the
blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood.
(7) The continued unregulated operation of adult-oriented businesses,
including, without limitation, those specifically cited in the definition
of "adult-oriented business" in § 4-2 hereof, is and would be
detrimental to the general welfare, health and safety of the citizens
of Colchester,
(8) The reasonable regulation and supervision of adult-oriented
businesses tends to discourage such sexual acts and prostitution,
and thereby promotes the health, safety and welfare of the patrons,
clients and customers of such establishments.
D. The Constitution and laws of the State of Connecticut grant to the Town
powers, especially police power, to enact reasonable legislation and
measures to regulate and supervise adult-oriented businesses in order
to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
E. It is not the intent of the Town Meeting, in enacting this chapter, to
deny any person rights to speech protected by the United States and/or
state constitutions, nor is it the intent of the Town Meeting to impose
any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented films, video tapes,
books and/or other materials. Further, by enacting this chapter, the Town
Meeting does not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to
obtain and/or view any sexually oriented materials protected by the
United States and/or state constitutions, nor does it intend to restrict or
deny any constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors
of such sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distribute or exhibit
such materials.
§ 4-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall
have the following meanings, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the
context:
ADULT AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Includes any amusement machine that
is regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its stock-in-trade in books, films, video cassettes, compact disks
or magazines and other periodicals that are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a
segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. This
definition shall not apply to any establishment in which such materials are
concealed so as not to permit the observation of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
§ 4-1 COLCHESTER CODE § 4-2
4:8
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition of any motion pictures,
videotapes, live performances, displays or dances of any type, which has,
as a significant or substantial portion of such performance, any actual
or simulated performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition and
viewing of specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building regularly
used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS — Includes, without limitation, adult
bookstore, adult motion-picture theater and commercial establishments
containing one or more adult amusement machines. In addition, "adultoriented
business" means any premises to which the public, patrons or
members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as
to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls separate
from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing adult
entertainment when such establishment is operated or maintained for
profit, direct or indirect.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Includes any machine which upon the payment
of a charge or upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, may
be operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score or whether or not electronically
operated.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who
work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an
adult-oriented business.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who provides entertainment within an adultoriented
business, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for
entertainment and whether or not entertainment is provided as an
employee or an independent contractor.
MINOR — A person under the age of 18 years.
OPERATOR — Any person, partnership or corporation operating,
conducting or maintaining an adult-oriented business.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) Human genitals and pubic region.
(2) Buttocks.
Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
(3)
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
§ 4-2 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 4-2
4:9
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
TOWN MEETING — The Town Meeting of the Town of Colchester,
Connecticut.
§ 4-3. Operating requirements.
A. Before operating an adult business in the Town of Colchester, the
operator shall receive approval of its application for a special use license
in accordance with § 4-4 hereof.
B. No operator or employee of an adult-oriented business shall allow or
permit any minor to enter into such establishment or to loiter upon the
grounds and parking lots of such establishment.
C. Every adult-oriented business doing business in the Town on and after
the effective date of this chapter shall be well lighted at all times and
be physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion
of the booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls, wherein adult entertainment is
provided, shall be clearly visible from the common areas of the premises.
Visibility into such booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls shall not be blocked
or obscured by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes or any other
obstruction whatsoever. After the effective date of this chapter, it shall
be unlawful to install enclosed booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls within
adult-oriented businesses for the purpose of viewing adult
entertainment.
D. On and after the effective date of this chapter, the operator of each adultoriented
business shall be responsible for and shall provide that any
room or other area used for the purpose of viewing adult entertainment
shall be well lighted and readily accessible at all times and shall be
continuously open to view in its entirety. The premises shall be equipped
with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every
place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not
less than 1.0 footcandle as measured at the floor level. It shall be
the duty of the operator and its agents to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on
the premises.
E. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs, either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and shall be
deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining
whether the operator's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
F. The operator shall conform in all respects with Section 11-17 of the
Zoning Regulations of the Town.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts.
C.
§ 4-2 COLCHESTER CODE § 4-3
4:10
G. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit any use preexisting the
enactment of this chapter.
§ 4-4. Application for license.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to secure a license shall
make application to the Town Clerk. Seven copies of the application shall
be filed with, and dated by, the Town Clerk. Copies of the application
shall be distributed promptly by the Town Clerk to the Colchester Police
Department, the Board of Selectmen, the Building Official, the Director
of Health, the Zoning Enforcement Officer and the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
B. The Town Clerk shall grant the application if all the standards for
application in § 4-5 are satisfied and upon written certification from the
First Selectman, Colchester Police Department, the Building Official, the
Director of Health, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Zoning
Enforcement Officer that all applicable requirements have been met.
C. The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the
Town Clerk. The applicant for a license, which shall include all general
partners of a partnership adult-oriented business, all officers and
directors of a corporate adult-oriented business, all managers of an
adult-oriented business and any other person involved in the
management of an adult-oriented business, shall furnish the following
information:
(1) Name and address.
(2) Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
(3) Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other
county, Town, city or state under an adult-oriented business license
or similar business license, whether the applicant has ever had such
a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the business
entity or trade name under which the applicant operated that was
subject to the suspension or revocation.
(4) Whether the applicant has been convicted, forfeited a bond or pled
nolo contenderes to any crime involving moral turpitude,
prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any
jurisdiction within five years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
(5) The address of the adult-oriented business to be operated by the
applicant and the exact nature of the use to be conducted in the
adult-oriented business.
(6) If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall specify the name
of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the name
and address of the registered agent and the name and address of all
officers and directors of the corporation.
D. Within 75 days of receiving an application for a license, the Town Clerk
shall notify the applicant whether the application is granted or denied.
E. Whenever an application is denied, the Town Clerk shall advise the
applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. If the applicant
requests a hearing within 10 days of receipt of notification of denial, a
public hearing shall be held within 30 days thereafter before the Board
§ 4-3 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 4-4
4:11
of Selectmen, as hereinafter provided. The Board of Selectmen must
render a decision within 45 days of receipt of the notice of appeal.
F. Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the
investigation of the application, or the applicant's refusal or failure to
appear at any reasonable time and place for examination regarding said
application, or the applicant's refusal to submit to or cooperate with any
investigation required by this chapter shall constitute an admission by
the applicant that the applicant is ineligible for such license and shall be
grounds for denial thereof by the Town Clerk.
§ 4-5. Standards for issuance of license.
A. The Town Clerk shall grant an application if all of the following
requirements have been met:
(1) The applicant shall submit a completed application in conformance
in all respects with § 4-4 hereof, and pay the fee required by § 4-6
hereof.
(2) The applicant shall conform in all respects to the provisions of this
chapter.
(3) The applicant shall not make a material misrepresentation of fact in
the application.
(4) Neither the applicant if an individual, nor the manager, officer,
director, if a corporation, nor a general partner if a partnership, nor
any other person interested directly in the operation of the proposed
business has been convicted of, pled nolo contenderes or guilty to
any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other
crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within five years. The
fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on this
provision.
(5) The applicant has not had a license similar to the one issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter issued by another local
authority suspended or revoked for cause within the five-year period
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application.
(6) The proposed business complies with all applicable sections of the
Zoning Regulations of the Town.
(7) The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age.
B. No license shall be issued unless the Colchester Police Department has
investigated the applicant's qualifications to be licensed. The result of
that investigation shall be filed in writing with the Town Clerk no later
than 60 days after the date of the application.
§ 4-6. Fees.
A license fee of $250 shall be submitted with the completed application for
a license. If the application is denied, 1/2 of the fee shall be returned.
§ 4-7. Renewal of license.
A. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate at the
expiration of one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked,
and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following year.
§ 4-4 COLCHESTER CODE § 4-7
4:12
Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to the
Town Clerk. The application of renewal must be filed not later than
60 days before the license expires. The application for renewal shall
be filed in triplicate with and dated by the Town Clerk. A copy of the
application for renewal shall be distributed promptly by the Town Clerk
to the Colchester Police Department and to the operator. The application
of renewal shall be upon a form provided by the Town Clerk and shall
contain such information and data as is required for an application for a
new license.
B. A license renewal fee of $250 shall be submitted with the application for
renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty of $100 shall be
assessed against the operator who files for a renewal less than 60 days
before the license expires. If the application is denied, 1/2 of the total
fees collected shall be returned.
C. No license shall be renewed unless the Colchester Police Department
conducts an investigation and determines that the applicant continues
to meet all the standards for issuing a license as designated in § 4-5 of
this chapter. The result of that investigation shall be filed in writing with
the Town Clerk no later than 60 days after the date of the application for
renewal.
§ 4-8. Revocation of license.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall revoke a license or permit for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on
any application or material facts were omitted from any application.
(2) The operator or any employee of the operator violates any provision
of this chapter; provided, however, that in the case of a first offense
by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee,
the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 days if the Board
of Selectmen shall finds the operator had no actual or constructive
knowledge of such violation and could not, by the exercise of due
diligence, have had such actual or constructive knowledge.1
(3) The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license or permit.
(4) Any cost or fee required to be paid by this chapter is not paid.
(5) Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is served or
consumed on the premises of the adult-oriented business.
B. The Board of Selectmen, before revoking or suspending any license or
permit, shall give the operator at least 10 days written notice of the
charges and the opportunity for a public hearing before the Board of
Selectmen within 30 days after receipt of the notice.
C. A license shall be personal to the applicant and may not be transferred.
D. Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a
license for one year from the date of revocation. No location or premises
for which a license has been issued shall be used as an adult-oriented
business for six months from the date of revocation of the license.
1. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 4-7 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 4-8
4:13
E. The Board of Selectmen shall give notice to the Town Clerk of any
revocations or suspensions.
Chapter 6
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rapid access systems — See Ch. 103.
§ 6-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xiv), the Town adopts the following
alarm systems ordinance.
§ 6-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the installation, maintenance
and operation of alarm systems, devices and equipment in businesses and
residences within the Town of Colchester.
§ 6-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR — The First Selectman or his or her designee appointed
to administer the provisions of this chapter.
ALARM OWNER — Any person, company, corporation or other entity that is
the owner, operator or user of an alarm system.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device or equipment which is capable of
automatically calling and relaying recorded emergency messages to any
state police or municipal police or fire/EMS department telephone number
or which is capable of automatically calling and relaying recorded
emergency messages or other forms of emergency signals to an
intermediate third party which shall thereafter call and relay such
emergency messages to a state police or municipal police or fire/EMS
department telephone number.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm signal which causes an emergency response to
the location of the alarm which is caused by mistake, misuse or malfunction;
or unintentional activation caused by flaw or defect in design, installation,
maintenance or equipment of the alarm system.
§ 4-8 COLCHESTER CODE § 6-4
4:14
§ 6-4. Maintenance.
An alarm owner shall be responsible for maintaining and keeping in good
working order at all times each alarm system on the premises owned or
occupied by the alarm owner in order to minimize false alarms.
§ 6-5. Registration.
A. To operate an alarm system within the Town of Colchester, an alarm
owner must complete a registration form provided by the administrator.
The registration form shall include information concerning the alarm
system, its location and any other necessary information as determined
by the administrator. All alarm systems within the Town shall be
registered with the administrator within 90 days of the effective date of
this chapter.
B. It shall be the responsibility of an alarm owner to notify the
administrator, in writing, within 10 days of changes in registration
information.
§ 6-6. Penalties for offenses.
A. In the event there are three false alarms at the same location within the
same calendar year, a written warning shall be issued to the alarm owner
upon the occurrence of the third false alarm. The warning shall notify
the alarm owner that any further false alarms occurring within the same
calendar year shall lead to the following penalties:
(1) A fine of $25 shall be imposed on the alarm owner upon the
occurrence of the fourth false alarm within a calendar year.
(2) A fine of $50 shall be imposed on the alarm owner upon the
occurrence of all subsequent false alarms after the fourth false alarm
within a calendar year.
B. A fine of $50 shall be imposed on any alarm owner for failure to register
an alarm system with the administrator.
C. A fine of $50 shall be imposed on any alarm owner for failure to provide
notification of any changes in registration to the administrator.
D. All fines for violations of this chapter shall be payable to the Town of
Colchester and deposited into the Town's general fund.
E. All fines imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to appeal in
accordance with Chapter 93 of the Code of the Town of Colchester.
Chapter 7
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sale of liquor in adult-oriented
businesses — See Ch. 4.
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93.
§ 6-4 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 6-6
4:15

ARTICLE I
Hours of Sale
[Adopted 12-3-1935]
§ 7-1. Sale on Sunday permitted. [Amended 10-18-2012]
The sale of alcoholic liquor shall be permitted in the Town of Colchester on
Sundays in accordance with state statutes.
§ 7-1 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 7-1
4:17

ARTICLE II
Town Recreation Facility
[Adopted 7-8-1982]
§ 7-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Includes all types of liquor, liqueurs, beer, ale
and wine.
TOWN RECREATIONAL FACILITY — All that area owned by the Town of
Colchester on the southwesterly side of Old Hebron Road and such other
land which may be acquired from time to time which has been set aside for
recreational purposes.[Amended 4-12-2001]
§ 7-3. Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages
prohibited.
No person shall, while within the confines of the Town recreational area,
consume or have in their possession any alcoholic beverages.
§ 7-4. Suspension of prohibition for special events.
The Recreational Commission of the Town of Colchester may by a formal
written resolution of the Commission suspend the prohibition of this article
for such special event as it may deem appropriate and proper.
§ 7-5. Penalties for offenses.
Violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $99.
§ 7-2 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 7-5
4:19
Chapter 10
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93. Use of animals by peddlers — See Ch. 98,
§ 98-2.
§ 7-5 COLCHESTER CODE § 7-5
4:20
ARTICLE I
Dogs at Large
[Adopted 7-27-1981]
§ 10-1. Leashing required. [Amended 10-15-2009]
The owner or keeper of any dog shall be required to keep such dog on
a leash or lead while within the confines of public streets, sidewalks,
highways, parks and other public places and grounds within the Town of
Colchester, except within the fenced enclosure of the Town of Colchester's
designated dog park(s).
§ 10-2. Impoundment and disposition.
Dogs found roaming at large, in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the provisions of C.G.S.§ 22-332 relating to impounding
and disposition.
§ 10-3. Penalties for offenses.
In addition, any owner or keeper who allows his or her dog to roam at large,
in violation of this article, shall forfeit and pay for the use of the Town of
Colchester a fine of $25 to be recovered by an action of this article brought
in the name of the Treasurer of the Town.
§ 10-1 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 10-3
4:21
Chapter 11
ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATION
§ 11-1. Payment of financial obligations.
The Town of Colchester, pursuant to authority set forth in C.G.S.§ 7-148,
shall pay the remaining outstanding financial obligations of the 275th
Anniversary Celebration of the Town of Colchester; provided, however, that
no more than the sum of $3,600 shall be expended pursuant to this chapter.
Chapter 14
BAZAARS AND RAFFLES
Chapter 16
BLIGHTED PREMISES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 24.
Building demolition — See Ch. 27.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 30.
§ 16-1. Declaration; purpose; statutory authority.
A. It is declared that the presence of blighted properties adversely affects
the quality of life of the residents and the economic well-being of the
Town of Colchester.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to define, prohibit, and abate blights; to
protect, preserve, and promote public health, safety and welfare; and to
preserve and protect property values within the Town of Colchester.
C. This chapter is adopted pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
§ 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv) and is deemed to be a Blight Ordinance.
§ 16-2. Scope.
A. This chapter shall apply uniformly to the maintenance of all residential,
nonresidential, commercial/industrial, and undeveloped premises now in
existence or hereafter constructed, maintained, modified or abandoned/
vacated. The following shall be excluded: agricultural lands as defined in
Section 22-3(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes; land dedicated as
public or semipublic open space or preserved in its natural state through
conservation easements; and areas designated on Town of Colchester
maps as inland wetlands and watercourses.
B. No owner of real property located in the Town of Colchester shall allow,
create, maintain, or cause to be created or maintained a blighted
property as detailed in § 16-3 of this chapter. This chapter recognizes all
§ 10-3 COLCHESTER CODE § 16-2
11:22
applicable State of Connecticut statutes and Town of Colchester codes,
such as building codes, zoning codes, fire codes and health codes.
§ 16-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLIGHT ENFORCEMENT COMMITTEE — A multidisciplined committee
designated to enforce the provisions of this chapter. It shall be comprised of
the Town's Building Official, Zoning Enforcement Official, Director of Health
or any designee of the aforementioned and any other Town of Colchester
employee designated by the Board of Selectmen.
BLIGHTED PREMISES — Any building, structure or parcel of land,
including without limitation, single-family or multifamily residential,
industrial or commercial, whether occupied or vacant in which at least one
of the following conditions exists:
It is deemed an unsafe structure or designated as unfit for human
habitation by the Building Official;
A.
It is a fire hazard as determined by the Fire Marshal or as documented
by a Fire Department Officer;
B.
It is determined by the Director of Health or designee that the condition
of the building, structure or parcel of land poses a serious or immediate
danger to the safety, health or general welfare of the community;
C.
It is not being adequately maintained and is visible from either the
street or from an adjacent property. The following factors shall be
considered in determining whether a premises is not being adequately
maintained:
(1) Multiple missing, broken or boarded windows or doors.
Collapsing, seriously damaged, or missing walls, roof, siding or
other exterior features including but not necessarily limited to
stairs, porches, railings, hatchways, chimneys or floors.
(2)
(3) Persistent accumulation of garbage or trash on the premises.
Chronically neglected and/or inoperable motor vehicles, camper
trailers, or boats being stored on the premises, unless garaged, for
a period of time in excess of 60 days; or two or more unregistered
motor vehicles in the public view, pursuant to Section 14-150a of
the Connecticut General Statutes.
(4)
Outside storage, for a period of time in excess of 60 days, of
material or equipment which is incapable of performing the
function for which it is designed, including, but not limited to, parts
of automobiles, furniture, appliances, cans, boxes, scrap metal,
tires, batteries, or containers.
(5)
D.
§ 16-2 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 16-3
14:23
BUILDING OFFICIAL — An individual who administers the State Building
Code and any applicable ordinances of the Town.
CITATION HEARING OFFICER — An individual appointed by the Board of
Selectmen to conduct official hearings authorized by this chapter, who may
not be a police officer or a Town employee or person who issues citations on
behalf of the Town.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH or HEALTH DISTRICT DESIGNEE — An individual
who administers state health regulations applicable to this chapter.
DESIGNATED BLIGHT ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — The individual who
the Blight Enforcement Committee designates to investigate and to act
upon the complaint.
ISSUANCE OF CITATION — The notification that fines and the penalties are
being assessed against the owner of the premises for the violation of this
chapter.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET — To permit, provide or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant
to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION — The initial notification in writing of a violation to
the owner of the premises.
OCCUPANCY — The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records
of the state or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person
if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PREMISES — A lot or parcel and all buildings, structures, or uses located
thereon.
(6) Rodent harborage and/or infestation.
Dead, decayed, diseased or damaged trees constituting a hazard or
danger to adjacent premises or the occupants thereof or to public
property or persons lawfully therein.
(7)
Chronically overgrown grass, weeds, or similar vegetation that is
allowed to reach and remain at a height of 12 inches or greater;
cultivated gardens and areas maintained in their naturally wooded,
field, or shoreline state are specifically excluded from the height
requirement so stated.
(8)
(9) Commercial parking areas left in a state of disrepair or abandoned.
§ 16-3 COLCHESTER CODE § 16-3
14:24
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — An individual who oversees and
enforces the Town's Land Development Regulations\, otherwise known as
"zoning regulations."
§ 16-4. Construal of provisions; conflicting provisions; prior
provisions.
A. The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other statutes, codes, ordinances or regulations which
prescribe standards other than those that are provided in this chapter.
B. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance,
regulation or other code of the Town or state, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health, safety and property values of the residents of the Town shall
prevail.
C. This chapter shall not affect violation of any other ordinances, code or
regulation existing prior to the effective date of this chapter, and any
such violations may be governed and continue to be punishable under
the provisions of those ordinances, codes, or regulations in effect at the
time the violation occurred.
§ 16-5. Responsibility for compliance.
The premises under control of the owner, including the agents thereof, are
subject to this chapter, and shall be jointly and severally obligated to comply
with the provisions of this chapter. Whenever the person, as herein defined,
is a corporation or other legal entity, the officers thereof shall be jointly and
severally responsible with the corporation or other legal entity.
§ 16-6. Report of complaint.
Complaints by residents of the Town of Colchester shall be submitted to
the First Selectman or his/her designee. The First Selectman or a designee
shall forward the complaint to the Blight Enforcement Committee who shall
assign an appropriate designated enforcement official.
§ 16-7. Notice of violation.
A. Whenever the Blight Enforcement Committee or designated
enforcement official determines that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter, except as to § 16-3, the definition of "blighted
premises," Subsection D(4) pertaining to unregistered motor vehicles,
the designated blight enforcement official shall give notice of the
violation to the owner of the premises responsible therefor, as
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Set forth the violation(s) of this chapter.
(3) Specify a final date which will be at least 30 days and not exceed 60
days for the correction of any violation.
(4) Be served upon the owner or owner's agent; provided that such
notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner
§ 16-3 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 16-7
14:25
or agent, or upon such occupant, as by any method authorized or
required under the laws of this state.
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will result in
the permanent compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(6) State the penalties and enforcement provisions of this chapter that
will become effective on the final date set for the correction of any
violation.
(7) Inform the owner of the opportunity for a preliminary meeting as set
forth in § 16-8.
B. Whenever the designated blight enforcement official determines that
there has been a violation of § 16-3, the definition of "blighted premises,"
Subsection D(4), the enforcement official shall give notice of such
violation to the person responsible. The notice shall be in compliance
with above Subsection A and any applicable Town of Colchester Land
Development Regulations specific to camper units or recreational
vehicles and junk vehicles as well as include the following:
(1) The notice shall specify that the owner has 30 days to correct the
violation by removing the vehicle or registering it;
(2) The person notified in accordance with this section who fails to
correct any violation by the date specified in said notice shall be in
violation of this chapter and subject to its penalties and enforcement
procedures.
§ 16-8. Preliminary meeting.
A. Within 10 days of receiving a notice of violation in accordance with
§ 16-7, the owner of the premises may request a preliminary meeting to
discuss the notice of violation with the designated blight enforcement
official who issued the notice of violation or the Blight Enforcement
Committee. The preliminary meeting shall be held within 10 days
following the receipt of a written request by the property owner for such
a preliminary meeting.
B. At the preliminary meeting, a proposed remedial action plan to fully
correct any violation(s) of this chapter shall be discussed and agreed
upon in writing with the owner.
C. The purpose of the preliminary meeting is to develop a voluntary
remedial action plan in lieu of the formal enforcement citation and
penalties as set forth in this chapter. Any voluntary remedial action plan
will be subject to the requirements, time limits and other factors as
stated in this chapter.
D. Nothing contained in this § 16-8 shall be construed as limiting the Town
of Colchester's rights and remedies under this chapter, and the Town
reserves the right to proceed at any time with the enforcement of
penalties against the owner(s) who does not comply with the proposed
voluntary remedial action plan.
§ 16-9. Issuance of citation.
A. The designated blight enforcement official is authorized to issue a
citation if a violation remains unabated after the final correction date as
§ 16-7 COLCHESTER CODE § 16-9
14:26
set forth in the notice of violation or in the preliminary meeting voluntary
remedial action plan. The citation shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) State the address of the affected property.
(3) Identify the nature (description) of the violation and the remedial
action that is required to be in compliance.
(4) State the penalty amounts and enforcement actions of a lien as
outlined in § 16-10 for the continued violation of this chapter.
(5) Specify a final date of at least 30 days, but not to exceed 60 days, for
correction of the violation.
(6) State the right to appeal the citation.
B. The citation must be mailed by either certified mail, with a return receipt
requested, or by electronic mail with a read-receipt sent to the owner
or owner's agent of the property. This notice must also meet the same
standards as the notices to remedy a health, housing, or a safety code
violation.
§ 16-10. Appeals; citation hearing.
A. Within 10 days of receipt of a written citation, the owner may request
an appeal of the blight violation and penalties by filing a written request
with the First Selectman's Office.
B. Appeals of any action by the Blight Enforcement Committee or any
member of the Committee or any other Town employee or Townappointed
designee shall be heard by a citation hearing officer appointed
by the Board of Selectmen. The Connecticut Uniform Administrative
Procedures Act shall guide the hearing officer. Connecticut General
Statutes Section 7-152c establishes the appeal and citation hearing
process for all appeals under this chapter.
C. The designated blight enforcement official shall attend the hearing.
§ 16-11. Penalties for offenses; fines; lien.
A. Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense,
and for each day that any violation continues beyond the final correction
date set in the notice of violation, or voluntary remedial action plan,
it shall constitute a separate offense. Each separate offense under this
chapter shall have a penalty or fine of $50 per day for the first 30 days
of the citation. The fee will increase to an amount of $100 per day for
continuation of the violation and any unpaid fine after 31 days.
B. The designated enforcement official or the citation hearing officer is not
permitted to waive any assessed fines.
C. Penalties or fines may include the recovery of all costs associated with
the violation incurred by the Town of Colchester, including attorney's
fees and/or remediation costs.
D. Payment of the assessed fine, penalty or the issuance of a lien will
not remove the property owner from the responsibility to correct the
blighted condition(s).
E. Any fines or penalties unpaid after 60 days may constitute the placing
of a lien upon the real estate in accordance with Connecticut General
Statute Section 7-148aa. Such lien shall be continued, recorded and
§ 16-9 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 16-11
14:27
released as provided in the aforementioned Connecticut General
Statutes.
F. All fines are to be made payable to the Town of Colchester at the Town
Clerk's office. A dated receipt will be required as a proof of the payment.
Proof of the correction of the blighted premises will require a site visit
by the designated Town official who issued the notice of violation and
citation. A written statement confirming that the blighted conditions
were corrected will be submitted by the designated Town official to the
First Selectman's office for final approval.
Chapter 18
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 39. Board of Education — See Ch. 46.
§ 16-11 COLCHESTER CODE § 16-11
14:28
ARTICLE I
Zoning and Planning Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals
[Adopted 12-12-1957; amended 2-13-1958; 2-15-1959; 11-30-1966]
§ 18-1. Adoption of statute.
The provisions of Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut, as amended, are hereby adopted.
§ 18-2. Powers and duties of Zoning and Planning Commission.
There shall be a Zoning and Planning Commission of the Town of Colchester,
which shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by Chapters 124 and
126 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be hereafter
amended.2
§ 18-3. Membership; terms. [Amended 5-6-2003]
A. The Commission shall consist of seven members and two alternate
members, all of whom shall be electors of the Town of Colchester, and,
except as herein provided, the term of each member shall be for a
period of three years from the date upon which such member takes
office. All terms of office shall begin in December following a member's
appointment to the Commission.
B. Any vacancy occurring prior to expiration of a Commission member's
term shall be filled by appointment of the Board of Selectmen. Each
appointee is to serve out the term of the member he or she has replaced.
C. Alternate members shall attend all meetings and shall take the place of a
regular member when a regular member is absent from a meeting. Initial
appointments of alternate members shall be: one through December
2004 and one through December 2005. When taking the place of an
absent regular member, such alternate member shall be counted toward
a quorum and shall have all the voting rights of the absent member. The
Chairperson shall rotate alternates to serve in this capacity, as needed.
§ 18-4. Zoning Board of Appeals established; membership; terms.
There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Colchester,
consisting of five members, who shall be electors of the Town of Colchester
and who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for terms of five
years from the date of their appointment, one of the original members to
serve for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years
and one for five years, subject to the provisions of C.G.S. § 8-5.
2. Editor's Note: The Zoning and Planning Commission was designated as the Town Aquifer
Protection Agency 1-20-2005. See Art. XI of this chapter.
§ 18-1 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-4
14:29

ARTICLE II
Economic Development Commission
[Adopted 8-17-1960; amended 3-4-1969, 4-19-1977; 3-22-1982]
§ 18-5. Establishment.
An Economic Development Commission is established for the promotion of
the business and industrial resources of the Town of Colchester.3
§ 18-6. Membership; appointment. [Amended 10-16-2014]
The Economic Development Commission shall consist of seven members
and two alternates who shall be electors of the Town, to be appointed by the
Board of Selectmen.
§ 18-7. Terms.
The original members shall hold office for terms of one, two, three, four and
five years, respectively. Thereafter, each appointed member shall hold office
for a period of five years.
§ 18-8. Adoption of statute.
The provisions of C.G.S. § 7-136 are hereby adopted.
3. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Article IV of this chapter, the Economic Development
Commission was designated as the Development Agency for the town pursuant to C.G.S.
§ 8-188, and was vested with all of the powers referred to in said statute.
§ 18-5 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-8
14:31

ARTICLE III
Parks and Recreation Commission
[Adopted 4-17-1962; amended 5-15-1972; 3-30-1982; 3-28-1996]
§ 18-9. Creation; membership.
A. There is created in the Town of Colchester a Parks and Recreation
Commission which shall consist of eight members and two alternates
appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
B. Members shall serve for terms of four years. Members first appointed
shall serve as follows. Alternates shall serve for terms of three years.
[Amended 3-2-1998]
(1) Two members for terms of one year.
(2) Two members for terms of two years.
(3) Two members for terms of three years.
(4) Two members for terms of four years.
(5) Two alternates for terms of three years.
C. Thereafter, members shall be appointed annually to serve for four years.
In the event of any vacancy, the Board of Selectmen shall fill the vacancy
for the unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Board of
Selectmen and the Superintendent of Schools shall be ex-officio
members of the Commission.
D. Terms of present Board. The terms of all of the present Board members
shall expire on the first Wednesday after the first Monday of November
1972.
E. Initial appointments. The Board of Selectmen at some time prior to the
first Wednesday after the first Monday of November 1972 shall appoint
the members of said Commission.
§ 18-10. Powers and duties. [Amended 6-1-2017]
A. The Parks and Recreation Commission:
(1) Shall have the power to equip, operate, supervise and maintain
parks, playgrounds, gymnasiums, public baths, swimming pools or
recreation centers on or in a public ground or building in said town
which the Board of Selectmen may, from time to time, provide,
acquire, authorize, offer, designate or set apart for such use and,
with the consent of the Board of Education, to establish and carry on
playgrounds and recreation activities on the school grounds and in
the school building of said town.
(2) May take charge of and use any grounds, places, buildings or
facilities which may be offered either temporarily or permanently by
individuals or corporations for playground or recreational purposes.
(3) May receive, on behalf of the Town, donations and gifts from
individuals, corporations or others for the equipment, improvements,
maintenance or supervision of those facilities as described in
Subsection A above.
(4) May establish and provide for the collection of fees for the use of
those facilities as described in Subsection A above, as authorized and
approved by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 18-9 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-10
14:33
B. Any funds that may be received as described in Subsection A(3) or (4)
above shall be deposited in bank accounts maintained by the Town, and
recorded and accounted for in separate and distinct accounts within the
Capital Fund of the Town. Such funds may not be used to support the
annual operating budget of the Town.4
§ 18-11. Payment of expenses incurred for equipment and
improvements. [Amended 6-1-2017]
The expenses incurred for equipment and improvements of such facilities
as described in § 18-10A(1) shall be payable from users' fees, private gifts
or from such appropriations as may be made by the proper municipal
authority from the current funds of the Town of Colchester. The funds so
received or appropriated shall be recorded and accounted for in separate
and distinct accounts within the Capital Fund of the Town to be expended
for the purposes herein enumerated.
§ 18-12. Commissioner qualifications and duties; compensation;
meetings; quorum; removal from office.
A. Terms shall commence on the date of appointment.
B. All Commission members shall be resident electors of Colchester at
the time of appointment. The establishment of residence outside of
Colchester automatically terminates said appointment.
C. All Commission members shall serve without compensation, unless
otherwise provided herein.
D. All Commission members shall serve full terms or until their successors
shall have been appointed and qualified.
E. The Commission shall meet at least once a month.
F. A majority of Commission members shall constitute a quorum; however,
no business may be transacted unless a majority of the entire
membership approves.
G. Any Commission members may be removed only for malfeasance in
office, neglect of duty, incompetency or other just cause, but shall not
be removed upon any charge preferred against the member without due
notice and hearing by the Board of Selectmen. When any such charge
shall have been preferred, the Commission members complained of shall
have a right to be heard, with witnesses and by counsel, and such
hearing may be adjourned from time to time as said Board of Selectmen
may direct.
H. Unless otherwise stated herein, the Commission shall elect its presiding
officers.
I. Special meetings of the Commission may be called by its presiding
officer at any time upon reasonable notice to the members and shall be
called at any time upon written request of a majority of the members of
said Commission.
4. Editor's Note: An unnumbered paragraph providing for the amendment of the ordinance
to change "Board" to "Commission" and "Board of Recreation" to "Parks and Recreation
Commission," which immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-12-2001.
§ 18-10 COLCHESTER CODE § 18-12
14:34
J. The duties of each Commission member shall be those prescribed by
charter, ordinance and statute.
§ 18-12 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-12
14:35

ARTICLE IV
Development Agency5
[Adopted 3-4-1969; amended 4-19-1977; 11-22-1982]
§ 18-13. Designation of Agency.
The Economic Development Commission which was created Article II of this
chapter is hereby designated as the Development Agency for the Town of
Colchester, pursuant to C.G.S. § 8-188, in that said Agency is invested with
authority to exercise all of the powers referred to in said statute.
§ 18-14. Change of name; increase in membership.
Said Commission's name shall be changed to the Economic Development
Commission of the Town of Colchester, and said Commission shall continue
to serve as the Municipal Economic Development Commission of the Town
of Colchester under the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-136. The number of
members shall be increased from five members to nine.
5. Editor's Note: See Art. II, Economic Development Commission, of this chapter.
§ 18-13 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-14
14:37

ARTICLE V
Commission on Aging
[Adopted 8-18-1977; amended 6-30-1994]
§ 18-15. Organization.
A. There shall be a Commission on Aging in the Town of Colchester,
consisting of seven members and two alternate members, which shall be
called the "Colchester Commission on Aging." [Amended 6-16-2005]
B. Members and alternate members shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen and shall be chosen from the electors of the Town of
Colchester. All members so appointed shall be persons interested in
and committed to the consideration and solution of the problems of the
elderly and aging. [Amended 12-18-2003; 6-16-2005; 10-16-2014]
C. (Reserved)6
D. (Reserved)7
E. A Chairperson shall be elected by the members of the Commission from
among the members.
F. Alternate members shall attend all meetings and shall take the place of a
regular member when a regular member is absent from a meeting. When
taking the place of an absent regular member, such alternate member
shall be counted toward a quorum and shall have all the voting rights of
the absent member. The Chairperson shall rotate alternates to serve in
this capacity as needed.
G. The First Selectman and the Board of Selectmen's liaison shall be
nonvoting ex-officio members. [Amended 10-16-2014]
§ 18-16. Membership and terms of appointment; compensation.
[Amended 10-16-2014]
In December for each year the Board of Selectmen shall appoint members
and alternate members to replace those whose terms are then expiring.
All members and alternate members shall be appointed to hold office for a
period of three years.
§ 18-17. Purpose.
The purpose of the Commission shall be to review and analyze the needs
and conditions of the elderly and aging in relation to housing, nutrition,
employment, economic welfare, health, recreation, social services,
transportation and other matters and problems of concern to the elderly.
The Commission shall also plan, coordinate, develop and implement
programs to meet the needs and to improve the conditions of the elderly
and aging within the Town of Colchester and shall provide coordination
and linkage of such plans and programs among existing services. The
6. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, regarding alternate members 60 years of age or older,
as amended, was repealed 10-16-2014 at Special Town Meeting.
7. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, regarding all appointed members being persons
committed to solving the problems of aging, was repealed 10-16-2014 at Special Town
Meeting.
§ 18-15 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-17
14:39
Commission shall act as an advocate for the elderly and aging and shall
make recommendations from time to time to the Board of Selectmen and at
the Annual Town Meeting regarding services for elderly and aging persons.
§ 18-18. Duties. [Amended 10-16-2014]
The Commission shall initiate, plan and coordinate services and programs
for the elderly and aging within the Town of Colchester in accordance with
its purpose. The Commission may seek and review funding for programs
for the elderly and aging. The Commission shall assist in interpreting and
developing policies and guidelines for services and programs for the elderly
and aging. The Commission shall generally meet at least once every month
on a date which shall be determined by the members and shall call special
meetings from time to time as necessary. The Commission shall be
authorized to establish and promulgate bylaws to enable it to function in
fulfilling its duties. It is not intended that the Commission shall operate
Senior Center programs, but may operate programs or events that support
the greater Colchester elderly and aging population.
§ 18-19. (Reserved)8
§ 18-20. Budget. [Amended 10-16-2014]
The Commission shall prepare an annual budget in support of the
Commission on Aging programs. Said budget shall be submitted to the
Board of Selectmen to be included in the next fiscal year budget for
submission to the Board of Finance and the Annual Town Meeting by
December 1 of each year.
8. Editor's Note: Former § 18-19, Staffing for Commission, was repealed 12-18-2003 at
Special Town Meeting.
§ 18-17 COLCHESTER CODE § 18-20
14:40
ARTICLE VI
Flood and Erosion Control Board
[Adopted 6-9-1982]
§ 18-21. Adoption of statute.
Pursuant to C.G.S. §§ 25-84 through 25-94, inclusive, concerning the
establishment of a flood or erosion control system are hereby adopted.
§ 18-22. Power of Board of Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Colchester shall be empowered to
act as a Flood and Erosion Control Board for purposes of carrying out the
statutory provisions relating to flood or erosion control.
§ 18-21 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-22
14:41

ARTICLE VII
Fair Rent Commission
[Adopted 10-12-1989]
§ 18-23. Establishment; powers.
There is herewith established the Colchester Fair Rent Commission
("Commission") that shall have all powers as enumerated in C.G.S.
§§ 7-148b, 7-148c, 7-148d, 7-148e and 7-148f, as now existing and as
hereinafter amended.
§ 18-24. Membership; terms; vacancies; appointment by Board of
Selectmen. [Amended 5-6-2003]
The Commission shall consist of five members and two alternates, who
shall be electors of the Town of Colchester, all of whom shall be initially
appointed by the Board of Selectmen; three members shall serve until April
2004; two members shall serve until April 2005; and two alternates shall
serve until April 2005. Thereafter, the terms shall be for two years, and all
appointments, including the filling of vacancies, shall be made by the Board
of Selectmen.
§ 18-25. Notice of hearing on rental charges.
The Commission shall give written notice to the owner, the landlord and the
petitioner, at least seven days prior to the hearing date, of any proceeding
wherein the Commission will seek to determine whether a rental charge or
a proposed increase in a rental charge is excessive. The failure to give such
notice shall render any action of the Commission void ab initio.
§ 18-26. Decision; notice.
The Commission shall render its decision within 14 days following the
closing of a hearing, and all parties to the hearing shall receive written
notice of the decision, such decision shall be effective as of the date the
Commission voted on the same.
§ 18-23 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-26
14:43

ARTICLE VIII
Board of Police Commissioners
[Adopted 7-25-1990]
§ 18-27. Policy Advisory Commission repealed.
The provisions of the ordinance adopted at a Special Town Meeting on
August 9, 1985, respecting the creation of a Police Advisory Commission for
the Town of Colchester are herewith repealed.
§ 18-28. Establishment.
Pursuant to the authority granted in C.G.S. § 7-274, a Board of Police
Commissioners for the Town of Colchester is herewith established.
§ 18-29. Membership; terms.
The Commission shall consist of five members who shall be electors of
the town and shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for terms of
three years; provided, however, that two of the original appointees shall
be appointed to a term of two years, and the remaining appointee shall be
appointed to a term of three years.
§ 18-30. Authority and responsibility.
A. The Commission shall have the authority and responsibility for the
general supervision and management of the Constables and police
officers of the Town of Colchester and the property and equipment used
in connection therewith.
B. As used herein, the term "Constables" shall mean all Constables serving
the Town of Colchester in any capacity, whether appointed pursuant to
town ordinance as authorized by C.G.S. §§ 9-185 and 9-200 or pursuant
to C.G.S. § 7-92 providing for the appointment of Special Constables. The
term "police officer" shall mean all full-time town employees hired by the
Town of Colchester to serve in the capacity of a police officer.
§ 18-31. Liaison officer to Division of State Police.
During the period of time the Town of Colchester is obligated to contractual
agreements for the services of a Resident Trooper with the Connecticut
Department of Public Safety, Division of State Police, a member of the
Commission, being duly elected by the majority of the Commission, and
appointed by the Board of Selectmen, will serve as a liaison officer for
the Town of Colchester (this Commission and Board of Selectmen), to the
Department of Public Safety, Division of State Police, for all responsibilities
relative to the contractual agreement references to the Chief Executive
Officer of the Town of Colchester.
§ 18-27 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-32
14:45
§ 18-32. Power of appointment, promotion and removal. [Amended
4-12-2001]
The Commission, pursuant to the authority granted in C.G.S. § 7-276, shall
have the sole power of appointment, promotion and removal of the police
officers under such regulation as it adopts for the purpose, and such
appointees shall hold office during good behavior and until removed for
cause upon written charges and after a hearing.
§ 18-33. Regulations and penalties for violation. [Amended
4-12-2001]
The Commission shall make all needful regulations for the conduct and
operation of the Constables and police officers; provided, however, that
such regulations shall not be contrary to law and may prescribe suitable
penalties for the violation of any such regulation, including suspension or
removal from office of any Constable, police officer or member.
§ 18-34. Investigation of complaints; hearings.
Upon receipt of a complaint as to the activities of any Constable, the
Commission shall undertake such investigation as it considers appropriate
and, upon the conclusion thereof, make such recommendation to the First
Selectman as it deems to be in the best interest of the Town of Colchester
concerning suitable action with respect to suspension and or removal from
office. In making such investigation, the Commission may, in its discretion,
conduct formal or informal hearings.
§ 18-35. Election of officers; meetings; filling of vacancies.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-275, the Commission shall elect one of its number
to be Chair and one to be clerk and shall hold regular meetings and keep
records of the same. Meetings shall be held upon the call of the Chair or
of the majority of the members on the Board. A majority of all members of
the Board shall constitute a quorum. In the event of any vacancy upon the
Board, the Board of Selectmen shall have the authority by majority vote to
fill such vacancy until the expiration of the term.
§ 18-36. Compensation; reimbursement for expenses.
Commissioners shall be sworn to the faithful performance of their duties
and shall serve without compensation, but their actual expenses and
disbursements incurred in the performance of their duties shall be paid
from the town treasury.
§ 18-37. Terms of office related to particular events.
None of the provisions of this article shall be construed to affect the
authority of the First Selectman with respect to those Special Constables
appointed pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-92 for a set term of office related to
§ 18-32 COLCHESTER CODE § 18-37
14:46
a particular public celebration, gathering, riot or unusual excitement or
pursuant to the provisions of said statute.
§ 18-38. Applications to fill vacancies in office of Constable or
police officer.
Whenever there shall be a vacancy in the office of Constable or police
officer, any person who desires to be considered for appointment as a
Constable or police officer shall submit an application to the Commission.
The Commission shall review all applications submitted to it, provide the
required testing procedures as determined by the Commission and make
such recommendations to the first Selectman concerning such applicants
for the position of Constable as it may deem necessary in the best interests
of the Town of Colchester. The Commission shall retain its sole power
of appointment of police officers and will recommend the appointment
of a Constable to the First Selectman pursuant to the town ordinance
concerning appointment of Constables and or Special Constables as
provided for in C.G.S. § 7-92.
§ 18-39. Transfer of funds for operation.
To the extent permitted by law, the enactment of this article shall serve as
formal authorization for the transfer of the funds allocated in the 1989-1990
town budget for the operation of the Colchester Police Advisory
Commission, constabulary and or police department to the Colchester
Board of Police Commissioners established by this article.
§ 18-37 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-39
14:47

ARTICLE IX
Regional Council of Governments
[Adopted 8-25-1992]
§ 18-40. Joining of Regional Council by town.
The Town of Colchester hereby adopts C.G.S. §§ 4-124i through 4-124p
providing for the formation of the Southeastern Connecticut Regional
Council of Governments and does hereby join such Regional Council of
Governments when and as such Council is duly established in accordance
with said statutes upon the adoption of said statutes by not less than 60%
of the eligible municipalities within the Southeastern Connecticut Planning
Region as defined by the Secretary of the Office of Policy and Management
or his or her designee, and upon certification by the Secretary of the Office
of Policy and Management or his or her designee that a Regional Council of
Governments has been duly established.
§ 18-41. Repeal of previous ordinance.
When the Regional Council of Governments is duly established and the
transition period called for in C.G.S. § 4-124-1(b), as amended, has been
completed, the Town of Colchester does hereby rescind the ordinance of
August 3, 1967, and any amendments thereto, that created the town's
participation in the Southeastern Connecticut Regional Planning Agency.
§ 18-40 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-41
14:49

ARTICLE X
Sewer and Water Commission
[Adopted 5-31-1995; amended 6-8-1995]
§ 18-42. Adoption.
The following article relating to the nine-member Sewer and Water
Commission (the "Commission"), established by § C-1102 of the Charter for
the Town of Colchester, is hereby adopted by the Town of Colchester.9
§ 18-43. District representation. [Amended 1-19-2006]
A. No less than 50% of the persons who serve on the Commission shall be
(i) residents of the Sewer and Water District (the "District") and/or (ii)
owners of real property in the District. If any member of the Commission
changes his or her District status by virtue of a move out of the District,
or by selling or otherwise disposing of real property in the District,
and such move, sale, or disposition causes District representation on
the Commission to be below 50% of the members, then, in such event,
such member shall be allowed to finish out his/her term so long as
such member is otherwise qualified. The Board of Selectmen shall name
replacements for vacant positions on the Commission in accordance with
the residency and ownership requirements of this ordinance.
B. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, in filling a
vacancy, if the Board of Selectmen determines that there are no
residents of or owners of real property in the District who are qualified
and willing to serve on the Commission, the Board of Selectmen may
appoint a person who does not reside or own real property in the District
even though the District representation on the Commission may be
below 50%.
§ 18-44. Terms.
On July 1, 1995, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint three members of the
Commission to serve one-year terms of office, three members to serve twoyear
terms of office and three members to serve three-year terms of office.
Thereafter, as terms of office expire, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint
members of the Commission in place of members whose terms expire, each
for a three-year term of office.
9. Editor's Note: A seven-member Sewer and Water Commission was established by the
Board of Selectmen by ordinance of 10-19-2017. See Art. XV of this chapter.
§ 18-42 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-44
14:51

ARTICLE XI
Aquifer Protection Agency
[Adopted 1-20-2005]
§ 18-45. Designation and membership.
A. In accordance with the provisions of C.G.S. § 22a-354a et seq., the
Zoning and Planning Commission is hereby designated as the Aquifer
Protection Agency (hereinafter the "Agency") of the Town of Colchester.
The staff of the Zoning and Planning Commission shall serve as the staff
of the Agency.10
B. Members of the Zoning and Planning Commission shall serve co-existing
terms on the Agency. The membership requirements of the Agency shall
be the same as those of the Zoning and Planning Commission, including,
but not limited to, the number of members, terms, method of selection
and removal of members, and filling of vacancies.
C. At least one member of the Agency or staff of the Agency shall complete
the course in technical training formulated by the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection of the State of Connecticut, pursuant to C.G.S.
§ 22a-354v.
§ 18-46. Regulations to be adopted.
The Agency shall adopt regulations in accordance with C.G.S. § 22a-354p
and Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies (RCSA) § 22a-354i-3. Said
regulations shall provide for:
A. The manner in which boundaries of aquifer protection areas shall be
established and amended or changed.
B. Procedures for the regulation of activity within the area.
C. The form for an application to conduct regulated activities within the
area.
D. Notice and publication requirements.
E. Criteria and procedures for the review of applications.
F. Administration and enforcement.
§ 18-47. Inventory of land use.
A. In order to carry out the purposes of the Aquifer Protection Program, the
Agency will conduct an inventory of land use within the area to assess
potential contamination sources.
B. Not later than three months after approval by the Commission of the
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection of Level B
mapping of aquifers, the Agency will inventory land uses overlying the
mapped zone of contribution and recharge areas of such aquifers in
accordance with guidelines established by the Commissioner pursuant to
C.G.S § 22a-354f. Such inventory shall be completed not more than one
year after authorization of the Agency (C.G.S. § 22a-354e).
10.Editor's Note: See Art. I of this chapter for additional information regarding the Zoning
and Planning Commission.
§ 18-45 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-47
14:53

ARTICLE XII
Retirement Board
[Adopted 5-18-2006]
§ 18-48. Establishment; membership.
A. There shall be a Retirement Board in the Town of Colchester, consisting
of five members, which shall be called the "Colchester Retirement
Board."
B. Members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen and shall be
chosen as follows:
(1) One member shall be a representative of the Board of Selectmen.
(2) One member shall be a representative of the Board of Finance.
(3) One member shall be the Treasurer of the Town.
(4) Two members shall be electors of the Town who possess relevant
experience in government finance or retirement systems.
C. A Chairperson shall be elected by the members of the Board from among
the members.
D. The Chief Financial Officer of the Town of Colchester shall be a
nonvoting ex officio member.
§ 18-49. Appointment of members; terms; vacancies; compensation.
In January of each year, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint members
to replace those whose terms are then expiring. All members shall be
appointed to hold office for a period of three years, except for the initial
appointments, of which two shall be for three years, two for two years and
one for one year. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the
term, and the Board may recommend a candidate to the Board of Selectmen
to fill said vacancy. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
§ 18-50. Purpose.
The purpose of the Board shall be to serve as the plan administrator of the
Town of Colchester Police Department Retirement Plan (the plan).
§ 18-51. Duties; meetings; powers.
A. Upon establishment of the Board and appointment of the members, the
Board shall assume the responsibilities of the plan administrator as set
forth in Section 9.01 of the plan, which was established by the Town
effective July 1, 2005, and amended December 15, 2005, and may be
amended from time to time. These responsibilities include the following
provisions:
(1) To determine benefit rights;
(2) To adopt such method for the computation of periods of service and
participation as shall be permitted by law;
(3) To instruct the Funding Agent in the disbursement of benefits;
(4) To make such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to
carry out the provisions of the plan;
§ 18-48 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-51
14:55
(5) To employ, where necessary or desirable in the administration of
the Plan, actuaries, attorneys, accountants and other individuals,
who shall not be fiduciaries merely as a result of their employment
hereunder, and to delegate to such individuals such responsibilities
as it shall determine;
(6) To determine, in accordance with uniform standards, any question
arising in the administration, interpretation and application of the
plan, such determination to be conclusive and binding to the extent
the same shall not be plainly inconsistent with the terms of the plan
or any applicable law;
(7) To decide any disputes which may arise;
(8) To give instructions and directions to the Funding Agent as
necessary;
(9) To designate, consistent with sound standards, the actuarial bases
to be used for all actuarial calculations;
(10) To keep a record of all allocations and designations of fiduciary
duties made in accordance with the provisions of this article; and
(11) Other duties as deemed appropriate.
B. The Board shall meet at least semiannually, on a date determined by the
members, and shall call special meetings from time to time as necessary.
C. The Board shall be authorized to establish and promulgate bylaws to
enable it to function in fulfilling its duties.
§ 18-51 COLCHESTER CODE § 18-51
14:56
ARTICLE XIII
Open Space Advisory Committee
[Adopted 10-19-2006]
§ 18-52. Open space plan; conservation commission responsibility.
A. The Conservation Commission, pursuant to Connecticut General
Statutes Section 7-131a, has recommended to the Board of Selectmen
the adoption of the open space plan developed under the purview of the
Conservation Commission by the Open Space Task Force established in
December 2002. The date of the open space plan is August 22, 2006.
B. The Conservation Commission will be the responsible entity charged
with the implementation, oversight, and regular reassessment of said
open space plan for the Town of Colchester.
§ 18-53. Establishment; membership. [Amended 10-18-2012]
To assist in the implementation of the open space plan, the Board of
Selectmen shall create a standing advisory committee, designated the
"Open Space Advisory Committee," of seven members, to be comprised as
follows: a representative of the Colchester Land Trust; a representative of a
fish and game club; and five members at large.
§ 18-54. Terms; vacancies.
The terms of members of the Open Space Advisory Committee shall be three
years, following the initial appointments, beginning in October. Initial terms
shall be staggered as follows: Two members will serve for one year, three
members will serve for two years, and two members will serve for three
years. All vacancies shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 18-55. Duties.
The Open Space Advisory Committee shall:
A. Advise and make recommendations to the Conservation Commission on
the implementation of the open space plan.
B. Research and make recommendations on subjects relevant to the
acquisition, funding, and management of open space, and maintain an
inventory of protected and managed open space.
C. Regularly review the Open Space Map, and identify, inventory, and
research potential areas of interest and/or greenways for use as open
space.
D. Prepare and submit an annual report to the Conservation Commission
and the Board of Selectmen.
§ 18-52 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-55
14:57

ARTICLE XIV
Agriculture Commission
[Adopted 6-29-2011]
§ 18-56. Establishment.
In accordance with § C-402D of the Town of Colchester Charter, an
Agriculture Commission is established for the Town of Colchester.
§ 18-57. Membership; terms of appointment; meetings.
A. The Agriculture Commission shall consist of five regular members and
two alternate members appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The Board
of Selectmen shall, to the extent possible, appoint members who have
knowledge in the management, protection, and regulation of agriculture
or who are directly involved in agriculture as defined by C.G.S. § 1-1(q).
Members shall serve without compensation. In the event of any vacancy,
the Board of Selectmen shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired portion of
the term.
B. Regular and alternate members shall serve for terms of three years,
except that members first appointed shall serve as follows:
(1) Three regular members and one alternate member shall be
appointed for an initial term of three years.
(2) Two regular members and one alternate member shall be appointed
for an initial term of two years.
C. The initial organizational meeting of the Agriculture Commission shall
be held within one month after the Board of Selectmen appoints its
members. Thereafter, the Agriculture Commission shall hold an annual
organizational meeting in January of each year. At the initial
organizational meeting and, thereafter, at each annual organizational
meeting, the Commission shall elect a chair, vice chair and secretary.
Such officers shall serve until the conclusion of the next annual
organizational meeting.
§ 18-58. Powers and duties.
A. The Agriculture Commission shall have the following powers and duties
related to information and education concerning agriculture:
(1) To serve as a conduit of agricultural information for local farmers,
other Town boards, commissions and officials, nonprofit agencies,
civic organizations and other governmental agencies and officials.
(2) To serve as a source of information for the public about local
agricultural enterprises.
(3) To provide information to Town agencies and officials about
agricultural laws and legal issues regarding farm machinery,
buildings and operations.
(4) To provide information and guidance to Town agencies and officials
on agriculture-related issues, including, but not limited to, zoning,
inland wetlands and public works matters.
B. The Agriculture Commission shall have the following powers and duties
related to agricultural support within the Town of Colchester:
§ 18-56 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-58
14:59
(1) To offer support to new farms and new farmers.
(2) To offer support to local, regional and state vocational agriculture
education programs.
C. The Agriculture Commission shall have the following powers and duties
related to conflict resolution for issues impacting agriculture within the
Town of Colchester:
(1) To review state and federal regulations and to recommend, at its
discretion, policy changes to Town agencies and officials to help
ensure a consistent definition and treatment of agriculture, farming
and farms.
(2) To meet with and advise Town agencies and officials, at its
discretion, concerning the impact of proposed Town ordinances,
regulations and policies on farms and agriculture within the Town.
(3) To serve as a resource of information and provide advice for Town
agencies, officials, residents and taxpayers concerning the resolution
of agriculture-related conflicts.
D. The Agriculture Commission shall have the following powers and duties
related to economic opportunities involving agriculture:
(1) To identify innovative opportunities for farming additional lands
within the Town of Colchester.
(2) To promote opportunities for residents and local businesses to
support farming.
(3) To serve as a conduit between nonprofit agencies, funders and local
farmers.
(4) To work to create a climate that supports the economic viability of
farming as a career within the Town Colchester.
(5) To work to create a sustainable agriculture community within the
Town of Colchester.
E. The Agriculture Commission shall be an advisory body, and all advice,
guidance and recommendations shall be nonbinding.
§ 18-59. (Reserved)
§ 18-58 COLCHESTER CODE § 18-59
14:60
ARTICLE XV
Sewer and Water Commission: Establishment; Powers and Duties
[Adopted 10-19-2017]
§ 18-60. Establishment.
Subject to the passage of a Charter Revision referendum in November of
2017, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a seven-member Sewer and
Water Commission which shall be subject to the oversight and supervision
of the Board of Selectmen. There may be an additional two alternate
members appointed by the Board of Selectmen that may serve as full
members of the Commission in lieu of members that may not be in
attendance at a meeting of the Commission.
§ 18-61. Service area.
The area of the Town served by the public water and sewer system of the
Colchester Sewer and Water Commission, as may be expanded or reduced
from time to time, shall be designated as the Sewer and Water District.
Those areas beyond the Sewer and Water District, under the established
Exclusive Service Area of the Town of Colchester, are to be determined by
the Board of Selectmen for service provision, acting as either the Water
Pollution Control Authority or Municipal Exclusive Service Provider for the
Town of Colchester as provided for by State of Connecticut Regulation.
§ 18-62. Development of budget; recommendation of rates and fees.
The Sewer and Water Commission annually will develop a budget of
operating and maintaining the Sewer and Water District services. The
Public Works Director shall submit the draft budget to the Commission for
final recommendation to the Board of Selectmen for approval and adoption.
The Sewer and Water Commission annually shall develop and recommend
to the Board of Selectmen a schedule of rates and fees for sewer and water
services. Prior to submitting the recommendation the Sewer and Water
Commission shall hold a public hearing to present the budget and these
rates, along with a comparison of such budget and rates to those in effect
in the last completed fiscal year and in the current year to date fiscal year.
The Director of Public Works shall prepare, review, and present to the Board
of Selectmen the recommended budget and rates of the Sewer and Water
Commission. The Board of Selectmen may alter such budgets and rates as
it deems appropriate.
§ 18-63. Construction, expansion and maintenance
recommendations.
The Sewer and Water Commission shall annually recommend to the
Department of Public Works any construction and expansion of the Sewer
and Water District and any expenditure for the care, maintenance or
reconstruction of the sewer and water system.
§ 18-60 BAZAARS AND RAFFLES § 18-64
14:61
§ 18-64. Administration of operations.
The Sewer and Water Commission shall administer the operations of the
Sewer and Water District, including the construction, reconstruction,
establishment, planning, restoration, enlargement, improvement, removal,
care, repair and maintenance of all sewer and water systems in the District,
and shall exercise all those responsibilities and provided recommendations
to the Board of Selectmen in regard to the water system and Exclusive
Service Area provider responsibilities.
§ 18-65. Negotiation of contracts.
The Sewer and Water Commission may, upon the authorization of the Board
of Selectmen, negotiate any contract incidental to the provision of sewer
and/or water services, such contracts for system repair or system
expansion, except any labor contract or collective bargaining agreement.
In no event shall the sewer and Water Commission or any member thereof
execute these contracts or bind the Town in any way.
§ 18-64 COLCHESTER CODE § 18-65
14:62
Chapter 21
BOND ISSUANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town Meeting for issuance of bonds — See
Charter § C-701.
§ 21-1. Issuance period.
The Town of Colchester issues its bonds in the principal sum of $800,000
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 110 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended, for the purpose of financing in part the period from
September 16, 1973, to June 30, 1974, which amount does not exceed the
appropriations for said period.
§ 21-2. Maturity date.
Such bonds shall mature in substantially equal annual installments
beginning one year from date of issue and ending not later than 20 years
from date of issue, shall bear such date and rate of interest as may be
determined by the Board of Selectmen. Hartford National Bank and Trust
Company of Hartford, Connecticut, is appointed certifying and paying agent
for such bonds; Messrs. Day, Berry and Howard of Hartford, Connecticut
are designated as the attorneys at law to render an opinion approving the
legality of such issue. The Treasurer shall keep a record of such bonds.
§ 21-3. Signing and sealing
Such bonds shall be signed by the Selectmen, or a majority of them, and by
the Treasurer of the Town of Colchester or bear a facsimile of any of such
signatures, under the Seal of said town, or bear a facsimile of such Seal.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to determine the form of such bonds
and with the Treasurer to sell such bonds at public or private sale, to deliver
such bonds on behalf of the town and to do all other acts necessary and
appropriate to complete the issue of such bonds.
§ 21-4. Borrowing in anticipation of sale.
Pending the issue of such bonds as heretofore provided, the Selectmen
and Treasurer are authorized to borrow such sums as may be necessary
to defray the appropriations for the period ending June 30, 1974, in
anticipation of the receipt of the proceeds from the sale of funding bonds
authorized at this meeting. The Selectmen, or a majority of them, and the
Treasurer are hereby authorized to determine the amount, date, maturity,
interest rate, form and details of any notes and to sell and deliver the same.
Chapter 24
§ 18-65 BOND ISSUANCE § 21-4
21:63
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building demolition — See Ch. 27.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 30.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 64.
Trailers — See Ch. 139.
Town Center Strategic Plan — See Ch. A156.
§ 21-4 COLCHESTER CODE § 21-4
21:64
ARTICLE I
State Building Code
[Adopted 5-4-1957]
§ 24-1. Adoption.
The Town adopts the State Building Code and licensing of all electricians
and plumbers, and a code, as amended, to cover the Electrical and Plumbing
Codes, and appropriates $500 for the forming of a Public Works
Department. (Adopting as amended Sections 116 and 119 except Section
100.)
§ 24-1 BOND ISSUANCE § 24-1
21:65

ARTICLE II
Building Permits in Unapproved Subdivisions
[Adopted 2-11-1960]
§ 24-2. Power of Zoning and Planning Commission.
The Zoning and Planning Commission of the Town of Colchester is
authorized to prohibit or regulate the issuance of building permits for
the erection of buildings or structures in unapproved subdivisions or lots
abutting unaccepted highways or streets. However, the issuance of a
building permit shall not be withheld for the construction of farm or
accessory buildings which are not in violation of any lawful zoning or
building regulation of the Town of Colchester.
§ 24-3. Unlawful structures; action to enjoin.
Any building erected in violation of the provision hereinbefore contained
shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the Town of Colchester, through
an appropriate officer, may bring an action to enjoin the erection of such
structure or cause it to be vacated or removed.
§ 24-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation erecting a building or structure in violation
of the provision herein may be fined not more than $200 for each building
or structure so erected in addition to the relief herein otherwise granted to
the Town of Colchester.
§ 24-2 BOND ISSUANCE § 24-4
21:67

ARTICLE III
Building Permit Fees
[Adopted 3-4-1991]
§ 24-5. Maintenance and repairs excepted.
No fee or permit is required for necessary routine maintenance or repairs
to existing buildings as defined in the Basic Building Code of the State of
Connecticut.
§ 24-6. Fees required for certain building operations.
A permit and fee is required for all new construction, alterations, removal,
demolition, plumbing, electrical or other building operations.
§ 24-7. Fee schedule. [Amended 4-16-2009]
A. The fee schedule shall be as follows:
New Construction Estimated
Building Costs Fees
$1,000 or less $20
$1,000.01 to $60,000 $20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
$60,000 to $120,000 $20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
Over $120,000 $20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
Additional Required Permits
Plumbing, electrical, heating $20
Remodeling Alterations, Repairs
and Miscellaneous
Structural and finish work $20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
Plumbing, heating, electrical $20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
Swimming pool, plus electrical and
plumbing, if required
$20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
Siding, reroofing, chimneys, decks $20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
Wood or coal stoves $20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
Other Fees
House moving permit (plus building
permit to erect on a foundation if the
house is moved within the Town)
$100, plus septic test-repair and
house moving
Demolition permit $20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
Signs (if permit is required by Zoning
Regulations)
$50 or less No fee
Over $50 $20, plus electrical, if required
§ 24-5 BOND ISSUANCE § 24-7
21:69
New Construction Estimated
Building Costs Fees
Permitted mobile homes and mobile
home parks
$100
B. Exempt from the above fees are permit applications for the construction
of buildings from public funds, such as schools, churches and charitable
organizations, in which case the fee shall be $5.
§ 24-7.1. Waiver of fees for owners 62 or older. [Added 12-7-2006]
Building permit fees may be waived by the Building Official for owneroccupied,
single-family homes where at least one of the record owners is
aged 62 or over and where the permit is to replace or upgrade the roofing,
siding, windows or electrical or heating systems.
§ 24-7 COLCHESTER CODE § 24-7.1
21:70
ARTICLE IV
Disposition of Building Applications Upon Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 8-9-2001]
§ 24-8. Statutory authority.
The Town of Colchester does herewith adopt the provisions of C.G.S.
§ 7-148(c)(2)(B) et seq., relating to the establishment of a procedure for the
withholding of approval of a building application when taxes imposed by
the municipality are delinquent for the property for which an application is
made.
§ 24-9. Certification from Tax Collector required.
The Building Official shall require any applicant for any building application
for undeveloped or vacant property (the "subject property") to obtain
written certification from the Tax Collector verifying that there are no
delinquent taxes owed on the subject property.
§ 24-8 BOND ISSUANCE § 24-9
21:71
Chapter 27
BUILDING DEMOLITION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 24.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 30.
Historic districts — See Ch. 74.
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93.
Tax abatement for historic structures — See
Ch. 129, Art. V.
§ 24-9 COLCHESTER CODE § 24-9
27:72
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 7-16-1992]
§ 27-1. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DESIGNATED HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area designated as an Historic
District pursuant to C.G.S.§ 7-147b.
LUSIGNAN HISTORICAL AND ARCHITECTURAL SURVEY — The survey
prepared by Paul R. Lusignan for the Town of Colchester and Connecticut
Historical Commission in 1991, containing on Appendix I, a schedule by
street address of 166 historically significant buildings. A copy of said survey
is available for copying in the office of the Town Clerk.
PERSON — Include an individual, a partnership, a joint venture, a
corporation, an association and any other organization recognized as an
entity by the laws of the State of Connecticut.
§ 27-2. Permit.
No person shall demolish any building, structure or part thereof without
first obtaining a permit for the particular demolition undertaking from the
Building Official, and dismantling a building for removal shall be considered
for the purpose of this section as demolition. Before issuing such a permit,
the Building Official shall:
A. Publish a legal notice of any application for such permit for the
demolition of said building, structure or part in a newspaper having
substantial circulation in the Town of Colchester.
(1) Notice shall be published at least 60 days before the issuance of
such permit for buildings and structures located within a designated
Historic District or individually listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or nominated for such status, or a building at the
address listed on Appendix I of the Lusignan Historical and
Architectural Survey.
(2) Notice shall be published at least 30 days before the issuance of such
permit for all other buildings and structures.
B. Notify any organization concerned with the preservation of structures
within the Town of Colchester. To be entitled to notification under this
provision, any such organization shall register with the Building Official
and indicate a desire to be notified of the proposed demolition permit
application, and such registration shall be renewed annually after initial
registration.
(1) Notification shall be provided at least 60 days before the issuance of
such permit for all buildings and structures situated in a designated
Historic District or on the National Register of Historic Places, or
nominated for such status, or a building at the address listed on
Appendix I of the Lusignan Historical and Architectural Survey.
§ 27-1 BUILDING DEMOLITION § 27-2
27:73
(2) There shall be no notification requirement pursuant to this
Subsection B for buildings not in an Historic District or not on the
National Register of Historic Places, or nominated for such status,
or not at the address Appendix I of the Lusignan Historical and
Architectural Survey.
(3) Verify notifications by United States mail, return receipt requested,
abutting property owners, including condominium associations. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant to furnish to the Building
Official the names and proper mailing addresses of all abutters as
their names appear in the last completed grand list. The applicant
must present return receipts with names and proper mailing
addresses of all abutters.
§ 27-3. Signs.11
No such permit, other than for a building situated in a designated Historic
District or on the National Register of Historic Places or nominated for such
status or a building at the address listed on Appendix I of the Lusignan
Historical and Architectural Survey, shall be issued to any person unless
in connection with the application for such permit the applicant files an
affidavit with the Building Official certifying that the applicant has posted
a sign on the property to be affected by the application in a place visible
from the public street, which sign shall read: "Application for a permit to
demolish this building pending. For information contact the Building Official
of the Town of Colchester." Said sign shall be at least two feet by three feet
in size and will be made available to the applicant by the Building Official
on request and upon assurances made of its return. Said sign shall remain
posted on the property for a least 30 days before issuance of the permit.
§ 27-4. Public health or emergency demolition.
The provisions of § 27-2 concerning public notices, signs and notification of
abutting property owners shall not apply to applications for demolition due
to a threat to the public health or to emergency demolition orders issued by
the Building Official due to a threat to the public safety.
§ 27-5. Exception.
This article shall not apply to buildings containing less than 500 square feet
of floor space, provided that this exception shall not apply to any building
located in a designated Historic District or on the National Register of
Historic Places, or nominated for such status, or a building at the address
listed on Appendix I of the Lusignan Historical and Architectural Survey.
§ 27-6. Period of permit validity.
Any permit issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of
one year from date of issuance, and if the demolition contemplated by said
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 27-2 COLCHESTER CODE § 27-6
27:74
permit is not completed within said one-year period, then the owner of such
building shall be required to make application pursuant to this article for
a new permit and satisfy all notification requirements of this article should
said owner wish to demolish said building.
§ 27-6 BUILDING DEMOLITION § 27-6
27:75

ARTICLE II
Historic Buildings
[Adopted 7-16-1992; revised 6-30-1994]
§ 27-7. Statutory authority; waiting period.
Pursuant to C.G.S.§ 29-406(b), the following article imposing a waiting
period prior to granting a demolition permit is hereby adopted.
§ 27-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — The owner of the historic building to be demolished.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Town Building Official.
DEMOLITION — The meaning adopted by the Commissioner of Public
Safety pursuant C.G.S.§ 29-401.
HISTORICAL SURVEY — The historical and architectural survey prepared
in 1991 by Paul R. Lusignan for the town and the Connecticut Historical
Commission, which historical survey includes, in its Appendix I, a schedule
by street address of 166 historically or architecturally significant buildings
located in the town. A copy of the historical survey is available in the Town
Clerk's office.
HISTORIC BUILDING — Any building, structure or any part thereof that is:
TOWN — The Town of Colchester.
§ 27-9. Waiting period for permit.
No permit for the demolition of an historic building shall be issued until the
following requirements are satisfied:
A. Filing of an application for a demolition permit with the Building Official
upon a form provided by the Building Official, which form shall contain,
in addition to such other information as may be required, the name and
address of the applicant and the address of the historic building to be
demolished;
Located within an Historic District established pursuant to
C.G.S.§ 7-147a through 7-147k;
A.
An historic property designated pursuant to C.G.S.§ 7-147p through
7-147y;
B.
Listed or nominated for listing on the National Register of Historic
Places;
C.
D. Listed on Appendix I of the historical survey; or
E. More than 75 years old.
§ 27-7 BUILDING DEMOLITION § 27-9
27:77
B. Publication by the Building Official of notice of the demolition permit
application in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the town.
The notice shall be published within seven days following the filing of the
demolition permit application;
C. Notification mailed by the Building Official to the Colchester Historic
District Commission and any organization concerned with the
preservation of structures, provided that such organization has
registered its desire for such notification with the Building Official.
Such notification shall be mailed seven days following the filing of the
demolition permit application;
D. Notification mailed by the applicant to the owners of all parcels of land
abutting the property on which the historic building to be demolished is
located. Such notification shall be mailed within seven days following the
filing of the demolition permit application. The applicant shall provide
the Building Official with the names and mailing addresses, as shown
on the then-current Town Assessor's Map, of such abutting owners and
Unite States Postal Service return receipts verifying such notification;
E. Posting of a sign by the applicant giving notice of the application for
a demolition permit in a conspicuous place on the property on which
the historic building to be demolished is located. The sign shall remain
posted from the date the application is made until the date the permit
is issued. The sign shall be provided by the town upon the posting of a
deposit of $10 with the Building Official; and
F. A waiting period of 60 days following the filing of the application for the
demolition permit.
§ 27-10. Public health and safety.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the demolition of an historic
building for public health and safety reasons as determined by the Building
Official or the town Director of Health.
§ 27-9 COLCHESTER CODE § 27-10
27:78
Chapter 30
BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 24.
Building demolition — See Ch. 27.
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93.
§ 30-1. Preamble.
Whereas, in the Town of Colchester, there are or may in the future be
buildings or structures which are dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous,
unsanitary, a menace to the health, morals, safety and general welfare of
the public, and which might tend to constitute a fire menace, and which are
a public nuisance.
§ 30-2. Dangerous building defined.
All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects
shall be deemed dangerous buildings:
A. Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to
have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and
welfare of the occupants or the public.
B. Those which have become or are so deteriorated, dilapidated, decayed,
unsafe, unsanitary or which are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as
to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those
living there or the general public.
C. Those having parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and
injure members of the public or property.
D. Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people
of the town.
§ 30-3. Inspection.
Upon receipt of information from the local Fire Marshal or from any other
authentic source that any building in the Town of Colchester has become a
dangerous building as defined in § 30-2 hereof, the Town Building Official
shall immediately make an inspection of said building for the purpose
of determining whether any conditions exist which render such place a
dangerous building as defined in § 30-2 of this chapter.
§ 30-4. Order to repair or demolish.
Wherever the Building Official in making an inspection as provided in the
proceeding section shall find that any standards set forth in § 30-1 of this
§ 27-10 BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS § 30-4
30:79
chapter, he or she shall order said dangerous building to be repaired or
demolished.
§ 30-5. Service of order.
The Building Official shall cause such order to be put in writing and
personally served upon the owner by the Building Official or by any
indifferent person by delivering to such owner a true and attested copy
thereof or by leaving same at his or her usual place of abode; provided,
however, that when such owner or agent by registered mail. If there is any
regular occupant of the building other than the owner, service shall be made
upon such occupant of the building by leaving a true and attested copy of
such order in the hands of said occupant or at the main entrance of said
building. The person serving such order shall certify upon the original order
the date of the service and how and upon whom it was made, and if service
is made by an indifferent person, he or she shall return the original order to
the Building Official.
§ 30-6. Hearing.
The owner or occupant of the premises or the owner's authorized agent in
charge thereof may within 10 days after the service of an order, as provided
in the proceeding section, request a hearing upon such order before the
Board of Selectmen of the Town of Colchester. The Board shall conduct such
hearings, after due notice to such owner and the Building Official of the
time and place thereof, and shall review such order and may affirm, repeal
or modify it. The Board shall render its decision upon such order within
seven days from the date of the hearing.
§ 30-7. Time limit for compliance.
Any person upon whom such an order has been served as provided in § 30-5
hereof shall comply with such order within 10 days after service thereof or
if a hearing is requested within 10 days after the Board of Selectmen has
rendered its decision upon such hearing; provided, however, that for a good
cause shown the Board may extend the time for complying with such order
for a period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 30-8. Failure to comply; repair or demolition by town.
If the owner, the owner's agent in charge of the premises or the occupant
fails to comply with the order provided for in § 30-3 hereof, the Selectmen
shall cause such building or structure to be repaired or demolished as the
facts may warrant.
§ 30-9. Recovery of costs.
The Tax Collector shall collect from the property owner designated by the
Building Official the total amount of the costs of such repair or demolition,
plus a penalty with 6%. Such costs may be recovered in an action at law
against the be a lien upon the premises in connection owner, and sale
§ 30-4 COLCHESTER CODE § 30-9
30:80
with which it was incurred and such lien shall exist from the date of
commencement of the repairs or demolition. Such lien shall expire one year
after the date on which it commences to run unless a certificate thereof
containing a statement of the amount of such lien and a description of the
premises upon which it is claimed shall be signed and lodged for record by
the First Selectman and the town Tax Collector in the office of the Town
Clerk before the expiration of such period.
§ 30-10. Penalties for offenses.
The owner of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with any
order to repair or demolish said building or structure shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $100 for each offense. Each day
during which such failure to comply continues beyond the date fixed for
compliance shall constitute separate offense.
Chapter 39
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
§ 30-9 CONSERVATION COMMISSION § 30-10
39:81

ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 8-24-1972]
§ 39-1. Creation; members. [Amended 11-18-2004]
There is hereby created for the Town of Colchester a Conservation
Commission which shall consist of five regular members, all of whom shall
be electors of such Town. Municipal employees are eligible to serve on this
commission pursuant to CGS § 7-421(e).
§ 39-2. Terms; vacancies. [Amended 11-18-2004]
The number of the Commission shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen of the municipality; each member shall be appointed to serve for
three years. The Board of Selectmen may fill any vacancy and may remove
any member for cause.
§ 39-3. Powers.
The Commission shall have all the power set forth in C.G.S. § 7-13la, and
any other General Statutes applicable to the Conservation Commission.
§ 39-4. Organization; reports. [Amended 11-18-2004]
The Commission shall select a Chair and a Vice-Chair from its members,
may adopt rules for the transaction of its business and shall keep a public
record of its activities. It shall submit a written report for the proceeding
fiscal year.
§ 39-1 CONSERVATION COMMISSION § 39-4
39:83

ARTICLE II
Inland Wetland Regulations
[Adopted 3-12-1973]
§ 39-5. Authority to enact regulations and charge fees.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-36 et seq., the Conservation Commission is
authorized to enact such regulations, in conformity with the regulations
promulgated by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection and with
due consideration to the standards set forth in C.G.S. § 22a-39, as are
necessary to protect the inland wetlands and watercourses within the town,
and to charge a reasonable fee for any application made to it under such
regulations.
§ 39-6. Public hearing on regulations required; publication
requirements.
The Conservation Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to
enactment or amendment of such regulations. Notice of the time and place
of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial
circulation in the town not more than 15 days and not less than five days
prior to the date of such hearing. A copy of the proposed regulations or
amendments shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk not less than five
days prior to the date of such hearing. The regulations and any amendments
thereto become effective at such time as is fixed by the Conservation
Commission, provided that a copy of the regulations and amendments shall
be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and notice of the adoption of the
regulations and amendments shall have been published is a newspaper
having substantial circulation in the town.12
§ 39-7. Referral to Zoning and Planning Commission.
Proposed regulations and amendments shall be referred to the Zoning and
Planning Commission for its recommendations at least 44 days prior to the
date assigned for the public hearing.
§ 39-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of this
article and the regulations enacted by the authority of the article shall be
fined not more than $1,000 for each separate offense.
12.Editor's Note: See C.G.S.§ 22a-42a.
§ 39-5 CONSERVATION COMMISSION § 39-8
39:85

ARTICLE III
Alternate Members
[Adopted 11-24-1986]
§ 39-9. Statutory authority.
Section 22a-42 of the Connecticut General Statutes authorize the Town
of Colchester to determine the number of alternate members of the
Commission which regulates the activities affecting the wetlands and
watercourses within its territorial limits (Conservation Commission).
§ 39-10. Appointment and terms.
A. The Conservation Commission of the Town of Colchester shall, in
addition to the five regular members, consist of three alternate
members, who shall be electors of the Town of Colchester. Municipal
employees are eligible to sent on this commission pursuant to CGS
§ 7-421(e). [Amended 11-18-200413 ]
B. The terms of the alternate members of the Commission shall be for three
years, and such members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen
of the town.
§ 39-11. Powers and duties.
Such alternate members shall when seated as herein provided have all
powers and duties of the regular members of the Conservation Commission
of the Town of Colchester.
§ 39-12. Designation of alternates in rotation.
If a regular member of the Conservation Commission is absent or
disqualified, the Chair of the Commission shall designate an alternate to
act, choosing alternates in rotation so that they shall act as nearly equal a
number of times as possible. If any alternate is not available in accordance
with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes of the
meeting.
§ 39-13. Vacancies; removal from office.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Colchester may fill any vacancy of
an alternate member and may remove any alternate member for cause.
13.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C of this section, which
pertained to term lengths.
§ 39-9 CONSERVATION COMMISSION § 39-13
39:87
Chapter 46
EDUCATION, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Education — See Charter § C-602.
§ 39-13 COLCHESTER CODE § 39-13
46:88
ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted at referendum 10-17-1990]
§ 46-1. Membership.
In accordance with C.G.S.§ 9-205, the number of the Colchester Board of
Education is established at seven members.
§ 46-2. Terms of office.
At the town election next following this action the terms of office of the
members of such Board now in office shall expire. At subject town election
Colchester shall then elect four members of such Board to hold office for
two years and three members to hold office for four years, each from the
date of election and, at each town election thereafter, shall elect members
of such Board in place of the members whose terms expire, each for a term
of four years from the date of election.
§ 46-1 EDUCATION, BOARD OF § 46-2
46:89

ARTICLE II
Election
[Adopted 3-2-1993]
§ 46-3. Voting by electors.
Pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S.§ 9-204b, at any election of members of
the Colchester Board of Education (the "Board"), any elector of the Town
of Colchester (the "town") may vote for the number of such members to
be elected, and the persons receiving the greatest number of votes shall
be elected, except that when the number of members of any one political
party who would be elected without regard to C.G.S.§ 9-167a exceeds the
maximum number as determined by said section, then only the candidates
of such political party with the highest number of votes up to the limit of
such maximum shall be elected. The next highest ranking candidates, not
from such political party, shall be elected, up to the number of places to be
filled in such election.
§ 46-4. Nomination by political parties.
Each political party shall have the right to nominate as many persons as
there are vacancies on the Board, and those names shall be placed upon the
ballot.
§ 46-3 EDUCATION, BOARD OF § 46-4
46:91
Chapter 49
EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS
§ 49-1. Agreement authorized.
The Board of Selectman is authorized to enter into a certain agreement
with CEC, Inc. to provide for emergency communications service as is more
particularly detailed in the proposed agreement, which agreement provided
for a basic annual service charge of $2,647.48, plus such additional annual
sum not to exceed $4,000 per year as may be needed to fund Colchester's
share of the operating expense of the corporation, a copy of the herein
before-mentioned agreement being appended hereunto.
§ 49-2. Appropriation of funds.
The sum of $2,647,48 be appropriated to pay the basic annual consideration
due under the agreement with Colchester Emergency Communications Inc.
for the fiscal year 1976-1977.
Chapter 53
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conflicts of interest and Board of
Ethics — See Charter § C-1408.
§ 53-1. Statement of purpose.
Public office is a public trust. The trust of the public is essential for
government to function effectively. Public policy developed by government
officials and employees affects every citizen of the municipality, and it
must be based on honest and fair deliberations and decisions. This process
must be free from threats, favoritism, undue influence and all forms of
impropriety so that the confidence of the public is not eroded. By enacting
this code, this municipality seeks to avoid any loss of trust and to maintain
and increase the confidence of our citizens in the integrity and fairness of
their government.
§ 53-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS — Any entity through which business for profit or not for profit
is conducted, including without limitation a corporation, partnership,
§ 46-4 COLCHESTER CODE § 53-2
49:92
proprietorship, firm, enterprise, limited liability company, franchise,
association, organization or self-employed individual.
BUSINESS WITH WHICH HE/SHE IS ASSOCIATED — A business of which
the person or a member of his/her immediate family is a director, officer,
owner, partner, member, employee, compensated agent or holder of stock
which constitutes 5% or more of the total outstanding stock of any class.
CODE — This Code of Ethics.
COMMISSION — The Municipal Ethics Commission established in § 53-3.
COMPLAINT — Any complaint received by the Commission alleging a
violation of this Code of Ethics. See §§ 53-5 through 53-8.
COMPLAINANT — A party that makes the complaint as described in §§ 53-5
through 53-8.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — Information, whether transmitted
orally, in writing or by any other means, which is obtained by reason of the
public position or office held and is of such nature that it is not, at the time
of transmission, a matter of public record or public knowledge.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Any interest with a monetary value of $100 or
more or which generates a financial gain or loss of $100 or more in a
calendar year.
GIFT — Anything of value, including entertainment, food, beverage, travel
and lodging, given or paid to a public official or public employee to the
extent that consideration of equal or greater value is not received. A gift
does not include:
A political contribution otherwise reported as required by law or a
donation or payment as described in Subdivision (9) or (11) of
Subsection (b) of C.G.S. § 9-333b.
A.
A commercially reasonable loan made on terms not more favorable than
loans made in the ordinary course of business.
B.
A gift received from an individual's spouse, significant other, fiancee or
fianc@, the parent, brother or sister of such spouse or such individual,
or the child of such individual or the spouse of such child.
C.
Goods or services which are provided to the municipality and facilitate
governmental action or functions.
D.
E. A certificate, plaque or other ceremonial award costing less than $100.
A rebate or discount on the price of anything of value made in the
ordinary course of business without regard to that person's status.
F.
Printed or recorded informational material germane to governmental
action or functions.
G.
Items of nominal value, not to exceed $10, containing or displaying
promotional material.
H.
§ 53-2 ETHICS, CODE OF § 53-2
53:93
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Any spouse, child or dependent relative who resides
in the individual's household.
INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
INDIVIDUAL WITH WHOM ONE IS ASSOCIATED — An individual with
whom the person or a member of his/her immediate family mutually has an
interest in any business.
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Colchester and shall include any special
district contained therein.
OFFICIAL RESPONSIBILITY — The direct administrative or operating
authority, whether intermediate or final and whether exercisable personally
or through subordinates, to approve, disapprove or otherwise direct
government action.
PERSON — An individual, sole proprietorship, trust, corporation, union,
association, firm, partnership, committee, limited liability company, club or
other organization or group of persons.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — A person employed, whether part time or full time,
by the municipality or a political subdivision thereof.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL — An elected or appointed official, whether paid or
unpaid or full or part time, of a municipality or political subdivision thereof,
including candidates for the office, and shall also include a district office
elected pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-327.
RESPONDENT — One who answers to an allegation of a violation of this
Code of Ethics contained in a complaint.
SPECIAL DISTRICT — A district established pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-324.
§ 53-3. Municipal Ethics Commission.
A. There shall be a Municipal Ethics Commission consisting of five
members. The members shall be appointed by vote of the Board of
Selectmen for terms of three years, except that, of the initially appointed
members, one shall serve for one year, two for two years and two
for three years. No individual shall be appointed to more than two
An honorary degree bestowed upon a public official or public employee
by a public or private university or college.
I.
A meal provided at an event and/or the registration or entrance fee to
attend such an event, in which the public employee or public official
participates in his/her official capacity.
J.
A meal provided in the home by an individual who resides in the
municipality.
K.
Gifts of nominal value not to exceed $25 tendered on generally
recognized gift-giving occasions such as Christmas, Hanukkah,
birthdays, the birth or adoption of a child, weddings, confirmations or
bar/bat mitzvahs, provided that the total value of such gifts from any
person in any calendar year does not exceed $100.
L.
§ 53-2 COLCHESTER CODE § 53-3
53:94
consecutive three-year terms, provided that any member may continue
in office until a successor has been appointed. No more than three
members shall be members of the same political party.
B. All members shall be electors of the municipality. No member shall:
(1) Have held public office or have been a candidate for public office for
a two-year period prior to appointment;
(2) Hold office in any political party or political committee; or
(3) Be a public official in any other capacity other than a notary public
or Justice of the Peace.
C. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson who shall preside at meetings
of the Commission and a Vice Chairperson to preside in the absence of
the Chairperson. Three members shall constitute a quorum. A majority
vote of the Commission shall be required for action of the Commission.
The Chairperson or any three members may call a meeting.
§ 53-4. Duties of Commission.
A. The Commission shall:
(1) Compile and maintain a record of all reports, advisory opinions,
statements and memoranda filed by and with the Commission to
facilitate public access to such reports and statements.
(2) Issue opinions with regard to the requirements of this code upon
the written request of any person. Advisory opinions rendered by
the Commission, until amended or revoked, shall be binding on
the Commission and shall be deemed to be final decisions of the
Commission. Any person who requested an advisory opinion and who
acts in good-faith reliance on such advisory opinion shall be entitled
to use such reliance as an absolute defense to any complaint brought
under the provisions of the code in connection with the specific
activities that were subject of the advisory opinion.
(3) Report annually on or before February 1 to the Board of Selectmen
summarizing the activities of the Commission.
B. The Commission may adopt, after a public hearing, rules and regulations
not inconsistent with this code for the administration and
implementation of the code.
C. The Commission may employ necessary staff or outside counsel within
available appropriations.
§ 53-5. Procedure for receiving complaint.
A. The Commission shall receive complaints from any person alleging
violation of the code. Any complaint received by the Commission must
be in writing on a form prescribed by the Commission and signed under
penalty of false statement by the individual making said complaint
before:
(1) A Judge of a court of record;
(2) A clerk or deputy clerk of a court having a seal;
(3) A Commissioner of Deeds or Town Clerk;
(4) A notary public;
(5) A Justice of the Peace; or
(6) An attorney admitted to the bar of the State of Connecticut.
§ 53-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 53-5
53:95
B. If the complainant intentionally makes a false statement, he/she shall
be subject to fines of up to $ 1,000 and penalties of up to one year
imprisonment under the provisions of C.G.S.§ 53a-157b for a Class A
misdemeanor.
§ 53-6. Investigation procedures; time limits; notice and hearings.
A. Upon the complaint of any person on a form prescribed by the
Commission, signed under penalty of false statement, or upon its own
complaint, the Commission shall investigate any alleged violation of
this code. Until such time as the Commission makes a determination
of probable cause, any allegations and any information supplied to or
received from the Commission shall not be disclosed to any party by a
complainant, witness or Commission or staff member, except upon the
written request of the respondent.
(1) Not later than 10 days after the receipt or issuance of such
complaint, the Commission shall provide notice of such receipt or
issuance and a copy of the complaint by registered or certified mail
to any respondent against whom such complaint is filed and shall
provide notice of the receipt of such complaint to the complainant.
Complaints shall be noted as received at a scheduled meeting.
(2) If the complaint has been filed by a member of the public, the
Commission shall review the complaint to determine:
(a) Whether the allegations contained therein if proved would
constitute a violation of any provision of the code. If the
Commission determines that the complaint does not allege
sufficient facts to constitute a violation, the Commission shall
dismiss the complaint and duly notify the complainant and
respondent by registered or certified mail.
(b) If the Commission determines that the complaint alleges
sufficient facts to constitute a violation, then within 30 days
after so determining, the Commission shall fix a date for the
commencement of the hearing on the allegation contained
therein. Such hearing shall be conducted in two phases. In the
first phase, the Commission will make a confidential
determination as to whether there is probable cause to believe
the facts alleged in the complaint actually occurred. If the
Commission does not make a finding of probable cause, the
complaint and all records for the hearing shall remain
confidential except upon the written request of the respondent.
If the Commission makes a finding of probable cause, the
Commission shall proceed to the second phase, which shall be
a public hearing to determine whether a violation has occurred.
The hearing date regarding any complaint shall be not more than
60 days after the filing of the complaint.
B. In the conduct of an investigation of an alleged violation of this code:
(1) The Commission shall have the power to hold hearings, administer
oaths, examine witnesses, receive oral and documentary evidence,
subpoena witnesses and require the production for examination by
the Commission of any books and papers that the Commission deems
§ 53-5 COLCHESTER CODE § 53-6
53:96
relevant in any matter under investigation or in question. In the
exercise of such powers, the Commission may use the services of the
municipal police, who shall provide the same upon the Commission's
request.
(2) The respondent shall have the right to appear and to be represented
by legal counsel and to examine and cross-examine witnesses. All
witnesses will be sworn.
C. The Commission shall make no finding that there is a violation of any
provision of the Code, except upon the concurring vote of at least four of
its members.
D. Any hearing conducted by the Commission shall be governed by the
Administrative Procedures Act, C.G.S.§ 4-178.
E. No complaint may be made under this code, except within three years
after the violation alleged in the complaint has been committed.
F. No person shall take or threaten to take official action against an
individual for such individual's disclosure of information to the
Commission under the provisions of this code.
§ 53-7. Confidentiality of complaints; evaluations of possible
violations and investigations; publication of findings.
A. Unless the Commission makes a finding of probable cause, a complaint
alleging a violation shall be confidential, except upon the written request
of the respondent unless such information is required to be disclosed
pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act, C.G.S. § 1-200 et seq.
B. Prior to any other action on a complaint, the Commission may conduct a
preliminary investigation to determine whether the filing of a complaint
is warranted. This preliminary investigation shall be confidential, except
upon the written request of the respondent.
C. If the Commission makes a finding of no probable cause, the complaint
and the record of its investigation shall remain confidential, except upon
the request of the respondent. No complainant, witness, designated
party or Commission or staff member shall disclose to any third party
any information learned from the investigation, including knowledge
of the existence of a complaint, which the disclosing party would not
otherwise have known. The Commission shall inform the complainant
and the respondent of its finding by registered or certified mail not
later than three business days after termination of the hearing or
investigation.
D. The Commission shall make public a finding of a violation not later
than five business days after the termination of the hearing. At such
time, the entire record of the investigation shall become public. The
Commission shall inform the complainant and the respondent of its
finding and provide them a summary of its reasons for making such a
finding by registered or certified mail not later than three business days
after termination of the hearing.
§ 53-8. Penalties for offenses.
A. Upon determination that a violation of any provision of the code has
occurred, the Commission will impose sanctions as follows:
§ 53-6 ETHICS, CODE OF § 53-8
53:97
(1) Public censure and reprimand;
(2) A civil penalty of not more than $100 per violation; and/or
(3) Restitution of any pecuniary benefits received because of the
violation committed.
B. Upon determination that a violation of any provision of this code has
occurred, the Commission may also recommend to the Board of
Selectmen the following actions:
(1) In the case of a public employee, disciplinary action as provided for
by town policy and/or collective bargaining agreement.
(2) In the case of an appointed official, removal from office as provided
in the Town Charter.14
(3) In the case of an elected official, removal from office as provided in
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 53-9. Public employees and officials.
A. No public employee or public official shall engage in or participate in any
business or transaction, including but not limited to outside employment
with a private business, or have an interest, direct or indirect, which is
incompatible with the proper discharge of his/her official responsibilities
in the public interest or which would tend to impair his/her independent
judgment or action in the performance of his/her official responsibilities.
B. Gifts.
(1) No public employee or public official shall solicit or accept any
gift from any person which to his/her knowledge is interested in
any pending matter within such employee's or official's official
responsibility.
(2) If a prohibited gift is offered, he/she must refuse it, return it, pay
the donor the full value of the gift or donate it to a nonprofit
organization, provided that he/she does not receive the
corresponding tax benefit. Alternatively, it may be considered a gift
to the municipality, provided that it remains in the municipality's
possession permanently.
C. Voting.
(1) A public employee or public official shall refrain from voting upon or
otherwise participating in any matter on behalf of the municipality if
that employee or official, a business with whom he/she is associated,
an individual with which he/she is associated or a member of his/
her immediate family has a financial or personal interest in the
transaction or contract, including but not limited to the sale of real
estate, materials, supplies or services to the municipality; provided,
however, that the restrictions of this Subsection C(1) shall not apply
if such financial or personal interest accrues to him/her, his/her
spouse, a dependent child or a business with which he/she, his/
her spouse or a dependent child is associated as a member of a
profession, occupation or group to no greater extent than to any
other member of such profession, occupation or group.
14.Editor's Note: See Charter § C-207.
§ 53-8 COLCHESTER CODE § 53-9
53:98
(2) If such participation is within the scope of the public employee's
or public official's official responsibility, he/she shall be required to
provide written disclosure, which sets forth in detail the nature and
extent of such interest, to the Commission.
(3) Notwithstanding the prohibition in Subsection C(1), a public
employee or public official may vote or otherwise participate in
a matter if it involves a determination of general policy and the
interest is shared with a substantial segment of the population of the
municipality.
D. Appearance on behalf of private interests.
(1) Except for a public official who receives no compensation for his/
her service to the municipality other than per diem payments and
reimbursement of expenses, no public employee or public official
shall appear on behalf of private interests before any board, agency
or committee of the municipality.
(2) Except for a public official who receives no compensation for his/
her service to the municipality other than per diem payments and
reimbursement of expenses, no public employee or public official
shall represent private interests against the interests of the
municipality in any litigation to which the municipality is a party.
E. Appearance on own behalf.
(1) Nothing contained in this code shall prohibit or restrict a public
employee or public official from appearing before any board or
commission of the municipality on his/her own behalf, or from being
a party in any action, proceeding or litigation brought by or against
the public employee or public official to which the municipality is a
party.
(2) No public official or public employee shall appear on behalf of
private interests before any board, commission or agency of the
municipality, nor shall be/she represent private interests in any
action or proceeding against the town in any litigation, when such
appearance or representation would be in conflict with or would
impair his/her independence of judgment and action in the
performance of his/her official duties as such officer or employee.
F. No public employee or public official shall disclose confidential
information concerning municipal affairs, or use confidential
information acquired in the course of and by reason of his/her official
duties nor shall be/she use such information for the financial interests of
himself/herself or others.
G. No public employee or public official shall request or permit the use of
municipal-owned vehicles, equipment, facilities, materials or property
for personal convenience or profit, except when such are available to the
public generally or are provided as municipal policy for the use of such
public employee or public official in the conduct of official business.
H. No public employee or public official, or a business with which he/she
is associated, or member of his/her immediate family shall enter into a
contract with the municipality unless it is awarded through a process
of public notice and competitive bidding; provided, however, that this
§ 53-9 ETHICS, CODE OF § 53-9
53:99
restriction shall not apply to any contract the total value of which is
$1,000 or less.
I. No public employee or public official shall use his/her position or office
to take any action that would benefit, financially or otherwise, such
employee or official or any other person or organization in a manner
that is not available to all similarly situated persons or organizations,
nor shall any public employee or public official take any action in his/her
official capacity in exchange for or as a quid pro quo for any benefit of
any kind that he/she has received from any persons or organization.
J. No public employee or public official shall accept a fee or honorarium
for an article, appearance or speech, or for participation at an event, in
his/her official capacity.
K. No public employee or public official, or member of such individual's
immediate family or business with which he/she is associated, shall
solicit or accept anything of value, including but not limited to a loan,
political contribution, reward or promise of future employment based on
any understanding that the vote, official action or judgment of the public
employee or public official would be or had been influenced thereby.
L. No public official or public employee shall grant or accept any special
consideration, treatment or advantage to or from any person beyond
that which is available to every other person.
§ 53-10. Paid consultants of municipality.
A. No paid consultant of the municipality shall represent a private interest
in any action or proceeding against the interest of the municipality which
is in conflict with the performance of his/her duties as a consultant.
B. No paid consultant may represent anyone other than the municipality
concerning any matter in which he/she participated personally and
substantially as a consultant to the municipality.
C. No paid consultant shall disclose confidential information learned while
performing his/her duties for the municipality nor shall be/she use such
information for the financial interests of himself/herself or others.
§ 53-11. Former public employees and officials.
A. No former public employee or public official shall appear for
compensation before any municipal board or agency in which he/she was
formerly employed or with which he/she formerly served at any time
within a period of one year after termination of his/her employment or
service with the municipality.
B. No former public employee or public official shall represent anyone
other than the municipality concerning any particular matter in which
he/she participated personally and substantially while in municipal
service.
C. No former public employee or public official shall disclose or use
confidential information acquired in the course of and by reason of his/
her official duties, for any reason, unless compelled to do so by law.
D. No former public employee or public official who participated
substantially in the negotiation or award of a municipal contract obliging
the municipality to pay an amount of $100,000 or more, or who
§ 53-9 COLCHESTER CODE § 53-11
53:100
supervised the negotiation or award of such a contract shall accept
employment with a party to the contract other than the municipality for
a period of one year after such contract is signed.
E. No former public official or public employee shall appear before any
board, commission, committee or agency of the municipality in relation
to any case, proceeding, application or contract in which he/she
personally participated during the period of his/her service or
employment, or which was under his/her active consideration for a
period of 12 months from the date of termination of his/her employment
with or service to the town.
§ 53-12. Conflict of interest statement; filing requirements.
A. All appointed members of town boards and commissions, elected officials
and department heads shall file, under penalty of false statement, on a
form designated by the Ethics Commission, a statement declaring any
conflict of interest or potential conflict of interest as defined in §§ 53-9
through 53-11 of this code.
B. All appointed members of town boards and commissions, elected officials
and department heads must recuse themselves from any decision that
would incur a conflict of interest or potential conflict of interest. Failure
to do so will constitute a violation of this code.
C. Failure to file this conflict of interest statement as required by this
section of this code shall constitute a violation of the code, subject to
penalties as defined in § 53-8.
§ 53-13. Distribution of code.
The Commission shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be distributed
to every public employee and public official within 60 days after enactment
of this code. Each public employee and public official shall be furnished
a copy before entering upon the duties of his/her office or employment.
A signed receipt for all copies shall be returned to the Chair of the
Commission and retained on file.15
Chapter 55
FARMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 24.
15.Editor's Note: The Complaint Form and and explanation of the Code of Ethics are on file in
the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 53-11 ETHICS, CODE OF § 53-13
53:101

ARTICLE I
Right to Farm
[Adopted 10-15-2009]
§ 55-1. Purpose and intent.
A. Agriculture plays a significant role in Colchester's heritage and future.
The Town officially recognizes the importance of farming to its rural
quality of life, heritage, public health, scenic vistas, tax base, wetlands,
wildlife, and local economy. This Right-to-Farm Ordinance encourages
the pursuit of agriculture, promotes agriculture-based economic
opportunities, and protects farmland within Colchester by allowing
agricultural uses and related activities to function with minimal conflict
with abutters and Town agencies.
B. It is the declared policy of the Town of Colchester to conserve, protect
and encourage the maintenance and improvement of agricultural land
for the production of food and other agricultural products and for its
natural and ecological value.
§ 55-2. Definitions.
The terms "agriculture" and "farming" shall have all those meanings set
forth in C.G.S. § 1-1(q), as amended.
§ 55-3. Right to farm.
A. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, no present or future
agricultural operations conducted or maintained in a manner consistent
with accepted customs and standards of the agricultural industry on a
recognized farm which is engaged in the act of farming shall become
or be considered a nuisance due to the identified impacts below solely
because such activity resulted or results in any changed condition of the
use of adjacent land, provided that best management practices for all
activities are observed.
(1) The incidental noise from livestock or farm equipment used in
normal, generally acceptable farming practices;
(2) Odors from livestock, manure, fertilizer or feed in accordance with
public health and Department of Environmental Protection
standards;
(3) Dust and fumes associated with normally accepted farming
practices;
(4) The use of agricultural chemicals, pesticides and fertilizers
associated with normally accepted farming practices; or
(5) Water pollution from livestock or crop production activities, except
the pollution of public or private drinking water supplies, provided
such activities conform to acceptable management practices for
pollution control approved by the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection.
B. These provisions shall not apply whenever a nuisance results from the
negligent or improper operation of any such agricultural operation or
when best management practices are not followed.
§ 55-1 ETHICS, CODE OF § 55-3
53:103
C. Inspection and approval of the agricultural or farming operation, place,
establishment or facility by the State Commissioner of Agriculture or
his/her designee shall be prima facie evidence that such operations
follow generally accepted agricultural practices. Nothing contained in
this article shall restrict the powers of Colchester's Wetlands
Commission, Planning and Zoning Commission, Building or Health
Department under Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 55-3 COLCHESTER CODE § 55-3
53:104
Chapter 56
FEES
§ 55-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 55-3
53:105

ARTICLE I
Additional Fees for Processing Land Use Applications
[Adopted 2-7-2002]
§ 56-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, "staff" means the Town Planner and/or his
designee; "outside consultant" means a professional or professional firm
who is not an employee of the Town of Colchester, including but not limited
to an engineering, traffic, environmental, wildlife/habitat, wetlands, design,
or planning professional.
§ 56-2. Hiring of outside consultants.
When the staff, in its discretion, determines that the size, complexity,
potential impact or other aspects of the proposed land use project
necessitate specialized expertise for the proper review and evaluation of
the application, staff may require the applicant to pay any and all costs
associated with the services of an outside consultant. All outside consultant
services are to be performed under the sole direction of the Town. The Town
will solicit, select and directly pay any outside consultant hired through this
article.
§ 56-3. Payment of outside consultant costs; waiver; exception.
When staff determines that a land use application necessitates the hiring
of an outside consultant as referenced above, the anticipated expenses of
such outside consultant(s) shall be estimated by the staff and promptly
reported to the applicant. This amount shall be paid by the applicant within
14 days of the date staff reports the amount of outside consultant costs to
the applicant. If the applicant does not pay the designated amount within
this time frame, staff shall report to the respective board, commission or
Town official that a proper review of the application cannot be completed
due to such failure. The respective board, commission or Town official,
consistent with the statutes and regulations governing its actions, may then
decide whether to deem the application incomplete and to refuse to issue
the requested permit until the necessary fees have been submitted. The
Zoning Enforcement Officer, Town Planner, Wetlands Enforcement Officer,
and Town Engineer are hereby prohibited from issuing any permits,
approvals or sign-offs for an application for which the necessary fees as
described above have not been paid, unless staff, in its discretion, should
decide to reduce or waive the additional fees for outside consultants. No
costs of review by an outside consultant shall be assessed for land use
applications for properties located in the Historic Preservation Overlay
Zone.
§ 56-4. Additional outside consultant costs.
Prior to the decision of the respective board, staff may revise the estimated
expense of outside consultants and thereupon require additional sums to be
§ 56-1 ETHICS, CODE OF § 56-4
53:107
deposited by the applicant to cover such fees. These sums shall be paid by
the applicant prior to the issuance of any permits. The Zoning Enforcement
Officer, Town Planner, Wetlands Enforcement Officer, and Town Engineer
are hereby prohibited from issuing any permits, approvals or sign-offs for
an application for which such additional sums have not been paid.
§ 56-5. Refund of funds not expended.
Any portion of the originally estimated expense of outside consultants or
additional sums not expended by staff shall be refunded to the applicant,
with interest earned, within 30 days after the completion of the review,
evaluation and processing of the application, or the resolution of any
appeals filed with respect to the application whichever is later.
§ 56-4 COLCHESTER CODE § 56-5
53:108
ARTICLE II
Fee Structure for Inland Wetland and Watercourse Applications
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen as last amended 1-6-2011]
§ 56-6. Fees for applications.
The fee structure for applications to the Conservation Commission of the
Town of Colchester, Connecticut, is hereby amended as follows:
A. Uses permitted as of right and nonregulated uses: $75 if review needed
fee.
B. Renew, transfer or amend permit: $100.
C. Base administration fee: $200.
D. Wetland agent approval: $50.
E. Public hearing fee: $200.
F. Nonsignificant activity: $100.
G. Significant activity: $200 plus $1 for each 1,000 square feet of wetlands
or fraction thereof on the application property and $10 for each 1,000
square feet of wetlands or fraction thereof disturbed or created.
H. Subdivision with no municipal improvements: $50 ($200 if significant)
plus $55 per lot and $10 for each 1,000 square feet of wetlands or
fraction thereof disturbed or created.
I. Subdivision with municipal improvements: $50 ($200 if significant) plus
$65 per lot, $1 for each 1,000 square feet of wetlands or fraction thereof
on the application property and $10 for each 1,000 square feet of
wetlands or fraction thereof disturbed or created, to a maximum $2,000.
J. Commercial development: $400 plus $50 ($200 if significant) plus $1 for
each 1,000 square feet of wetlands or fraction thereof on the application
property and $10 for each 1,000 square feet of wetlands or fraction
thereof disturbed or created.
K. Petitions for changes in regulations or the Wetlands Map: $155.
L. A state fee of $60 must be added to all of the above fees pursuant to
C.G.S. 22a-27j.
M. In addition to the above, for permitted construction projects which
require environmental site monitoring, the cost of such monitoring shall
be at the expense of the applicant.
§ 56-6 ETHICS, CODE OF § 56-6
53:109

ARTICLE III
Zoning and Planning Fees
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen as last amended 4-16-2009]
§ 56-7. Zoning and Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals,
engineering and administrative zoning fees.
A. Zoning and Planning Commission.
Base administrative fee $200
Public hearing fee $200*
Zoning/Planning review fee
Zone or regulation change $150
Site plan $100
Subdivision $50 per lot
Multi-unit housing $50 per unit
Engineering review fee
Site plan (Class 2) $10 parking place
Subdivision $100/lot with new/improved road
$80/lot on existing road
Follow-up engineering review fee
First review $100
Second review Free
Each review after second $500
Driveway permits $50
Apron bonding $1,000
*Note: The public hearing fee will be charged for any subdivision wherein
the density factor yields 10 or more lots.
B. Zoning Board of Appeals fees.
Base administrative fee $100
Public hearing fee $200
Zoning review fee $50
C. Administrative zoning fees.
Zoning permit fee $50
(To be collected upon issuance of permit. Additions and accessories to
existing single-family residential dwellings are exempt.)
D. A state fee of $60 must be added to the above fees for each application
pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-27j. (That is, the proposed new fee schedule is
§ 56-7 ETHICS, CODE OF § 56-7
53:111
cumulative, depending on the nature of the application; the state fee is
charged only once for each application.)
§ 56-8. GIS mapping fee.
Map Product
Cost
(each)
8.5" x 11" Site Map with USGS
Topography
$1.00
8.5" x 11" Site Map with
Orthophotography
$3.00
11" x 17" Site Map with USGS
Topography
$3.00
11" x 17" Site Map with
Orthophotography
$5.00
24" x 36" Site Map with USGS
Topography
$25.00
24" x 36" Site Map with
Orthophotography
$30.00
36" x 42" Site Map with USGS
Topography
$27.00
36" x 42" Site Map with
Orthophotography
$32.00
24" x 36" Town-wide USGS
Topography Map
$30.00
24" x 36" Town-wide
Orthophotography Map
$30.00
36" x 42" Town-wide USGS
Topography Map
$35.00
36" x 42" Town-wide
Orthophotography Map
$35.00
11" x 17" Zoning Map $5.00
24" x 36" Zoning Map $25.00
36" x 42" Zoning Map $30.00
11" x 17" Wetlands Map $ 5.00
24" x 36" Wetlands Map $25.00
36" x 42" Wetlands Map $30.00
11" x 17" Open Space Map $5.00
24" x 36" Open Space Map $25.00
36" x 42" Open Space Map $30.00
§ 56-7 COLCHESTER CODE § 56-8
53:112
Chapter 57
FIRE HYDRANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 24.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 58.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 124.
Water — See Ch. 150.
§ 57-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(B), the Town adopts the following fire
hydrants ordinance.
§ 57-2. Purpose.
To purpose of this chapter is to authorize the Colchester Fire Department
to regulate the installation, location, operation and maintenance of fire
hydrants within the Town.
§ 57-3. Fire hydrant regulations.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall adopt and enforce regulations regarding
the specifications for and the location, operation and maintenance of all
fire hydrants within the Town (the "Fire Hydrant Regulations").
B. Any property owner that is required to install a private or municipal
fire hydrant shall install said fire hydrant in a manner which is in full
accordance with the Fire Hydrant Regulations. The Building Official of
the Town shall not issue a building permit or certificate of occupancy
to an applicant until the Fire Marshal confirms compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 57-4. Out-of-service fire hydrants; repair of fire hydrants on
private property.
A. Fire hydrants that are out of service shall be clearly marked by the
Colchester Sewer and Water Department.
B. The Fire Marshal may order the repair of a defective fire hydrant on
private property and bill the cost of such work to the owner if the Town
incurs costs associated with the repair of the defective fire hydrant.
§ 57-5. Tampering with fire hydrant equipment prohibited.
Fire hydrants and fire apparatus and equipment required by this chapter
shall not be removed, tampered with, or otherwise disturbed except for
purposes of: extinguishing a fire; training; recharging, repairing or flushing
a fire hydrant; or when permitted by the Colchester Sewer and Water
Department or the Fire Marshal.
§ 57-6. Clearing of fire hydrants.
§ 56-8 ETHICS, CODE OF § 57-6
53:113
A. All private property owners whose property contains a fire hydrant
shall continuously maintain the area around the fire hydrant and keep
the area clear of weeds, rubbish and any other obstructions which
might prohibit access for use and/or maintenance of the fire hydrant.
Landscaping or decorations shall not obstruct or hide any fire hydrant
from clear view, nor prohibit access for use and/or maintenance of fire
hydrants.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct access to any fire hydrant
by placing, locating or permitting any debris, building material, personal
property or other obstruction which may interfere with the use of a fire
hydrant. Parking, placing or locating any motor vehicle or boat within 10
feet of a fire hydrant is prohibited.
C. All private property owners whose property contains a fire hydrant shall
remove snow and ice abutting the fire hydrant that has accumulated
higher than a point four inches below the bottom of the lowest outlet
on any fire hydrant within 24 hours after the cessation of a snow or ice
storm.
Chapter 58
FIRE LANES
§ 58-1. Response to alarms without hindrance.
In the Town of Colchester, it is essential that fire-fighting equipment
respond to alarms without obstruction, danger or inconvenience caused by
parked vehicles.
§ 58-2. Authority of Fire Marshal.
The Fire Marshal of the Town of Colchester shall have the authority to
designate fire lanes in accordance with the provisions of the State Fire
Safety Code.
§ 58-3. Marking of fire lanes.
The owner(s) of property benefited by the establishment of fire lanes shall
be required to mark the lanes in a manner acceptable to the Fire Marshal.
§ 58-4. Parking prohibited.
Parking shall be prohibited within designated fire lanes.
§ 58-5. Penalties for offenses.
If any vehicles are parked in designated fire lanes, the owners of said
vehicles shall forfeit and pay for the use of the Town of Colchester a fine of
$25. In addition, any vehicles parked in designated fire lanes in violation of
this chapter may be towed away by the Town of Colchester at the vehicle
owner's expense.
§ 57-6 COLCHESTER CODE § 58-5
58:114
Chapter 60
(RESERVED)
Chapter 64
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood and Erosion Control Board — See Ch.
18, Art. VI.
Building contruction — See Ch. 24.
§ 64-1. Findings and intent.
Certain areas of the Town of Colchester have been identified by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development as being subject to
periodic flooding from the waters of local streams and wetlands, with the
implied potential of causing danger to residential properties within these
areas. Relief is available in the form of flood insurance provided by the
National Flood Insurance Program. It is the intent of this Town Meeting to
recognize and duly evaluate flood hazards in all official actions relating to
land use in areas having special flood hazards. Chapters 124 and 126 of
the Connecticut General Statutes authorize the town to adopt land use and
control measures.
§ 64-2. Purpose; designation of special flood hazard areas.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies, permit requirements and
application procedures related to land use and development in special flood
hazard areas of the Town of Colchester, consistent with the regulations of
the National Flood Insurance Program, as published in the Federal Register,
Vol. 41 No. 207, October 26, 1976, which will maintain the eligibility of
the Town of Colchester for participation in that program. Said special flood
hazard areas shall be those areas designated by the Federal Insurance
Administrator and shown as Zone A on the Flood Boundary and Floodway
Maps (FBMF) or the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) for the Town and
Borough of Colchester, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Town
Clerk and with the Building Official.
§ 64-3. Authority of First Selectman; designation of Building
Official as responsible agent.
The Town Meeting of the Town of Colchester hereby authorizes the First
Selectman to apply on behalf of the town to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, Division of Insurance and Mitigation, for participation
in the National Flood Insurance Program and designates the Building
§ 58-5 (RESERVED) § 64-3
60:115
Official as the official responsible for maintaining information and records
relating to the town's participation in this program.
§ 64-4. Consideration of flood-related erosion hazards in all official
land management actions.
All official boards and commissions of the Town of Colchester shall take into
account flood and flood-related erosion hazards, to the extent that they are
known, in all official actions relating to land management and use and shall,
where applicable, adopt regulations consistent with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 64-5. Responsibility of Building Official.
The Building Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood (one-hundred-year flood) elevation data from federal, state or other
sources. Such information shall be made available to the Zoning and
Planning Commission.
§ 64-6. Review of permits by Building Official.
Before issuing a permit for new construction within A Zones on the FBFM or
FIRM, the Building Official shall review the permit application to determine
that all new construction and substantial improvements (including the
placement of prefabricated buildings and mobile homes) shall be:
A. Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
B. Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage; and
C. Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
§ 64-7. Elevation of lowest floor.
Before issuing a permit for new construction or substantial improvement of
residential structures within A Zones on the FBFM or FIRM, the Building
Official shall require that the lowest floor (including the basement) be
elevated to or above the base flood level.
§ 64-8. Floodproofing methods; certification; records.
A. Before issuing a permit for new construction or substantial improvement
of nonresidential structures within A Zones on the FBFM or FIRM, the
Building Official shall require that the structure:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including the basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level; or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed
so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
§ 64-3 COLCHESTER CODE § 64-8
64:116
B. Where such floodproofing is utilized, a registered professional engineer
or architect shall certify that the floodproofing methods are adequate to
withstand loads and forces associated with the base flood, and a record
of such certification shall be maintained by the Building Official.
§ 64-9. Information to be obtained by Building Official.
The Building Official shall:
A. Obtain the elevation of all new or substantially improved structures
within A Zones on the FBFM or FIRM and whether or not such structures
contain a basement.
B. Obtain, if the structure has been floodproofed, the elevation in relation
to mean sea level to which the structure was flood proofed.
C. Maintain a public record of all such information.
§ 64-10. Requirements for mobile homes.
The Building Official shall require all mobile homes placed within Zone A
on the FBFM or FIRM be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors.
Specific requirements shall be that:
A. Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile
home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations and
mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side.
B. Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional
ties per side at intermediate points and mobile homes less than 50 feet
long requiring four additional ties per side.
C. All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force
of 4,800 pounds.
D. Additions to the mobile home be similarly anchored.
§ 64-11. Evidence of other governmental approvals.
The Building Official shall, prior to issuing any permit for construction
or other development located in Zone A on the FBFM or FIRM require
evidence from the applicant for such permit that all necessary permits have
been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is
required by Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33
U.S.C. § 1334.
Chapter 67
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93.
§ 64-8 FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS § 67-1
67:117
§ 67-1. Findings.
The Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut (herein after referred
to as the "Health Code") requires periodic inspection of public food service
establishments (herein after referred to as "establishments") by the
Municipal Director of Health. In order to comply with Health Code
provisions, the following chapter is adopted.
§ 67-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Anyplace where food or
beverages are served to the public.
§ 67-3. Special classes of operations; fees.
The following special classes of establishment operations are adopted and
the annual fees shall be as follows:
A. Class A (nonprofit social, fraternal and recreational organizations which
maintain permanent kitchen facilities): $75.
B. Class B [nonprofit social fraternal and recreational organizations which
do not maintain permanent kitchen facilities and also, fairs, carnivals,
bazaars and other activities of a temporary duration (not more than 14
days) at which food or beverages are served to the public]: $50.
C. Class C (synagogues, churches, charitable organizations and
organizations primarily dedicated to community service): no fee.
D. Class D (any restaurant with one to 49 seats): $125.
E. Class E (any restaurant with 50 to 100 seats): $175.
F. Class F (any restaurant with more than 100 seats): $200.
G. Class G (convenience store, take-out service, bakery, grocery store, deli):
$100.
H. Class H (itinerant food vendors and caterers): $75.
§ 67-4. Inspections.
All establishments shall be inspected in accordance with provisions of the
applicable section of the Health Code, and each such establishment shall
be required to obtain a permit from the town evidencing that the required
inspections have been performed.
§ 67-5. Annual permit; inspection fees.16
A. Except as provided in §§ 67-6 and 67-7, any person, corporation or
organization which operates or maintains an establishment must obtain
an annual permit. Fees are as stated above. The fees stated in § 67-3
shall cover four quarterly inspections.
B. If any additional follow-up inspections are required, an additional fee
of $30 per additional inspection shall be due. Such annual fee shall
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 67-1 COLCHESTER CODE § 67-5
67:118
become due and payable on the first day of July of each year or within
30 days after the initial serving of food or drink by such establishment,
whichever shall first occur, and any additional fees for additional followup
inspections shall be due and payable at the time of such inspection.
§ 67-6. Temporary permits; fee.17
In lieu of the annual permit specified in § 67-5, operators of Class A
establishments, which only occasionally serve food from their kitchen
facilities or otherwise and Class B establishments may elect to obtain a
temporary permit, limited to 14 days duration, and pay $35 per inspection,
which fee shall include one reinspection related to the initial inspection.
§ 67-7. Permit fee not required for Class C operators.
Class C establishment operators shall obtain either annual or temporary
permits, but without payment of any permit fee.
§ 67-8. Right of entry by Director of Health for inspections.
The Municipal Director of Health or his or her agent, after proper
identification, shall be permitted to enter any establishment at any
reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine
compliance with this chapter and the Health Code, Section 8.
§ 67-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, corporation or organization which operates an establishment
without having obtained the permit and paying fees provided for herein
shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and shall be fined $50.
Each day of operation in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed a separate violation. The fine provided herein shall be collected by
civil action by the Town Treasurer or may be imposed in such other manner
as provided by law.
Chapter 72
HEALTH DEPARTMENT PERMITS AND FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 24.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 67-5 FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS § 72-1
67:119
§ 72-1. Permits required for wells and water supply and sewage
disposal facilities.
No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall construct, reconstruct,
extend, modify or repair within the Town of Colchester a well, water supply
facility or sewage disposal facility without first obtaining a written permit
from the Director of Health or duly authorized agent.
§ 72-2. Approval required prior to issuance of building permit.
No building permit for the construction of any building or any addition
thereto shall be issued by the official authorized to issue building permits
until there has been presented to such official the written permit issued
pursuant to § 72-1 of this chapter or written approval, signed by the
Director of Health or duly authorized agent, indicating that the well or other
water supply facilities and the sewage disposal facilities located on the land
on which said building or addition are to be constructed are satisfactory.
§ 72-3. Fees. [Amended 3-19-2009]
Fees for permits issued pursuant to § 72-1 of this chapter and approvals
issued pursuant to § 72-2 of this chapter and for any related inspections
required by the Health Department prior to issuing such permit or approval
shall be adopted by the Board of Selectmen and shall be in addition to any
fees for soil testing, plan review and other services performed by the Health
Department or any fees charged by other town departments.
Service Fee
Soils test - new lot $100
Soils test - repair $75
Site plan review - new $100
Site plan review - repair $50
Site plan review greater than 2,000 gallons
per day
$100
Each revised site plan after one free revision $150/lot
Subdivision, multi-lot plan review -
subsurface sewage disposal
$50/lot
Each revised subdivision, multi-lot plan after
one free revision - subsurface system
$75/lot
Subdivision plan review - municipal sewered
sites
$10/lot
Each revised site plan after one free revision
- municipal sewer
$10/lot
Septic permit - new lot $125
Septic permit - repair $75
§ 72-1 COLCHESTER CODE § 72-3
67:120
Service Fee
Septic permit greater than 2,000 gallons per
day
$150
Septic permit greater than 2,000 gallons per
day, repair
$150
Well permit $60
Mortgage/Bank inspections $25
Chapter 74
HISTORIC DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building demolition — See Ch. 27.
Tax abatement for historic structures — See
Ch. 129, Art. V.
Town Center Neighborhood Strategic
Plan — See Ch. A156.
§ 74-1. Statutory authority.
The Town of Colchester adopts the following Historic District Chapter,
pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S.§ 7-147a.
§ 74-2. Establishment.
To promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of
the public through the preservation and protection of the distinctive
characteristics of buildings and places associated with the history of or
indicative of a period or style of architecture of the Town of Colchester,
State of Connecticut and United States of America and through the
development of appropriate settings for such buildings and places, there
is hereby established an Historic District in the Town of Colchester to be
known as the "Colchester Historic District."
§ 74-3. Boundary description.
The Colchester Historic District shall encompass the following: Beginning at
a point in the southerly highway line of Linwood Avenue (Connecticut Route
16) at its intersection with a line comprising a southeasterly extension
of the easterly highway line of Cragin Court; thence running generally
northwesterly across Linwood avenue and along the easterly highway line
of Cragin Court, a distance of 300 feet more or less to a point; thence
running generally northeasterly a distance of 83 feet more or less, and
generally southeasterly a distance of 200 feet more or less to a point in the
northwesterly highway line of Main Street, the last three courses running
along land now or formerly of the Trustee of the Cragin Memorial Library:
thence running generally northeasterly along said northwesterly highway
§ 72-3 HISTORIC DISTRICTS § 74-3
74:121
line of Main Street, a distance of 412.5 feet more or less to the intersection
of the northwesterly highway line of Main Street and the westerly highway
line of Broadway; thence continuing across said Broadway to the southern
corner of the northern most, triangular portion of the Colchester Green;
thence running generally northwesterly along the southwestern bound of
said Green, a distance of 258 feet to the northwestern corner of said
Green; thence running generally southeasterly a distance of 221 feet more
or less along the northeastern bound of said Green to the eastern corner
of said Green; thence continuing in a generally easterly direction across
the intersection of Broadway, Lebanon Avenue and Hayward Avenue to the
northwestern corner of land now or formerly of Getzoff; thence running
generally northeasterly along the southerly highway line of Lebanon
Avenue, a distance of 315 feet more or less; thence running generally
southeasterly along said land now or formerly of Getzoff, a distance of 398
feet more or less to land now or formerly of Thompson; thence running
generally westerly along said land now or formerly of Thompson; to a
point in the northern property line of said Thompson due north of the
northeastern corner of land now or formerly of Colchester Grange No. 78
Inc.; thence running due south to said northeastern corner of land now
or formerly of Colchester Grange No. 78 Inc.; thence running generally
westerly a distance of 151 feet more or less, to land now or formerly
of Johnston; thence running generally southerly along said land now or
formerly of Johnston; and land now or formerly of Brennen, a distance of
152 feet more or less to land now or formerly of Parsons; thence running
generally easterly a distance of 50 feet more or less, and southerly a
distance of 54 feet more or less to land now or formerly of Turner, the last
two courses running along said land now or formerly of Parsons; thence
running generally easterly a distance of 45 feet more or less generally
southerly a distance of 75 feet more or less, generally westerly a distance
of 72 feet more or less, generally southerly a distance of 134 feet more
or less, and generally westerly a distance of 129 feet more or less to a
point on the easterly highway line of Hayward Avenue, the last five courses
running along land now or formerly of Turner; thence running generally
southerly along said easterly highway line of Hayward Avenue a distance
of 42 feet more or less to the intersection of the easterly highway line of
Hayward Avenue and the northerly highway line of Norwich Avenue; thence
continuing in a generally southerly direction across said Norwich Avenue to
the northeastern corner of land now or formerly of the Trustees of Bacon
Academy (commonly known as the DAR House); thence running along said
land now or formerly of the trustees of Bacon Academy generally southerly
a distance of 81 feet more or less, and generally westerly a distance of
41 feet more or less to land now or formerly of the Town of Colchester;
thence running along said land now or formerly of the Town of Colchester
in a generally southerly and then a generally westerly direction to land
now or formerly of Goldberg; thence running generally southerly along
said land now or formerly of Goldberg to its southeastern corner; thence
continuing along said land now or formerly of Goldberg generally westerly
a distance of 151 feet more or less and generally northerly a distance of
100 feet more or less to the southerly highway line of said Norwich Avenue;
§ 74-3 COLCHESTER CODE § 74-3
74:122
thence running generally westerly along said southerly highway line of
Norwich Avenue a distance of 196 feet more or less to the intersection of
the southerly highway line of Norwich Avenue and the easterly highway
line of Main Street; thence running generally southerly along the easterly
highway line of said Main Street a distance of 1,250 feet more or less to a
point opposite land now or formerly of Green (the Breed Tavern lot); thence
running westerly across said Main Street to a point at the southeastern
corner of land now or formerly of said Green, thence running generally
westerly a distance of 200 feet more or less, generally northerly a distance
of 39 feet more or less, generally westerly a distance of 20 feet more or
less and generally northerly a distance of 247 feet more or less to the
southern boundary of land now or formerly of Solomon, the last four courses
running along said land now or formerly of Green; thence running generally
westerly along the southern boundary of said land now or formerly of
Solomon to its southwestern corner; thence running generally northerly
along the western boundary of said land now or formerly of Solomon and
the western boundary of land now or formerly of Condren, a distance or
238 feet more or less to the southern boundary of land now or formerly of
Brown; thence running in a generally westerly direction along the southern
boundary of said land now or formerly of Brown to its southwestern corner
thence running generally northerly along the western boundary of said land
now or formerly of Brown and the western boundary of land now or formerly
of Sabrowski, a distance of 236 feet more or less; thence running generally
easterly along said land now or formerly of Sabrowski a distance of 173
feet more or less; thence running generally northerly along said land now
or formerly of Sabrowski a distance of 52 feet more or less to land now or
formerly of Collins; thence running generally westerly along the southerly
boundary of said land now or formerly of Collins a distance of 175 feet more
or less; thence running generally northerly along the western boundary of
said land now or formerly of Collins a distance of 238 feet more or less;
thence running generally easterly along said land now or formerly of Collins
a distance of 65 feet more or less; thence running generally northerly along
said land now or formerly of Collins, and land now or formerly of the
Colchester Federated Church, a distance of 373 feet more or less; thence
running generally easterly along the southerly highway land now line of
Stebbins Road and the northern boundary of said land now or formerly of
the Colchester Federated Church, a distance of 230 feet more or less, to a
point in the western boundary of land now or formerly of the Trustees of
Bacon Academy (the Day Hall property); thence running generally northerly
along said land now or formerly of the Trustees of Bacon Academy to its
northwestern corner; thence running generally easterly along the northern
boundary of said land now or formerly of the Trustees of Bacon Academy
a distance of 81 feet, more or less, to a point in the westerly highway line
of Main Street, a distance of 235 feet, more or less, to its intersection with
the southerly highway line of Linwood Avenue; thence running generally
southwesterly along said southerly highway line of Linwood Avenue to the
point and place of beginning.
§ 74-4. Historic District Commission.
§ 74-3 HISTORIC DISTRICTS § 74-4
74:123
A. An Historic District Commission is hereby established, which shall
consist of five members and three alternate members, all of whom shall
be electors of the Town of Colchester holding no salaried town office.
The members of said Commission shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen. The regular members shall be appointed in such a manner
that the term of a least one member shall expire each year, with their
successors to be appointed in like manner for terms of five years.
Alternate members shall be appointed for terms of three years. The
Selectmen are further empowered to make appointments to fill
vacancies, which appointments shall be for the duration of the vacated
unexpired term. At least one member of the Commission shall be a
resident within the Historic District.
B. Within a period of 30 days after the appointment of the original members
of the Commission, the regular members shall meet and elect a Chair,
Vice Chair and Clerk from among the membership. Alternate members
shall not participate in any election of officers of the Commission. In all
other matters, in case of an inability to act because of absence, sickness
of self-interest on the part of any member of the Commission, that
Commissioner's place shall be taken by an alternate member designated
by the Chair. All members shall serve without compensation. The
Commission shall adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent with the
provisions of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut and may,
subject to appropriation, employ clerical or technical assistance or
consultants and may accept money gifts and expend the same for such
purposes.
§ 74-5. Powers and duties of Historic District Commission.
The Historic District Commission shall have powers and perform such
functions and shall be subject to such limitations as shall from time to time
be provided by C.G.S.§ 7-147.
§ 74-6. Enforcement officer designated. [Added 6-24-1999]
The Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town of Colchester shall serve as
enforcement officer for such activities pertaining to the jurisdiction of the
Colchester Historic District Commission.
Chapter 77
HOUSING PARTNERSHIP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing needs of the elderly — See Ch. 18,
Art. V.
§ 74-4 COLCHESTER CODE § 77-1
77:124
§ 77-1. Declaration; purpose.
The Board of Selectmen of the municipality of Colchester hereby declare
that a Local Housing Partnership be formed, in accordance with C.G.S.
§ 8-336f, in order to develop ways to increase the supply and availability of
affordable housing in Colchester.
§ 77-2. Housing Partnership created; membership.
There is hereby created the Colchester Housing Partnership, appointed by
the chief elected official of the municipality. The partnership shall consist of
the following members:
A. The chief elected official of Colchester.
B. Representatives of the Planning Commission, Zoning Commission,
Inland Wetlands Commission, Housing Authority and any local
community development agency, not to exceed five in number.
C. Representatives of the local business community, such as local bankers,
realtor's and developers, not to exceed three in number.
D. Representatives of public interest groups, such as housing advocates,
members of the clergy, members of local civic groups and
representatives of local nonprofit corporations, not to exceed three in
number.
E. Local urban planning, land use and housing professionals, not to exceed
three in number.
§ 77-3. Responsibilities of town for initial designation under
program.
Responsibilities of the Municipality of Colchester, in order to receive initial
designation under the Connecticut Housing Partnership Program shall
include the following:
A. Submit evidence to the Commissioner of Housing that the Colchester
Housing Partnership has been formed in accordance with C.G.S.
§ 8-336f.
B. Submit evidence to the Commissioner of Housing that sufficient local
resources have been committed to the Colchester Housing Partnership.
§ 77-4. Duties of Housing Partnership.
Duties of the Colchester Housing Partnership, in order to receive
development designation under the Connecticut Housing Partnership
Program, shall include the following:
A. To examine and identify housing needs and opportunities in the
community.
B. To explore the availability of any state, municipal or other land that is
suitable for the development of affordable housing.
C. To review applicable zoning regulations to determine whether such
regulations restrict the development of affordable housing in the
community.
D. To identify any necessary changes to such regulations.
§ 77-1 HOUSING PARTNERSHIP § 77-4
77:125
E. To establish priorities and develop a long-range plan to meet identified
housing needs in the community consistent with regional housing needs.
F. To establish procedures for the development of a written proposal to
achieve such priorities in accordance with said plan.
G. To start an activity, development or project designed to create additional
affordable housing in Colchester.
§ 77-5. Conflicting resolutions, orders, rules and regulations.
At all times when any orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated
pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing
resolutions, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be
inconsistent therewith.
§ 77-6. No conflict with state or federal statutes.
This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal
statute, rule or regulation.
§ 77-7. Expenses.
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the
municipality in carrying out any Partnership activities authorized by this
chapter without prior approval by the legislative body nor shall any person
have any right to bind the municipality by contract, agreement or otherwise
without prior and specific approval of the legislative body.
Chapter 81
LIBRARY
§ 81-1. Establishment of free public library; appropriation of funds.
The town voted to accept the library site and building conveyed by Dr. E.
B. Cragin, under a deed of gift for the uses of inhabitants of the Town of
Colchester, and said Cragin Memorial Library is hereby established and
constituted the free public library of the Town of Colchester. Further $300
shall be and the same is hereby appropriated out of funds in the hands of the
Treasurer of the Town of Colchester for the uses of the free public library
in said town, and said Treasurer is hereby directed to pay such money to
any person authorized by the Trustees of the Cragin Memorial Library to
receive same, the same to be paid on or before March 1, 1905.
§ 81-2. Payment by Town Treasurer.18
Following the public library bylaws, the Town Treasurer of the Town of
Colchester is directed to pay annually thereafter, to any person authorized
by the Trustees of the Cragin Memorial Library to receive the same, the
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 77-4 COLCHESTER CODE § 81-2
81:126
sum of $300, so long as said Trustees shall maintain a public library free to
the inhabitants of said town.
Chapter 90
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 81-2 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 81-2
90:127

ARTICLE I
Social Security
[Adopted 12-17-1952]
§ 90-1. Application for membership.
The Town of Colchester shall apply for membership and participate in the
Old Age and Survivors Insurance System under Title II of the Social Security
Act as amended in accordance with Public Act No. 277 of the 1951 Public
Act as of the first day of July 1952, for all its employees with the exception
of employees performing such services and all classes of part-time positions
and the employees excluded by Section 3 of said Public Act No. 277.
§ 90-2. Execution of agreements by Board of Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen shall execute on behalf and in the name of the Town
of Colchester any and all agreements with the State Employees Retirement
Commission for the aforesaid purposes, in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of said Public Act 277 and subject to the provisions of said
Public Act 277 and subject to the regulations promulgated by the State
Employee's Retirement Commission pursuant to said Public Act 277.
§ 90-3. Deduction from wages.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Colchester be and is hereby
authorized and directed to make deductions from the wages of the
employees participating in the aforesaid Old Age Survivors Insurance
System as required by Section 4 of said Public Act No. 277, and to forward
the amount thereof, together with the contribution of the Town of
Colchester, to the State Employees Retirement Commission in manner and
form prescribed by said regulations.
§ 90-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 90-3
90:129
Chapter 91
OPEN BURNING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93.
§ 91-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-174, the town adopts the following open burning
ordinance.
§ 91-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — The person making the open burning certificate application
and who will be responsible for the open burning.
BRUSH — Shrubs, vegetation or prunings, the diameter of which is not
greater than three inches at the widest point.
BUILDING — Any structure that is enclosed by a roof and walls.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the State of Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection, or his or her designee.
DEP — The State of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
NUISANCE — The discharge into the open air of any smoke, soot, dust,
fumes, odors or other emissions which cause injury, detriment or annoyance
or which endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of the public
or which cause, or are likely to cause, injury or damage to business or
property.
OPEN BURNING — The ignition of, causing to be ignited, permitting to be
ignited or maintenance of a fire outside the confines of a building.
OPEN BURNING CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued by the open burning
official in accordance with this chapter, § 22a-174 and the regulations.
OPEN BURNING CERTIFICATE APPLICATION — An application for an
open burning made on the form furnished by the open burning official,
which form shall, at a minimum, name the person responsible for the open
burning, list his or her address, list his or her telephone number, explain the
purpose of the open burning, explain the type and quantity of materials to
be burned and list the address of the property at which the open burning
shall take place.
OPEN BURNING OFFICIAL — Such official who has been nominated,
certified and serves in accordance with § 22a-174 and the regulations.
§ 90-3 COLCHESTER CODE § 91-2
91:130
OPEN BURNING REGISTRATION — Verbal registration which is made to
the open burning official of an open burning enumerated in § 91-5 of this
chapter 24 hours prior to the ignition of such open burning.
REGULATIONS — Those Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies enacted
pursuant to § 22a-174, as amended.
SECTION 22a-174 — Section 22a-174 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
as amended.
§ 91-3. General prohibition.
No open burning shall be allowed except as specifically provided in this
chapter.
§ 91-4. Open burning certificate required; conditions.
A. The following types of open burning shall be allowed only after an
applicant obtains an open burning certificate:
(1) The open burning of brush on residential property. The applicant
must be a resident or an authorized agent of a resident of the
property where the open burning will occur. The open burning
official, in his or her discretion, may require proof of residency or
proof that the applicant is an authorized agent of a resident.
(2) Fire-training exercises.
(3) Eradication or control of insect infestations or disease.
(4) Agricultural purposes.
(5) Clearing vegetative debris following a natural disaster.
(6) Vegetative management or enhancement of wildlife habitat or
ecological sustainability on town property or on any privately owned
property permanently dedicated as open space.
(7) Any other type of fire that is described in § 22a-174 or the
Regulations.
B. The following conditions shall be placed on all open burning certificates:
(1) Open burning must take place between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. No visible embers, flame or smoke may be present after
5:00 p.m.
(2) Open burning shall only be permitted on sunny or partly sunny days
when the wind speed is five to 15 miles per hour, except that firetraining
exercises shall not be subject to this condition.
(3) The open burning of brush may only occur on residential property
that contains one or two residential units.
(4) The applicant must keep a copy of the open burning certificate in his
or her possession at the time of the open burning.
(5) The applicant must call the open burning official or such other
person listed on the open burning certificate 24 hours prior to the
ignition of the open burning and leave the applicant's name,
telephone number, the specific time of and the location of the open
burning.
(6) Any other conditions required to be imposed by § 22a-174 or the
regulations.
§ 91-2 OPEN BURNING § 91-4
91:131
C. The open burning official may issue such further conditions to an open
burning certificate, either at the time of issuance of the open burning
certificate or afterwards, as are necessary to avoid a nuisance or to
protect the health, safety and comfort of the public, relating to the
following:
(1) The materials and quantifies to be burned.
(2) The hours and days during which open burning is allowed.
(3) Any other conditions allowed under § 22a-174 or the Regulations.
D. An open burning certificate is applicable only for the occasion and
purpose outlined in such open burning certificate. The open burning
certificate may be revoked in writing by the open burning official or the
Commissioner for violation of any provision of this chapter, § 22a-174 or
the regulations.
§ 91-5. Open burning registration required.
The following type of open burning shall be allowed only after a person
makes an open burning registration: any campfires or bonfires that exceed
four feet in any direction.
§ 91-6. Exception.
The following types of open burning shall be allowed without the need for
an open burning certificate or open burning registration:
A. Barbecues or other similar outdoor fires, which fires are for the cooking
of food for human consumption.
B. Campfires, bonfires or other types of fires made out of nonprocessed
wood for recreational or ceremonial purposes, provided that the size of
such fires does not exceed four feet in any direction.
C. Fires in "salamanders" or other similar devices used by construction
or other workers for heating purposes, which fires are used for street
installation or paving activities, the repairing of utilities or other similar
work.
D. Fire breaks for the purpose of controlling forest fires, provided that fire
personnel do it.
E. Controlled fires in salt water marshes to forestall uncontrolled fires,
provided that they are done by fire personnel.
F. My fire specifically exempted from such requirements in § 22a-174 or the
Regulations.
§ 91-7. Permit from Fire Marshal.
The following types of open burning shall be allowed only after a permit
from the Fire Marshal is obtained in accordance with § 22a-174 and the
Regulations: the open burning of brush in municipal landfills, transfer
stations and municipal recycling centers in the town.
§ 91-4 COLCHESTER CODE § 91-8
91:132
§ 91-8. Permit from Commissioner.
Certain types of open burning require the issuance of a permit by the
Commissioner; such types are enumerated in the Connecticut General
Statutes and the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies.
§ 91-9. Burning not allowed by this chapter.
Under no circumstances is the following allowed, and constitutes a violation
under this chapter:
A. No weeds, grass, leaves, processed wood, garbage, paper, metals,
plastics, rubber, painted materials, man-made waste or demolition waste
shall be burned.
B. No open burning of brush shall occur when national or state ambient air
quality standards may be exceeded.
C. No open burning of brush shall occur where a hazardous health
condition might be created.
D. No open burning shall occur when the forest fire danger in the area
is identified by the Commissioner as extreme, and where woodland or
grassland is within 100 feet of the proposed open burning.
E. No open burning of brush shall occur when there is an advisory from the
Commissioner of any air pollution episode.
F. No open burning is allowed within the limits of any public road or public
right-of-way.
G. No open burning of brush shall occur on commercial or industrial
properties, vacant lots or on properties that contain multifamily
residential units.
§ 91-10. Conditions on all open burning.
The following conditions are imposed on all open burning:
A. No open burning shall create a nuisance.
B. A responsible adult shall tend to the open burning at all times.
C. Suitable fire-extinguishing equipment must be in close proximity and
available at the time of the open burning.
D. The open burning must be a minimum of 25 feet from any property line
and 25 feet from any building, except that barbecues or other similar
outdoor fires shall not be subject to this condition.
E. No open burning shall be allowed to burn out of control so as to require
the response of fire personnel and/or apparatus. The Fire Chief or Fire
Marshal shall make the determination that a fire has been allowed to
burn out of control.
§ 91-11. Extinguishing of fires.
The Fire Marshal, Fire Chief or any officer of the Fire Department, the
Director of Health, or his or her designee, or any police officer may require
any person who ignites or maintains an open burning in violation of the
provisions of this chapter to extinguish such open burning. Failure to
extinguish such open burning shall be a violation under this chapter.
§ 91-8 OPEN BURNING § 91-12
91:133
§ 91-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
following penalties and fines:
A. Fines:
(1) First offense or violation: $25.
(2) Second or subsequent offense or violation: $100 for each separate
violation and each day of continued violation.
B. The open burning official may seek enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter by injunction and, in such event, the violator shall pay the town's
reasonable attorney's fees.
C. The provisions of Chapter 93, Ordinance Enforcement, shall otherwise
apply to this chapter.
D. Any and all remedies which the town has in enforcing this chapter, at law
or in equity, shall be cumulative, and two or more or all of such remedies
may be exercised at the same time.
Chapter 92
OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION FUND
§ 92-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148(c)(2)(K),
the Town of Colchester (the Town) does hereby create a special fund, which
fund shall be known as the "Open Space Preservation Fund" (the fund),
and which fund shall not lapse at the end of the municipal fiscal year. The
fund's purposes shall be the preservation of open space or the acquisition
of land or interests in land for open space or for recreational or agricultural
purposes (the "open space purposes").
§ 92-2. Sources of funding, investments, and limitation on fund use.
A. In addition to such sums as may be appropriated by the Town annually
for deposit into the fund, the Town is authorized to and may deposit into
the fund all monies received by it, from whatever source, as monetary
gifts, grants or loans for open space purposes.
B. Fees to the Town collected in lieu of any requirement to provide open
space, pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes §§ 8-25 and 8-25b, and
as authorized by the Zoning and Planning Commission, pursuant to the
Town's Subdivision Regulations, shall be deposited into the fund.
C. The fund shall be in the custody of the Town Treasurer or other officer
in charge of funds of the Town, and all or any part of the monies in
the fund may, from time to time, be invested in any securities in which
public funds may be lawfully invested. All income derived from such
investments shall be placed into the fund and become a part thereof. The
monies so invested shall at all times be subject to withdrawal from such
investments for use as, hereinafter set forth.
D. No sums contained in the fund, including interest and dividends earned
upon said sums, shall be transferred to any other account within the
§ 91-12 COLCHESTER CODE § 92-2
92:134
Town budget. No expenditures shall be made from the fund except in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
E. The continuation of the fund shall be perpetual, notwithstanding that
from time to time the fund may be unfunded.
§ 92-3. Expenditures from the fund.
Expenditures shall be made from the fund only in accordance with the
following procedures and requirements:
A. Expenditures from the fund shall be made exclusively for acquisition
costs, including but not limited to appraisal and closing costs, of real
property or of easements, interests or other rights therein, the use of
which shall be limited to open space purposes;
B. Expenditures from the fund shall only be made for acquisitions that have
been approved in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 92-4
below; and
C. All expenditures from the fund shall conform to the Town's general
procedures with regard to the expenditure of municipal funds.
§ 92-4. Process for approval of acquisitions for open space
purposes.
A. The Conservation Commission is hereby designated to act on behalf
of the Town for the purpose of reviewing and recommending to the
Board of Selectmen acquisitions for open space purposes. Any person,
including other agencies and departments of the Town, may propose
possible acquisitions to the Conservation Commission for review. The
Conservation Commission shall request input on possible acquisitions
from other agencies and departments of the Town (such as the Parks and
Recreation Department and the Zoning and Planning Commission), as
appropriate in each circumstance.
B. The Conservation Commission shall recommend to the Board of
Selectmen the acquisition of any parcel or interest therein to be used
for open space purposes ("proposed acquisition"). The recommendation
shall describe the proposed use and include a comprehensive statement
of the Conservation Commission's evaluation of the proposed
acquisition.
C. If the Board of Selectmen approves a proposed acquisition, it shall
forward the Conservation Commission's recommendation for the
proposed acquisition to the Zoning and Planning Commission for a
report pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 8-24, and to the Board
of Finance.
D. Following action by the Board of Finance and the issuance of the Zoning
and Planning Commission's report, pursuant to Connecticut General
Statutes § 8-24, final action on the proposed acquisition shall be taken
by the Board of Selectmen or, if required by Town Charter, by the Town
Meeting.
Chapter 93
§ 92-2 ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT § 92-4
93:135
ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT
§ 93-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to C.G.S.§§ 7-148(c)(10)(A) and 7-152c, as such sections may be
amended from time to time, the Town of Colchester (the "town") hereby
adopts the following procedures regarding citations issued for violations of
town ordinances.
§ 93-2. Enforcement of all ordinances by citation; warning.
Unless otherwise specifically provided in a town ordinance or the
Connecticut General Statutes, all town ordinances may be enforced by
citations issued by designated municipal officers or employees. Such
designated municipal officers or employees shall issue a written warning
providing notice of the specific violation before issuing the citation.
§ 93-3. Appointment of hearing officers.
The First Selectman shall appoint one or more persons who shall serve as
hearing officers to conduct hearings into the violation of town ordinances.
The hearing officers shall be electors of the town, but no police officer or
any employee or person authorized to issue citations for the violation of any
town ordinance shall be permitted to serve as a hearing officer.
§ 93-4. Notice of violation.
Within 12 months from the expiration of the period for the uncontested
payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any citation issued under any
town ordinance for a violation thereof, the town shall send notice to the
owner of the property which is the subject of the violation or such other
person as may be appropriate (the "cited person"). Such notice shall inform
the cited person:
A. Of the allegations against the cited person and the amount of the fines,
penalties, costs or fees due;
B. That the cited person may contest liability before a hearing officer by
delivering in person or by mail written notice within 10 days of the date
thereof;
C. That if a hearing is not demanded, an assessment and judgment shall be
entered against the cited person; and
D. That such judgment may issue without further notice.
§ 93-5. Admission of liability.
A. If a cited person who is sent notice pursuant to § 93-4 above wishes
to admit liability for an alleged violation, the cited person may, without
requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties, costs or
fees in person or by mail to the First Selectman at the address specified
in the notice. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil
or criminal, to establish the conduct of the cited person or other person
making the payment.
§ 92-4 COLCHESTER CODE § 93-5
93:136
B. Any cited person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a
hearing within 10 days of the date of the notice provided for in § 93-4
above shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the First Selectman
shall certify the cited person's failure to respond to the hearing officer.
The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties,
costs or fees provided for by the applicable ordinance and shall follow
the procedures set forth in § 93-6 below.
§ 93-6. Hearing procedure.
A. Any cited person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of
the date, time and place for the hearing. The hearing shall be held not
less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of
the notice, provided that the hearing officer shall grant, upon good cause
shown, any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement
or continuance. An original or certified copy of the initial notice of
violation issued by the issuing official or police officer shall be filed and
retained by the town and shall be deemed to be a business record within
the scope of C.G.S.§ 52-180 and evidence of the facts contained therein.
B. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form
and with such methods of proof as the hearing officer deems fair and
appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not
be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or
affirmation.
C. The hearing officer shall announce a decision at the end of the hearing.
If the hearing officer determines that the cited person is not liable, then
the matter shall be dismissed, and the hearing officer's determination
shall be entered in writing accordingly. If the cited person is found liable
for the violation, the hearing officer shall forthwith enter and assess the
fines, penalties, costs or fees against the cited person as provided by the
applicable ordinance.
§ 93-7. Attendance at hearing.
The presence of the issuing official or police officer shall be required at the
hearing if the cited person so requests. A designated town official, other
than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the town. The
cited person wishing to contest liability shall appear at the hearing and may
present evidence in his or her behalf. The hearing officer may, however,
accept from the cited person copies of police reports, investigatory and
citation reports and other official documents by mail and may determine
thereby that the appearance of the cited person at the hearing is
unnecessary. If the cited person fails to appear and such appearance has
not been determined by the hearing officer to be unnecessary, the hearing
officer may enter an assessment by default against the cited person upon a
finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable ordinance.
§ 93-8. Notice of assessment; judgment.
If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing officer
shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to the cited person
§ 93-5 ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT § 93-8
93:137
and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months after such
mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the clerk of the
Superior Court at Norwich, together with such entry fee as may be required
by the Superior Court. The certified copy of the notice of assessment
shall constitute a record of assessment. Within such twelve-month period,
assessments against the same cited person may be accrued and filed as one
record of assessment. The clerk shall enter judgment, in the amount of such
record of assessment and court costs, against the cited person in favor of
the town. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the hearing officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment,
shall have the effect of a civil money judgment, and a levy of execution of
such judgment may issue without further notice to the cited person.
§ 93-9. Appeal.
A cited person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to
this chapter is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal shall
be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such assessment
by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in
an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to
C.G.S.§ 52-259, in the Superior Court at Norwich, which shall entitle the
cited person to a hearing in accordance with the rules of the Judges of the
Superior Court.
Chapter 98
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93.
§ 98-1. Permit required; exceptions. [Amended 5-6-2004]
No person, except those exempt pursuant to C.G.S. § 21-37, as amended,
shall engage in the business of hawker or peddler on the public streets,
Connecticut highways or sidewalks of the Town or any land abutting such
streets, highways or sidewalks without first having obtained a permit from
the First Selectman. This chapter shall not apply to the hawking or peddling
of any goods, wares or merchandise from house to house within the Town.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to allow hawking or peddling on limited
access highways or public property, including without limitation, the Town
Green or private property without the permission of the owner of the private
property.
§ 93-8 COLCHESTER CODE § 98-1.1
98:138
§ 98-1.1. Vending during events. [Added 5-6-2004]
No person, except those exempt pursuant to § 21-37 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended, shall engage in the business of hawker or
peddler on the public streets, state highways or sidewalks of the Town or
any land abutting such street, highways, or sidewalks along the route of
a parade or at the location of a fair, festival or similar community or civic
event during such parade or event, except in an area designated by the First
Selectman.
§ 98-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAWKER or PEDDLER — Any person, whether principal or agent, who
goes from town to town or from place to place in the same town selling or
bartering, or carrying for sale or barter, or exposing therefor, any goods,
wares or merchandise, either on foot or from any animal or vehicle.
§ 98-3. Permit application information.
An application on a form established by the Board of Selectmen for a permit
shall be submitted to the First Selectman and shall include the following
information:
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Name and address of any person or organization for whom the applicant
is employed or acting.
C. Broad description of the general types of goods, wares or merchandise
proposed to be sold or offered for sale, including the type of operation
proposed to be conducted (e.g., motor vehicle, pushcart, vending table).
D. If food or beverages are to be sold, evidence of inspection by and
approval of the Town Code Enforcement Department.
E. Registration number and name of the owner of any motor vehicle that
will be used in connection with the applicant's business.
§ 98-4. Fee; exemption for nonprofit organizations. [Amended
5-6-2004]
The fee for the privilege of so vending, hawking or peddling shall be $200
per year. Nonprofit organizations shall not be subject to said fee.
§ 98-5. Term of permit; annual renewal.
The permit shall continue in effect for one year from the date of issue and
may be renewed annually.
§ 98-6. Record of permits.
The First Selectman's office shall keep a record of all permits issued
hereunder in a book provided for such purpose containing:
§ 98-1.1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 98-6
98:139
A. Number and date of each permit.
B. Name and address of each permittee.
§ 98-7. Revocation of permit.
Any permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the First
Selectman if the permittee violates any provision of this chapter or creates
any nuisance situation in connection with the permitted activity.
§ 98-8. Posting of permit.
Each permittee shall be required to affix the permit to the vehicle, cart,
stand, carrying case or support structure used in peddling or vending in a
location clearly visible to the public.
§ 98-9. Permit requirements.
Permits issued under this chapter shall be subject to the following
requirements:
A. The permittee shall make adequate provision for the collection and
disposal of all containers, wrappings or other type of litter that is
deposited in the area by the permittee or its customers.
B. The permittee shall operate the business in a safe manner and maintain
any pushcarts, vehicles or similar devices in a safe operating condition
so as not to be injurious to the public health and safety.
C. The permittee shall be in compliance with all applicable federal, state
and local laws, rules, regulations and ordinances.
§ 98-10. Penalties for offenses.
The penalty for violating any provision of this chapter shall be a fine of $50.
Chapter 103
RAPID ACCESS SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 6. Building construction — See Ch. 24.
§ 103-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(B), the Town adopts the following rapid
access systems ordinance.
§ 103-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to enable fire and emergency personnel to
promptly enter commercial and industrial structures within the Town of
§ 98-6 COLCHESTER CODE § 103-2
98:140
Colchester by requiring the installation of a rapid access system in new or
renovated commercial and industrial structures.
§ 103-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Town of Colchester Fire Department.
RAPID ACCESS SYSTEM — A rapid access system consisting of a heavyduty
key vault or other storage device that holds a key for providing
emergency personnel with access to a commercial or industrial structure.
RENOVATED STRUCTURE — Any existing commercial or industrial
building that has been updated or repaired, or any structure that has been
converted to a commercial or industrial use, which required the issuance
of a building permit from the Town of Colchester and for which the cost of
work associated with the building or structure exceeded $10,000.
§ 103-4. Installation required; maintenance.
A. No certificate of occupancy shall henceforth be issued for any new
or renovated commercial or industrial structure unless there shall be
installed thereon a rapid access system approved by the Fire
Department. Keys to such rapid access system shall be maintained
exclusively by the Fire Department.
B. Upon installation of such rapid access system, the building owner shall,
at such owner's expense, maintain all components thereof. If the Fire
Department determines that a rapid access system must be repaired or
replaced, it shall provide written notice to the building owner, and the
building owner shall repair or replace said rapid access system within
seven days of receipt of written notice from the Fire Department.
§ 103-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any building owner who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
$25 for each violation per day so long as the violation continues.
Chapter 105
REPORTS
§ 105-1. Submission of reports.
A. It is the sense of this meeting that:
(1) The Selectmen, Town Treasurer and Town Social Committee of the
Town of Colchester, Connecticut, make and submit to the Annual
Town Meeting of said Town of Colchester to be in October 1925,
a complete report of all the doings of said officials in their official
capacity for the fiscal year ending prior to said Town Meeting; and
(2) Said report shall include a list of all bills contracted by said officials
or any of them in their official capacities, including all bills that are
§ 103-2 REPORTS § 105-1
105:141
unpaid and outstanding against said town at the date of said Town
Meeting, or to the end of said first year of said town; and
(3) Said lists of bills be included in the Annual Town Report in so far as
they have been contracted prior to the publication of said report; and
(4) A list of all bills contracted by said officials and outstanding against
said town or paid by said officials in the period and during the
period of time between the closing of town record books and the
Annual Town Meeting in October 1925, and said list of said bills so
contracted and bills so paid be submitted to and turned over to the
successors in office of said officials, if any; and
(5) Said list be also received at said Annual Town Meeting and entered
in the minute book of the Town Clerk of said town.
B. Also the auditors of said town shall make a complete report of the
available taxes due and of all taxes due to said town, after making a
complete audit and examination of the rate books in the hands of the
Tax Collector of said town, or in the possession of any other person or
persons, said auditor's report to be included in said Annual Town Report
of 1925.
C. Such reports as above stated shall be submitted and made by the officials
mentioned at all subsequent Annual Town Meetings of said town.
Chapter 109
ROADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93.
§ 109-1. Purpose.
The following chapter has been created to control by permit, the
construction of roads and related improvements within the rights-of-way
of the Town of Colchester and to provide for fees to compensate for
inspections of said improvements.
§ 109-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association
who shall apply to the Board of Selectmen for a road construction permit.
ARTERIAL STREET — A major thoroughfare whose main function is to carry
large volumes of traffic between major points.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — Refers to an agent of the First Selectmen. Such
agent may be the Town Road Inspector or Road Foreman.
§ 105-1 COLCHESTER CODE § 109-2
109:142
COLLECTOR STREET — A street whose primary function is to carry
moderate traffic volumes between local streets and arterial streets. It may
also provide access to abutting properties.
FORM 813 — A certain document entitled "Department of Transportation:
Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges, and Incidental Construction,
Form 813," as may be amended from time to time.
IMPROVED TOWN ROADS — A town road that is oiled or paved with
bituminous concrete or similar surface.
NEW SUBDIVISION ROAD — A proposed town road, said road being part of
a subdivision plan.
ROAD — Includes streets, highways, avenues, lanes laid out and intended
as a vehicular accessway.
ROAD FOREMAN — An employee of the Town of Colchester responsible for
the maintenance of the town roads.
ROAD INSPECTOR — An employee of the Town of Colchester responsible
for the building of town roads, according to regulations.
ROAD ORDINANCE — An ordinance concerning the construction and
acceptance of roads in the Town of Colchester for public use.
TOWN ENGINEER — A professional engineer certified in the State of
Connecticut employed by the Town of Colchester.
TOWN ROAD — A road that has been accepted at a Town Meeting or a road
that has not been accepted by a Town Meeting but has been used by the
public for more than 25 years and has been maintained in a like condition
by the town.
UNIMPROVED TOWN ROAD — A town road that is not oiled or paved with
bituminous concrete or similar surface.
WORKING DAYS — Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m to 4:30 p.m.,
excluding municipal holidays as defined by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 109-3. Permit required.
No road or other improvements appurtenant thereto shall be constructed
in the Town of Colchester right-of-way until a road construction permit has
been issued by the Board of Selectmen. Said permit is required for the
construction of:
A. New roads to be accepted by the town.
B. The completion of roads in a subdivision approved by the Zoning and
Planning Commission prior to and after the effective date of the Road
Ordinance.
C. The construction or modification of pavement, drainage or other
improvements within or in support of any existing improved or
unimproved town road or highway.
D. Any other improvements within a Town of Colchester right-of-way.
§ 109-2 ROADS § 109-4
109:143
§ 109-4. Standards.
In addition to the design and construction standards hereinafter specified,
the following shall also be applicable:
A. Approved subdivision. The design and construction standards applicable
to streets in a subdivision approved by the Zoning and Planning
Commission prior to the effective date of the Road Ordinance shall be
the standards applicable at the time of such approval, provided that such
approval is still in effect.
B. Other standards. The Zoning and Planning Commission may approve
alternate design and construction standards when:
(1) Such standards are prepared by a licensed professional engineer and
are approved by the Town Engineer.
(2) The Commission determines that such standards will be in accord
with the purpose and intent of the Road Ordinance.
§ 109-5. Inspection.
All work subject to a road construction permit shall be subject to inspection
and approval by the First Selectman, or his or her authorized agent shall
have free access to the work at all times and shall be deemed authorized
to take material samples, cores and other tests as deemed necessary to
determine compliance with these standards. The First Selectman or
authorized agent may require the applicant, at his or her expense, to have
such tests made and certified by a professional engineer licensed by the
State of Connecticut or other parties of its determination.
§ 109-6. Coordination and support of other regulations.
It is the intent of this chapter that the policies, rules, procedures, standards
and specifications established herein are coordinated with and support the
following:
A. The Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Colchester as the same may
be amended from time to time which are hereby incorporated in this
chapter by reference.19
B. The Zoning Regulations of the Town of Colchester as the same may be
amended from time to time.20
§ 109-7. Form of conveyance.
Conveyances shall describe the land involved and the privileges of the town
in a form acceptable to the Board of Selectmen and shall be duly executed.
Such conveyances shall be accompanied by:
A. A certificate of title.
B. Waiver of mechanics' lien in a form acceptable to Town Counsel.
C. A letter signed by the Tax Collector certifying that any taxes due the
Town of Colchester have been paid.
19.Editor's Note: The Subdivision Regulations are on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
20.Editor's Note: The Zoning Regulations are on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 109-4 COLCHESTER CODE § 109-8
109:144
§ 109-8. Maps and plans; fee.
A. Application for a road construction permit shall be made to the First
Selectman in writing and shall be accompanied by three copies of
approved plans showing the rights-of-way for streets and drainage
easements and plans showing the construction details prepared and
showing the information required by the Subdivision Regulations and
any other requirements as stipulated by the First Selectman and/or the
Zoning and Planning Commission.
B. A fee of $100 shall accompany the application.
§ 109-9. Conditions for approval and issuance of permit.
The road construction permit shall be issued by the First Selectman in
writing, and the Selectman's approval of the construction plans shall be
endorsed thereon. Such approval and issuance are subject to the following:
A. Prior approval. In the case of roads, any road improvements shall receive
the approval of the Zoning and Planning Commission.
B. Inspection fee. Payment to the Town of Colchester of an inspection
fee equal to 3% of a cost estimate approved by the Town Engineer.
[Amended 1-16-1992]
C. Time limit and validity. The road construction permit shall be valid for
a period of one year. The Board of Selectmen may revoke or suspend
a permit when the Board or its authorized agent determines that the
work is not being carried out in accordance with the approved plans and
Subdivision Regulations.
§ 109-10. Notification of beginning or resumption of work;
preconstruction meeting.
A. The holder of a road construction permit shall notify the First Selectman
of his or her intention to begin the authorized work at least one week
prior to so doing. Such notification shall be in writing and shall include
a schedule showing when each stage of work, as hereinafter specified,
is to begin. If, due to weather conditions or other cause, it is found
necessary to stop work for a period exceeding one week, the permittee
shall notify, in writing, the First Selectman or authorized agent, of his or
her intention to resume work at least three days prior to so doing.
B. Stages of work.
(1) In addition, the permittee shall notify the First Selectman or
authorized agent, in writing, at least 48 hours before each of the
following stages of work are begun. Prior to construction of the
proposed improvements and after the permit has been obtained, a
preconstruction meeting will be scheduled with the contractor of the
project and the Town Road Foreman and Inspector. The contractor
shall request the meeting at least five working days prior to
commencing the construction.
(a) Prior to commencing site clearance and after the construction
work has been staked out (applicant's land surveyor must certify
that the street has been staked out as indicated on the approved
plan).
§ 109-8 ROADS § 109-10
109:145
(b) Prior to commencing excavation and grading of streets and
installation of embankments.
(c) Prior to commencing installation of drainage and other utilities.
(d) Prior to backfilling structures and drainage pipes, facilities and
other utilities.
(e) Prior to placement of the base course on the subgrade of the
street.
(f) Prior to commencing construction of the paved surface of a
street. Paving shall be completed between April 1 to October
30.21
(g) Prior to commencing construction of any sidewalk or other
appurtenant items.
(2) The Road Inspector shall have three days in which to inspect the
work in each of the above described stages. No work shall begin on
the succeeding stage of construction until the required inspection
has been made and approved by the Road Inspector in writing.
The First Selectman may issue a stop-work order, and the Board
of Selectmen may suspend or revoke the road construction permit
if in their judgment the construction project or any stage thereof
is not being carried out in accordance with the Road Ordinance,
or if unforeseen field circumstances are encountered for which the
approved plans are insufficient, the First Selectman shall withdraw
such stop-work order and reinstate the permit when it is determined
that there is compliance therewith.22
§ 109-11. Petition for acceptance.
The petition for acceptance of the road by the Town of Colchester shall be
presented to the Board of Selectmen in writing and shall be signed by the
owner of record. The petition shall be accompanied by the following:
A. Maps. A copy of the map on file in the office of the Town Clerk showing
the right-of-way of the road and any easements within a subdivision.
A copy of the recorded subdivision map approved by the Zoning and
Planning Commission may be substituted for such submission.
B. As-built plans. A copy of the construction plans showing the road
drainage and other improvements as built. In lieu of such submission,
the construction plans, updated and certified as correct by a professional
engineer, may be substituted.
C. Maintenance bond. An executed agreement and bond, approved by the
Board of Selectmen, to guarantee remedy of unforeseen deficiencies in
the construction of the road and other improvements shall be prepared.
Said bond shall remain in force for a period of one year from the date
on which the road is accepted by a Town Meeting. The amount of the
bond shall be 10% of the original bond estimate approved by the Town
Engineer or a minimum of $2,500.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 109-10 COLCHESTER CODE § 109-12
109:146
§ 109-12. Validity.
This chapter shall be governed by the laws of the State of Connecticut.
In the event that any provision or clause of this chapter conflicts with
applicable law, such conflict shall not affect other provisions of this chapter,
which can be given effect without the conflicting provision, and to this end
the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.
Chapter 120
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93. Litter on sidewalks — See Ch. 124, Art. III.
§ 109-12 SOLID WASTE § 109-12
120:147

ARTICLE I
Disposal of Septic Tank Pumping
[Adopted 3-7-1984]
§ 120-1. Findings.
Section 22a-220 of the Connecticut General Statutes requires the Town of
Colchester to make provisions for the safe and sanitary disposal of septic
tank pumping generated within its boundaries. The Town of Colchester has
arranged for the disposal of said septic tank pumpings in a disposal facility
maintained by the City of Norwich. Section 22a-220(a) of the Connecticut
General Statutes further provides that the town may, by action of its
legislative body, provide for the levying of a charge for such disposal of
septic tank pumpings.
§ 120-2. Users responsible to City of Norwich for fees and charges.
Pursuant to C.G.S.§ 22a-220(a), any person not in the employ of the Town of
Colchester who utilizes the facilities of the City of Norwich for the disposal
of septic tank pumpings generated within the Town of Colchester shall be
responsible for the payment of any and all charges or fees levied by said city
for said disposal. The Town of Colchester shall incur no expense by virtue of
its provision for the disposal of septic tank pumpings in the City of Norwich.
§ 120-1 SOLID WASTE § 120-2
120:149

ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 12-18-1990]
§ 120-3. Definitions.
The following shall be the definitions of words contained in this article:
CARDBOARD — Corrugated cardboard boxes and containers.
DESIGNEE — Any person(s) appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
GLASS FOOD CONTAINERS — Clean glass food jars and bottles.
HDPE PLASTIC — High density polyethylene containers (i.e., milk and
water jugs).
LEAVES — Organic tree waste.
METAL FOOD CONTAINERS — Metal cans used for food, etc.
NEWSPAPER — Any clean newspaper and all inserts contained within; does
not include magazines.
OFFICE PAPER — High-quality white bond paper and computer paper from
businesses.
PET PLASTIC — Polyethylene terephthalate containers (i.e., plastic soda
bottle).
RECYCLE — To process in order to regain material for human use.
RESIDENTS — Any persons who own or rent real property in the Town of
Colchester.
SCRAP METAL — Any bulky white goods or appliances, scrap aluminum,
copper and steel.
SCRAP TIRES — Any used tires from automobiles and light trucks.
SOLID WASTE — Discarded materials not suitable for recycling (also called
rubbish, refuse or garbage).
STORAGE BATTERIES — Batteries used in automobile, truck and heavy
equipment engines.
VIOLATION — Failure to properly separate or properly prepare recyclables.
WASTE OIL — Used motor oil from autos, trucks, lawn mowers and other
equipment.
YARD WASTE — Brush, twigs and weeds; not to include grass clippings or
other organic waste.
§ 120-4. Enumeration of recyclable materials.
The following material shall be classified as recyclable and subject to the
separation and collection requirements as established in this article:
A. Corrugated cardboard.
§ 120-3 SOLID WASTE § 120-4
120:151
B. Glass and metal food containers.
C. Leaves.
D. Newspaper.
E. Office paper.
F. Scrap metal.
G. Scrap tires.
H. Storage batteries.
I. Waste oil.
J. Yard waste.
K. Any other item, including plastics, that may be added through rules and
regulations established by the Town Board of Selectmen or its designee.
§ 120-5. Program requirements.
A. Residents. On or after January 1, 1991, it shall be mandatory for all
persons who are occupants of residential property to separate
recyclables, as herein defined, from all other solid waste generated by
such residence for ultimate recycling.
B. Businesses. On or after January 1, 1991, it shall be mandatory for all
occupants of business and industrial property and of private, public and
governmental institutions and buildings, apartments and condominiums
to separate recyclables from all other solid waste generated by said
establishments for collection and ultimate recycling. In case of other
than individual occupants, the chief executive officer, owner or agent
of the entity occupying said property, institution or building shall be
responsible for ensuring the compliance of all other individuals in said
property, institution or building with this article.
C. Additions to list of recyclables.
(1) There shall be added to the list of recyclable materials described
in § 120-4, those items which are added to the list of recyclable
materials contained in Chapter 446d of the Connecticut General
Statutes and the regulations of the State Department of
Environmental Protection.
(2) There shall be added to the list of recyclable materials described in
§ 120-4, those items which are added by the Board of Selectmen as
recyclable matter.
§ 120-6. Separation and placement requirements.
A. Residents.
(1) Recyclables shall be brought to a site designated by the town where
they must be deposited into the proper containers as provided by
policies established by the town. Recyclables not handled as
specified below will not be accepted at the recycling site and
penalties may be imposed:
(a) All clean newspapers shall be separated from the solid waste and
other recyclables. Newspaper shall not be wet or contaminated
with food or other waste materials.
(b) All clean and uncoated corrugated cardboard shall be separated
from the solid waste and other recyclables, collapsed and
§ 120-4 COLCHESTER CODE § 120-6
120:152
flattened. Corrugated cardboard shall not be wet or
contaminated with food or other waste materials.
(c) All containers, including but not limited to metal and glass food
containers and aluminum foil products, shall be rinsed and
devoid of food products. All labels must be removed from cans,
and all corks, neck rings, lids or tops must be removed from glass
food containers and placed with the solid waste.
(d) All storage batteries, used motor oil, scrap metal and vehicle
tires generated by residences shall be brought to locations
established by the town. Leaves and grass clippings shall be
composted on the property from which they were generated.
Yard waste shall be separated and brought to a designated site.
(2) In the alternative, residents serviced by commercial or public waste
haulers shall use recycling containers for the purpose of collecting
recyclables and placing them for pickup. These containers shall not
be used for any other solid waste. In the event of rain or snow, no
paper or cardboard recyclables will be collected and none should
be placed for collection. All recyclables shall be separated from
nonrecyclables as directed by the waste hauler. Recyclables not
handled as specified above in this section will not be collected and
penalties may be imposed.
B. Businesses. Businesses shall separate recyclables and make provision
for proper recycling. In addition to the above mentioned recyclables in
this section, businesses shall be required to sort and recycle office paper.
C. Separation. Recyclables shall not be placed in the same container as,
or otherwise mixed with, other forms of solid waste for collection and
disposal Any generator or hauler who knowingly mixes recyclables with
other solid waste shall be subject to the penalties set forth herein.
§ 120-7. Reporting requirements.
All commercial waste haulers or collectors operating within the town may
notify the Board of Selectmen or its designee of those residents or
businesses that have violated any provision of this article.
§ 120-8. Unauthorized collection.
A. It shall be a violation of this article for any person not authorized by the
town to collect or pick up, or cause to be collected or picked up, any
recyclables.
B. The provisions of this article shall not preclude Colchester residents or
businesses from donating recyclables generated within the town to any
person, partnership or corporation, whether operating for profit or not
for profit, and shall not preclude Colchester residents or businesses from
bringing recyclables generated within the town to a designated site.
§ 120-9. Penalties for offenses.
A. Residents.
§ 120-6 SOLID WASTE § 120-9
120:153
(1) A resident who fails to properly separate recyclables from other solid
waste or fails to properly prepare recyclables shall be subject to the
following penalties:
(a) First offense: a written warning.
(b) Subsequent offenses: a fine not to exceed $25 for each
occurrence of a violation.
(2) If unpaid after 30 days, the fine will increase to $50. Fines unpaid
after 60 days will subject the owner to a lien on their property.
B. Businesses that fail to provide for the separation of recyclables from
other solid waste shall be subject to the following penalties:
(1) First offense: a written warning.
(2) Subsequent offenses: a fine not to exceed $500 for each occurrence
of a violation.
C. Commercial haulers who knowingly mix recyclables with other solid
waste shall be subject to the following penalties: subject to the
provisions of C.G.S.§ 22a-220a, Subsection (f).
§ 120-9 COLCHESTER CODE § 120-9
120:154
ARTICLE III
Littering and Dumping
[Adopted 3-30-1981]
§ 120-10. Violations considered nuisances.
A. No person shall engage in any activity which violates:
(1) Subsection (a) of § 22a-250 of the General Statutes;
(2) Article II of this chapter, establishing a mandatory program for
recyclable materials, adopted pursuant to Subsection (f) of § 22a-220
of the General Statutes;
(3) Subsection (f) of § 22a-220a of the General Statutes; or
(4) Subsection (i) of § 22a-220a of the General Statutes.
B. Any activity which violates Subsection A is considered to be a nuisance.
§ 120-11. Appointment of environmental protection officials.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint, pursuant to § C-205 of the Charter,
the police officers of the Town of Colchester as environmental protection
officials to issue littering, dumping and recycling warnings and citations.
The environmental protection officials shall be appointed in the same
manner as members of boards and commissions of the municipality. Such
officials shall not be persons appointed as hearing officers pursuant to
Chapter 93, Ordinance Enforcement.
§ 120-12. Citation; abatement; civil penalty.
A. The environmental protection official may issue citations for any
violation of § 120-10 of this article. Such citation shall be on a form as
approved by the chief elected official of the municipality.
B. The environmental protection official may order any person who has
violated § 120-10 of this article to abate such violation and may issue a
fine in accordance with provisions of Subsection C of this section.
C. Any person who engages in an activity which violates Subsection (f)
of § 22a-220a of the Connecticut General Statutes, Subsection (i) of
§ 22a-220a of the Connecticut General Statutes or Subsection (a) of
§ 22a-250 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be assessed a civil
penalty for the first offense of up to $250 and for a second or subsequent
offense a civil penalty of up to $1,000. Any person who engages in an
activity which violates Subsection (f) of § 22a-220 of the Connecticut
General Statutes shall be assessed a civil penalty of up to $1,000.
§ 120-13. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this article shall be as set forth in Chapter 93, Ordinance
Enforcement.
§ 120-14. Deposit of funds.
Any funds collected pursuant to this article shall be placed in the general
fund of the Town of Colchester.
§ 120-10 SOLID WASTE § 120-14
120:155
Chapter 124
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Leashing of dogs on public streets and
sidewalks — See Ch. 10, Art. I.
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93.
Roads — See Ch. 109.
§ 120-14 COLCHESTER CODE § 120-14
124:156
ARTICLE I
Street Numbering System
[Adopted 11-24-1986]
§ 124-1. Purposes.
To act and consider upon an ordinance providing for a town-wide street
numbering system for the purpose of creating order in the streets of
Colchester, to ensure that the town has proper and useful planning, to
promote public safety and convenience and to ease and speed essential
emergency services, the town adopts the following article.
§ 124-2. Adoption of numbering system; maps.
The number system, as shown on a set of maps on file in the office of the
Town Assessor entitled "Town of Colchester Numbering System, 1986" is
adopted as specified in C.G.S.§ 7-148 as the street numbering system of the
Town of Colchester.
§ 124-3. Numbering of unaccepted streets.
Certain streets and roads have been numbered which are not town roads.
This has been done for consistency and convenience and cannot be
interpreted as acceptance of the street by the town.
§ 124-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 124-3
124:157

ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice
[Adopted 12-27-1988]
§ 124-4. Adoption of statute.
The provisions of C.G.S.§ 7-163a, removing liability of the Town of
Colchester to any person injured by the presence of ice and/or snow on a
public sidewalk, are hereby adopted pursuant to the terms of said statute.23
23.Editor's Note: See Art. III, Sidewalk Maintenance, of this chapter.
§ 124-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 124-4
124:159

ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted 9-25-1990]
§ 124-5. Adoption of provisions.
The following article relating to the maintenance and care of sidewalks
within the Town of Colchester is herewith adopted.
§ 124-6. Adoption of statute.
The Town of Colchester does herewith adopt the provisions of
C.G.S.§ 7-163A, relating to the nonliability of the Town of Colchester.
§ 124-7. Responsibilities of owners and occupants of premises.
Every person owning or occupying any premises abutting upon any
sidewalk within the Town of Colchester shall be responsible for proper
maintenance and upkeep of said sidewalks. Such maintenance and upkeep
shall include keeping said sidewalks free from holes, obstructions and any
other objects or state of repair that will either impede or make hazardous
the use of said sidewalks by passersby. Such maintenance and upkeep shall
also include keeping said sidewalks free from litter, debris of all kinds,
ice and snow, whether actually creating a hazardous condition or not. For
purposes of definition, a motor vehicle may be considered as an obstruction.
§ 124-8. Obstructions interfering with pedestrian traffic.
It shall be unlawful to place, or cause to be placed, any obstruction within
the visually discernible boundaries of any sidewalk or otherwise generally
accepted public walking path within the Town of Colchester so as to impede
or otherwise make hazardous the safe and easy passage of pedestrian
traffic.
§ 124-9. Repairs by town; responsibility for costs.
Where, in the opinion of the Board of Selectmen, a violation of §§ 124-7 and
124-8 of this article results in the eminent threat of danger to the public,
including pedestrian users of said sidewalks, the Town of Colchester may
make such repairs or improvements as are necessary to abate the threat
to public safety, and the costs of said repairs and/or improvements shall be
borne by the person owning or occupying the premises abutting upon said
sidewalk.
§ 124-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be fined not more
than $100 for each day the violation continues.
§ 124-5 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 124-11
124:161
§ 124-11. When effective; repealer; effect of repeal.
This article shall take effect from and after its passage and publication
as provided by law. Upon its effective date those ordinances adopted by
the former Borough of Colchester on January 9, 1989, entitled "Ordinance
Regarding Obstruction of Sidewalks," and that ordinance adopted by said
borough on April 16, 1974, entitled a "By-law in Relation to Sidewalk
Maintenance and Upkeep," and that ordinance adopted January 21, 1986,
entitled an "Ordinance Revision Respecting Removal of Ice and Snow from
Public Sidewalks," are repealed, provided that the repeal of the ordinance
adopted January 21, 1986, shall not impose upon the Borough of Colchester
and its successor by merger, the Town of Colchester, any liability that did
not heretofore exist.
§ 124-11 COLCHESTER CODE § 124-11
124:162
Chapter 129
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax Collector — See Charter § C-502.
Board of Tax Review — See Charter § C-603.
Tax Assessor — See Charter § C-1006.
§ 124-11 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 124-11
124:163

ARTICLE I
List of Unpaid Taxes
[Adopted 12-5-1925]
§ 129-1. Purpose of list.
The Selectmen shall cause a list of all unpaid taxes to be presented from the
rate books, for the purpose of correctly ascertaining unpaid taxes.
§ 129-2. Keeping of proper records.
A complete and proper record of all taxes abated shall be made and also, in
the future, a complete record of abatements shall be kept, and the amount
of taxes due as shown in the Treasurer's reports each year shall be proven
by a check with the Tax Collector's records.
§ 129-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-2
124:165

ARTICLE II
Tax Collector's Report
[Adopted 3-4-1926]
§ 129-3. Information to be supplied by Tax Collector in reports.
The Tax Collector make and submit at the Annual Town Meeting of the Town
of Colchester, Connecticut, and same shall be printed in the next annual
Town Report, a report of the taxes as due to said Town of Colchester as
of September 16, 1925, and of all collections made by the Tax Collector
designating what amounts were collected as taxes of the different years
and what amounts were collected as interest on taxes and disbursements
of same to the Treasurer of said town, and the Tax Collector shall also
designate what abatements were made and the amounts thereof due, and
such reports shall be submitted in all annual reports thereafter. Such
subsequent reports, however, shall use the date of closing of the books for
the fiscal year instead of September 16, 1925, as above.
§ 129-4. Supplementary report.
Said Tax Collector shall be required and directed to submit a signed
supplementary report at the next Annual Town Meeting and all subsequent
Town Meetings and show the amount of taxes collected by him or her from
the date of closing of the books for the Annual Report of each Annual Town
Meeting, such supplementary report to show what amounts were collected
as taxes, what amounts were interest, what amounts were abated and what
amounts were turned over to the Treasurer. Such supplementary report
shall be recorded by the Town Clerk in the minute book of the Annual Town
Meeting.
§ 129-3 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-4
124:167

ARTICLE III
Solar Energy Exemption
[Adopted 4-5-197824 ]
§ 129-5. Tax exemption authorized. [Amended 4-12-2001]
Pursuant to Subsection 56, § 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes, a
tax exemption for active solar energy systems is hereby authorized. Such
tax exemption shall apply to any building or addition to a building, the
construction of which is commenced on or after October 1, 1976, and before
October 1, 2006, which is equipped with a solar energy heating or cooling
system.
§ 129-6. Computation of exemption. [Amended 4-12-2001]
Such exemption shall apply to the extent of the amount by which the
assessed valuation of such real property equipped with such active solar
heating or cooling system exceeds the assessed valuation of such real
property equipped with the conventional portion of the heating or cooling
system, exclusive of any portion of such system related to solar energy.
§ 129-7. Limitation on number of years exemption applies.
Such tax exemption shall only apply to the first 15 assessment years
following construction of such building or addition to such building.
§ 129-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE SOLAR ENERGY HEATING OR COOLING SYSTEM — Equipment,
including windmills and waterwheels, which provides for the collection,
transfer, storage and use of incident solar energy for water heating, space
heating or cooling which absent such solar energy system would require
a conventional energy resource, such as petroleum products, natural gas
or electricity, and which meets standards established by the Commissioner
of Planning and Energy Policy for the State of Connecticut.[Amended
4-12-2001]
§ 129-9. Filing of application.
Any person who desires to claim the exemption provided in this article
shall file with the Board of Assessors within 30 days following the annual
assessment date written application claiming such exemption on a form as
prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. Failure to file such application in said
24.Editor's Note: A Special Town Meeting held June 16, 1980, adopted the provisions of
Public Act 79-479, extending this article to passive and hybrid solar energy, heating or
cooling systems. See C.G.S.§ 12-81(62).
§ 129-5 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-9
124:169
manner and form within the time prescribed shall constitute a waiver of the
right to such exemption for the assessment year.
§ 129-9 COLCHESTER CODE § 129-9
124:170
ARTICLE IV
Exemption for Ambulance-Type and Modified Handicap-Accessible
Vehicles
[Adopted 9-25-1990; amended 6-24-1999]
§ 129-10. Exemption granted. [Amended 8-26-1999; 11-9-2000]
In accordance with the provisions of § 12-81c of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended by Substitute House Bill 5888, the Town of Colchester
authorizes and directs the Assessor to exempt from personal property
taxation:
A. Commencing with the October 1, 1990, Grand List, any ambulance-type
motor vehicle which is used exclusively for the purpose of transporting
any medically incapacitated individual, except any such vehicle used to
transport any such individual for profit; and
B. Commencing with the October 1, 2000, Grand List, any motor vehicle
owned by a person with disabilities, or owned by the parent or guardian
of such person, which vehicle is equipped, after its original manufacture,
for purposes of adapting its use to the disability of such person (such
vehicle shall be known as a "modified handicap accessible vehicle") as
further defined below in § 129-11.
§ 129-11. Qualifying vehicle modifications.
A. For the purposes of this article, vehicle modifications or adaptations
qualifying a vehicle as a modified handicap accessible vehicle shall
include, but are not limited to:
(1) Wheelchair or scooter loaders which mount on the roof in the
passenger area or in the trunk or other storage areas of a motor
vehicle; or
(2) Any automotive adaptive control device which is installed in the
motor vehicle and includes any mechanical or electrical device
added to the standard motor vehicle to enable an individual with
mobility restrictions to control the accelerator, floor brake, turn
signals, dimmer switch, steering wheel and/or parking brake.
B. The Assessor shall determine whether modifications not specifically
listed in this section qualify the vehicle under this definition.
§ 129-12. Proof required annually; consequences of failure to
provide.
An owner of such vehicle must show proof annually to the Assessor that the
vehicle meets the criteria listed in § 129-11A(1) or (2) above. Such proof
must be submitted prior to 90 days from the date in which the tax was due.
Failure to provide the required proof within the time limit prescribed shall
be a waiver to the right to such exemption in that year.
§ 129-10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-12
124:171

ARTICLE V
Historical Structures Tax Abatement
[Adopted 1-16-1992]
§ 129-13. Adoption of article.
The following article permitting the abatement of real property taxes on
structures of historic or architectural merit within the Town of Colchester is
herewith adopted.
§ 129-14. Adoption of statute.
The Town of Colchester does herewith adopt the provisions of
C.G.S.§ 12-127a.
§ 129-15. Application for exemption.
The owner of any real estate situated in an Historical District designated
pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-147b, or listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, or the Colchester Historic District Commission may make
application to the Board of Selectmen for tax abatement pursuant to
C.G.S.§ 12-127a.
§ 129-16. Authority of Board of Selectmen; recommendation from
Assessor.
The Board of Selectmen is herewith designated as the authority to
determine which structures within its locality shall be eligible for tax
abatement. Prior to acting upon any application for tax abatement, the
Board of Selectmen shall seek from the Assessor a recommendation for such
classification and abatement.
§ 129-17. Written rules and standards concerning criteria for
granting abatement.
The Board of Selectmen shall promulgate, with the recommendations of the
Historic District Commission and the Assessor, written rules and standards
concerning the criteria to be used in processing applications and granting
tax abatement, which written rules and standards may be amended by the
Board of Selectmen from time to time, provided that no amendment shall
affect any pending application for abatement.
§ 129-18. Applicability.
This article shall take effect 15 days following publication and shall apply to
real estate on the grand list of October 1, 1992, and thereafter.
§ 129-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-18
124:173

ARTICLE VI
Tax Relief for Elderly or Permanently and Totally Disabled
[Adopted 10-28-1993; amended in its entirety 6-19-2008]
§ 129-19. Adoption of article.
The following article shall be adopted by the Town of Colchester.
§ 129-20. Tax relief for eligible elderly or permanently and totally
disabled residents.
The Town of Colchester (the "Town") hereby provides real property tax relief
for eligible elderly Town residents and eligible permanently and totally
disabled Town residents ("tax relief") pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-129n,
commencing with the Grand List of October 1, 2007, and thereafter, on the
terms and conditions provided herein.
§ 129-21. Eligibility.
A. Any person who owns real property in the Town, or who is liable for taxes
on real property pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-48, and who occupies said real
property as his or her principal residence, shall be entitled to tax relief,
provided that such person meets the eligibility criteria of Subsection
A(1)(a) and Subsection A(2) and (3) below or Subsection A(1)(b) and
Subsection A(2) and (3):
(1) Specific criteria.
(a) Elderly criteria: Such person is 65 years of age or over, or his/
her spouse, living with him/her, is 65 years of age or over, or is
60 years of age or over and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer
qualified under this article at the time of his or her death; or
(b) Disability criteria: Such person is under age 65 and eligible
in accordance with applicable federal regulations to receive
permanent total disability benefits under Social Security, or has
not been engaged in employment covered by Social Security and
accordingly has not qualified for benefits thereunder, but has
become qualified for permanent total disability benefits under
any federal, state or local government retirement or disability
plan, including the Railroad Retirement Act and any governmentrelated
teacher's retirement plan, in which requirements with
respect to qualifications for such permanent total disability
benefits are comparable to such requirements under Social
Security.
(2) Such person's income does not exceed the income limitations for the
tax relief program pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-170aa, as amended from
time to time, by more than $5,000.
(3) Such person or his or her spouse has, for one year immediately
preceding the receipt of tax relief under this article, been a taxpayer
of the Town.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no otherwise eligible person shall be
deemed ineligible for tax relief solely because said person or his or her
§ 129-19 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-21
124:175
spouse has resided in a health care facility for a period of up to one year.
Persons who reside in such a facility for a period longer than one year
shall be ineligible for tax relief for the period exceeding said one year.
§ 129-22. Limitations.
A. The tax relief shall be limited to the principal residence of the taxpayer,
including the dwelling, the primary lot upon which the residence is
located and any accessory buildings located upon such lot (the "eligible
property"), as determined by the Town Assessor (the "Assessor");
provided, however, that in the case of a cooperative, the assessor shall
determine the tax relief in accordance with the procedure set forth in
C.G.S. § 12-129n(g).
B. The taxpayer's total tax relief shall not exceed the limitations set forth in
C.G.S. § 12-129n(a).
C. The Town's total abatement of property tax revenue, based on an
estimate in any tax year by the Colchester Board of Finance, which may
be granted in such tax year by the Town pursuant to this article, shall be
subject to the limitations of C.G.S. § 12-129n(c).
D. With respect to each taxpayer receiving tax relief pursuant to this
article, the total amount of such tax relief granted to such taxpayer over
time, including interest as provided in § 129-25A hereof, shall not exceed
50% of the market value of the eligible property. In any case where title
to the eligible property is recorded in the name of the taxpayer or his
or her spouse and any other person or persons, such total tax relief
including interest shall not exceed 50% of market value of the fractional
interest of such taxpayer or spouse in the eligible property. For purposes
of this section, the Assessor shall determine market values.
§ 129-23. Application; filing period; refiling annually.
A. Application for tax relief shall be made on forms provided by the
Assessor and shall be accompanied by a copy of the applicant's most
recent federal income tax return or such other documentation of
eligibility as may be required by the Assessor.
B. The application must be filed annually with the Assessor during the
period of February 1 through August 1, inclusive.
§ 129-24. Computation of tax relief.
A. The Assessor shall compute the amount of tax relief to which the
taxpayer is entitled and advise the Town Tax Collector thereof.
B. The tax relief shall, in any case where title to the eligible property is
recorded in the name of the taxpayer or his or her spouse and any other
person or persons, be prorated to reflect the fractional share of such
taxpayer or spouse.
C. The tax relief shall, in any case where the eligible property is a
multifamily dwelling, be prorated to reflect the fractional portion of
eligible property occupied by the taxpayer.
D. If a recipient of tax relief dies or transfers, grants or otherwise conveys
his or her interest in the eligible property, the tax relief previously
allowed shall be disallowed to the extent of the portion of the tax year
§ 129-21 COLCHESTER CODE § 129-24
124:176
remaining following such death or transfer, except where the surviving
spouse of the recipient, otherwise eligible under § 129-21A(1) hereof,
acquires the interest formerly held by the recipient.
§ 129-25. Lien on eligible property; interest rate; repayment.
A. The Town shall have a lien on the eligible property as provided in C.G.S.
§ 12-129n(f), which lien shall include interest on the amount of the tax
relief granted at an annual rate of 3%.
B. This lien is not assumable.
C. The interest rate on the amount of the tax relief granted that remains
unpaid 12 months from the date the recipient of tax relief dies shall
be the interest rate charged by the Town for delinquent taxes, except
where the surviving spouse of the recipient, otherwise eligible under
§ 129-21A(1) hereof, acquires the interest formerly held by the recipient.
D. If a recipient of tax relief shall transfer or otherwise convey his or her
entire interest in the eligible property, such recipient shall, at the time of
such transfer or conveyance, repay to the Town the aggregate tax relief
granted to such taxpayer, including interest. If a recipient of tax relief
shall transfer or otherwise convey a portion of his or her interest in the
eligible property, such recipient shall, at the time of such partial transfer
or conveyance, repay to the Town the sum equal to the percentage
interest of the transferred or conveyed portion times the aggregate relief
granted to such taxpayer, including interest.
E. For the purposes of this section, the transfer by a recipient of tax relief,
while retaining a life estate in the eligible property, shall be considered
a one-hundred-percent transfer of the eligible property.
F. The Board of Selectmen may adjust the interest rate in § 129-25A hereof
no more frequently than annually to reflect the then prevailing market
conditions.
§ 129-26. Administration.
A. The Assessor is hereby authorized to administer this program. The
Assessor may designate agents to act in the Assessor's name in
collecting applications for this program.
B. Beginning with the Grand List year 2012 and every five years thereafter,
the Board of Selectmen shall form a local option property tax relief task
force, consisting of at least one member of the Board of Selectmen, one
member of the Board of Finance, one member of the Town Commission
on Aging and four members of the general public to review this local
option and the annual percentage rate being charged for the interest
while the taxes are deferred.
§ 129-24 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-26
124:177

ARTICLE VII
Waiver of Certain Property Taxes
[Adopted 7-2-1997]
§ 129-27. Property taxes waived.
Pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 12-144c, the Town of Colchester
waives any property tax due in an amount less than $5.
§ 129-27 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-27
124:179

ARTICLE VIII
Exemption for Volunteer Fire Department
[Adopted 3-8-2001]
§ 129-28. Statutory authority.
The Town of Colchester adopts this article as authorized by the provisions
of Section 10 of Connecticut Public Act No. 00-120 to provide a property tax
exemption for eligible members of the Colchester Hayward Volunteer Fire
Department (CHVFD).
§ 129-29. Eligibility.
A. CHVFD members who pay property tax in the Town of Colchester shall
be eligible for the exemption provided in this article if they meet either
the criteria listed in Subsection B, Standard exemption criteria, or the
criteria listed in Subsection C, Disability exemption criteria, for the year
for which the property tax is payable.
B. Standard exemption criteria.
(1) A volunteer with the CHVFD must be an active member in good
standing, not on probation, and must have achieved at least one year
of service by October 1 of any year to be eligible for an exemption of
municipal taxes due on July 1 of the following year.
(2) The CHVFD member must have responded to the minimum required
number of calls and received the minimum number of "points" during
the year of service prior to October 1, as outlined in § 129-31C and
E; and
(3) The CHVFD member must have been found to have met the
eligibility criteria by the CHVFD Exemption Eligibility Committee as
outlined in § 129-30.
C. Disability exemption criteria. If a CHVFD member becomes permanently
or temporarily disabled as a result of the performance of his or her
duties as a CHVFD member, he or she shall be eligible for an exemption
of municipal taxes if the following criteria are met:
(1) At the time the volunteer became disabled, he or she had been a
member in good standing of the CHVFD, and not on probation.
(2) The CHVFD Exemption Eligibility Committee (as defined in § 129-30)
must make a written request to the Board of Selectman on behalf of
the CHVFD member, detailing the specifics of the incident in which
the member became disabled and recommending an exemption
amount and a duration for the exemption to be applied, provided that
no exemption shall be requested for an amount greater than that
authorized by Public Act No. 00-120.
(3) Upon receipt of a written request from the CHVFD Exemption
Eligibility Committee pursuant to Subsection C(2), the Board of
Selectmen shall consider the facts, inquire further and investigate,
if necessary, and, in its own discretion, make a determination as to
the amount of the exemption, if any, and as to the duration that an
approved exemption will be granted. An exemption granted pursuant
§ 129-28 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-29
124:181
to Subsection C(3) must be approved by a super majority vote of the
Board of Selectman.
(4) The Board of Selectmen shall have discretion to make the final
determination of whether a CHVFD member's disability resulted
from the performance of his or duties as a CHVFD member for the
purpose of an exemption under this section.
D. Upon approval of an exemption, in accordance with Subsection C(3), for
a CHVFD member, the Board of Selectmen shall notify the Assessor in
writing with the CHVFD member's full name, address and date of birth,
exemption amount and the duration that the exemption will be granted.
§ 129-30. Certification of eligible members.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall create the CHVFD Exemption Eligibility
Committee for the purpose of identifying, on an annual basis, the CHVFD
members who are eligible for a tax exemption in accordance with this
article. This Committee shall consist of three Colchester residents
appointed by the Board of Selectmen. No more than two members of
the CHVFD Exemption Eligibility Committee may be CHVFD members.
The appointment shall be for a four-year term. At the conclusion of each
four-year term, the Board of Selectmen may appoint new members or reappoint
existing members as the Board of Selectmen deems appropriate.
The Board of Selectmen may appoint a Colchester resident to serve the
unexpired portion of the term of any member of the CHVFD Exemption
Eligibility Committee who may resign or otherwise be unable to
complete his or her term.
B. In reference to the October 1, 2000, Grand List, on or before April 27,
2001, the CHVFD Exemption Eligibility Committee shall submit to the
Town Assessor a list, certified by the entire Committee, identifying the
CHVFD members who are eligible for an exemption pursuant to § 129-29
of this article. The list shall include the full name, address and date of
birth of each eligible CHVFD member and the amount of the exemption,
minimum or maximum, as determined in accordance with the exemption
benefit schedule set forth in § 129-31 of this article.
C. In reference to the October 1, 2001, Grand List and every subsequent
Grand List, on or before December 1 of each year the CHVFD Exemption
Eligibility Committee shall submit to the Town Assessor a list, certified
by the entire Committee, identifying the CHVFD members who are
eligible for an exemption pursuant to § 129-29 of this article. The list
shall include the full name, address and date of birth of each eligible
CHVFD member and the amount of the exemption, minimum or
maximum, as determined in accordance with the exemption benefit
schedule set forth in § 129-31 of this article.
D. If the CHVFD Exemption Eligibility Committee fails to provide the Town
Assessor with the list of members who are eligible for an exemption prior
to the required deadline set forth in Subsection B or C, as applicable, no
CHVFD member shall be eligible for an exemption in the following year.
E. The CHVFD Exemption Eligibility Committee shall cause to be
maintained such records as may be required by the Town Assessor in
order to verify a CHVFD member's eligibility. These records shall be
§ 129-29 COLCHESTER CODE § 129-30
124:182
available at any time during normal business hours for audit by Town
staff or any designated agent of the Town as directed by the Town
Assessor or Board of Selectmen. These records shall be kept for a period
of no less than seven years.
F. Once the Town Assessor has received the list from the CHVFD
Exemption Eligibility Committee identifying the members who are
eligible for the standard exemption as set forth in § 129-29B, the Town
Assessor may inquire further and investigate, if he or she deems it
necessary, and, in his or her own discretion, certify which members will
receive an exemption pursuant to this article.
§ 129-31. Exemption benefit schedule.
A. CHVFD members meeting the eligibility criteria set forth in § 129-29
of this article may be granted a minimum or maximum exemption of
town-levied taxes for real property, motor vehicle or personal property
for which the eligible CHVFD member may be liable. For any CHVFD
member to receive this exemption for the July 1 tax bill of any year
after 2001, the Town Assessor must receive the qualification list from
the CHVFD Exemption Eligibility Committee on or before December 1 of
the preceding calendar year and will apply the exemption to the eligible
CHVFD member's assessment on the previous October 1 Grand List.
Definitions and eligibility requirements for the minimum and maximum
exemptions are as follows.
B. Definition of minimum exemption. The "minimum exemption" shall be
defined as an exemption applicable to the assessed value of real or
personal property up to an amount equal to the quotient of $470,000
divided by the town's mill rate in effect at the time of the assessment,
such mill rate being the mill rate that was applicable to the previous
year's Grand List, expressed as a whole number of dollars per $1,000
of assessed value. Anything to the contrary notwithstanding, no CHVFD
member shall be eligible for an exemption in excess of the amount of
property assessed to the CHVFD member on the applicable Grand List.
C. Qualification requirement for minimum exemption. To qualify for the
minimum exemption as defined in Subsection B, the CHVFD member
must have received 125 or more "points" during the one-year period
prior to the October 1 certification date for the year at issue. One point
will be issued to each CHVFD member each time that CHVFD member
responds to a 911 emergency call. Points will be tracked on a daily
basis by the CHVFD and certified by the CHVFD Exemption Eligibility
Committee as set forth in § 129-30.
D. Definition of maximum exemption. The "maximum benefit" shall be
defined as an exemption applicable to the assessed value of real or
personal property up to an amount equal to the quotient of 940,000
divided by the town's mill rate in effect at the time of the assessment,
such mill rate being the mill rate that was applicable to the previous
year's Grand List, expressed as a whole number of dollars per $1,000
of assessed value. Anything to the contrary notwithstanding, no CHVFD
member shall be eligible for an exemption in excess of the amount of
property assessed to the CHVFD member on the applicable Grand List.
§ 129-30 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-31
124:183
Under no circumstances shall the maximum exemption exceed $1,000 of
tax benefit per eligible CHVFD member in any given assessment year.
E. Qualification requirement for maximum exemption. To qualify for the
maximum exemption as defined in Subsection D, the CHVFD member
must have received 175 or more "points" during the one-year period
prior to the certification date for the year at issue. One point will be
issued to each CHVFD member each time that CHVFD member responds
to a 911 emergency call. Points will be tracked on a daily basis by the
CHVFD and certified by the CHVFD Exemption Eligibility Committee as
set forth in § 129-30.
§ 129-32. Application and record of exemption.
A. The exemption under this article shall be applicable for any real or
personal property, owned by any eligible CHVFD member, whether such
property is owned individually, jointly or as tenants in common with one
or more other persons. To receive this exemption, the eligible CHVFD
member's name must appear as a legal owner of record of such property.
B. The exemption shall be applied first to any real property owned by
the eligible CHVFD member. If the eligible CHVFD member owns more
than one parcel of real property in Colchester, the exemption shall
be applied first to such CHVFD member's primary residence. In the
event that the eligible CHVFD member does not own real property,
the exemption will be applied to the personal property of such CHVFD
member in the manner that the Town Assessor deems appropriate.
Under no circumstances shall the exemption exceed $1,000 of tax
benefit per eligible CHVFD member in any given assessment year.
C. The Assessor of the Town of Colchester is delegated the authority to
administer this program and to promulgate forms, rules and regulations
consistent with this article and applicable state statutes.
D. The Assessor of the Town of Colchester shall maintain a record of all
exemptions granted in accordance with this article and shall report this
amount to the Board of Selectmen annually or when requested.
§ 129-33. Effective date.
The exemption provided by this article shall become effective commencing
with the October 1, 2000, Grand List.
§ 129-31 COLCHESTER CODE § 129-33
124:184
ARTICLE IX
Delinquent Motor Vehicle Taxes
[Adopted 8-9-2001]
§ 129-34. Statutory authority.
The Town of Colchester does herewith adopt the provisions of C.G.S.
§ 12-146, relating to the payment of delinquent motor vehicle taxes by only
cash, certified check or money order.
§ 129-35. Payment by cash or money order.
Any person owing delinquent property taxes applicable with respect to a
motor vehicle and who requires proof of payment of such taxes from the
Tax Collector in order to obtain an immediate release or clearance for
motor vehicle registration purposes must make payment only in cash or
by certified check or money order, or at any such time that the Town of
Colchester allows for payment of taxes by credit card as provided in C.G.S.
§ 12-141a, by any credit card accepted by the Town of Colchester.
§ 129-36. Payment by personal check. [Amended 5-6-2003]
Any person may pay delinquent motor vehicle taxes by personal check;
however, the Tax Collector shall not be required to issue an immediate
release or clearance for motor vehicle registration purposes for a period of
10 days from the time payment by personal check is tendered.
§ 129-37. Policies.
The Tax Collector is herewith authorized to adopt Tax Office policies that
comply with this article and the Connecticut General Statutes with respect
to payment of delinquent motor vehicle taxes.
§ 129-34 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-37
124:185

ARTICLE X
Additional Exemption for Veterans or Spouses
[Adopted 4-1-2004]
§ 129-38. Statutory authority.
The Town of Colchester does hereby adopt the provisions of § 12-81fC.G.S.,
as amended, to provide an additional property tax exemption for eligible
veterans or spouses.
§ 129-39. Eligibility.
A. Applicants must file an application with the Town Assessor and submit
proof satisfactory to the Assessor biennially between February 1 and
October 1 and receive approval.
B. Veterans must be qualified under § 12-81(19), § 12-81f and § 12-81l of
the Connecticut General Statutes.
C. Surviving spouses must be qualified under § 12-81(22), § 12-81f and
§ 12-81l of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 129-40. Exemption benefit.
A. Veterans or spouses shall be entitled to an additional exemption
applicable to the assessed value of property up to the amount of $3,000,
provided they have met the requirements of § 129-39.
B. The three-thousand-dollar exemption amount shall be subject to the
revaluation multiplier as set forth in § 12-62g of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
§ 129-41. Effective date.
The exemption provided by this article shall become effective commencing
with the October 1, 2004, Grand List.
§ 129-38 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-41
124:187

ARTICLE XI
Retention of Overpayments
[Adopted 12-20-2007]
§ 129-42. Statutory authority; limit on excess payments to be
retained.
Pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes, Sec. 12-129,
the Tax Collector for the Town of Colchester is authorized to retain any tax
payments received that, for whatever reason, are in excess of the amount
due, provided the amount of the excess payment is less than $5.
§ 129-42 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 129-42
124:189
Chapter 133
TOURISM DEVELOPMENT
§ 133-1. Action to become member of Southeastern Connecticut
Tourism District.
The Town of Colchester herewith acts pursuant to authority set forth in
C.G.S.§ 7-330 to join and become a full member of the Southeastern
Connecticut Tourism District, a municipal district organization formed
pursuant to said § 7-330 for the purpose of implementing and receiving
benefits as provided in Public Act 81-417 (C.G.S.§ 7-136a through 7-136c).25
§ 133-2. Appointment of representatives; terms.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint representatives to said district in
the number provided in C.G.S.§ 7-300. Based upon the 7,761 population
of the Town of Colchester as determined by the federal census of 1980,
the town at the time of passage of this chapter is entitled to three district
representatives. Said representatives shall be appointed forthwith after the
passage of this chapter with the initial appointments to be as follows: one
term for one year, one term for two years and one term for three years.
Upon expiration of each of the initial terms, representatives subsequently
appointed shall serve for terms of three years each.
§ 133-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to secure to the Town of Colchester the
benefits and privileges provided for in Public Act 81-417, as same may be
amended from time to time.
Chapter 136
TOWN CENTER NEIGHBORHOOD STRATEGIC PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town Center Neighborhood Strategic
Plan — See Ch. A156.
§ 136-1. Adoption of plan.
The legislative body of the Town of Colchester, Connecticut, hereby
approves and adopts the Town Center Neighborhood Strategic Plan, dated
February, 1998.26
25.Editor's Note: Repealed by P.A. 92-184, effective July 1, 1993.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. A156, Town Center Neighborhood Strategic Plan.
§ 129-42 COLCHESTER CODE § 136-2
133:190
§ 136-2. Town Center Neighborhood Revitalization Zone Committee.
The legislative body of the Town of Colchester, Connecticut, hereby
establishes a Town Center Neighborhood Revitalization Zone Committee
by reconstituting the Town Center Neighborhood Revitalization Planning
Committee to become said Zone Committee.
Chapter 139
TRAILERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93.
§ 139-1. Transient residential accommodations prohibited.
No overnight cabins for similar transient residential accommodation,
including household trailers either on or off wheels shall be permitted or
used for residential purposes in the Town of Colchester.
§ 139-2. Applicability.
This prohibition shall not affect such buildings or trailer units actually
established and in residential use at a time of the enactment of this chapter,
but this chapter is to apply to any additions thereto.
§ 139-3. Permits for temporary use.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to issue permits for a period not
exceeding two weeks for the temporary use of household trailers for
residential purposes.
§ 139-4. Order to remove; penalties for offenses.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to order the removal or
discontinuance of the use of any structure or trailer for residential use
prohibited by this chapter. In the event anyone neglects or refuses to
comply with such order of the Board of Selectmen, such person or persons
shall be liable to the Town of Colchester in the sum of $25 for each day of
noncompliance with said order after the expiration of the time limit for such
removal or discontinuance, which money may be recoverable against such
person in a civil action by said Town of Colchester.
§ 139-5. Violation of chapter.
Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a violation of C.G.S.§ 53-174.
Chapter 144
§ 136-2 TRAILERS § 139-5
139:191
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93. Snow on sidewalks — See Ch. 124, Art. III.
§ 139-5 COLCHESTER CODE § 139-5
144:192
ARTICLE I
Parking Ban
[Adopted 4-5-1978]
§ 144-1. Hours. [Amended 1-29-1990]
There shall be a parking ban in effect on town roads after 1/2 inch of snow
has accumulated. Said parking ban shall continue in effect for 12 hours
after the cessation of the snowfall.
§ 144-2. Penalties for offenses.
A. If any vehicles are parked on town roads in violation of this article, the
owners of said vehicles shall forfeit and pay for the use of the Town
of Colchester a fine of $25 to be recovered by an action on this article
brought in the name of the Treasurer of the town.
B. In addition, any vehicles parked on town roads in violation of this article
may be towed away by the Town of Colchester at the vehicle owner's
expense.
§ 144-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 144-2
144:193

ARTICLE II
Parking Regulations
[Adopted 9-25-1990]
§ 144-3. Adoption of article.
The following article relating to regulations governing parking in the Town
of Colchester is herewith adopted.
§ 144-4. Traffic Authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S.§ 14-297(6), the Board of Selectmen are
herewith deemed the Traffic Authority of the Town of Colchester.
§ 144-5. Establishment of written rules by Traffic Authority.
The Traffic Authority shall from time to time establish written rules and
regulations governing the parking of motor vehicles on the streets of the
Town of Colchester, including provisions for fines for violation of such rules
and regulations and for removal of motor vehicles or other vehicles that may
obstruct traffic.
§ 144-6. Establishment of fines by Traffic Authority.
The Traffic Authority is further authorized to establish, in writing, fines for
violation of any parking regulations adopted.
§ 144-7. Parking hearing procedure.
The Town of Colchester does herewith adopt a parking violation hearing
procedure pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S.§ 7-152, for the enforcement
of the rules, regulations and fines adopted pursuant to § 144-5 above.
§ 144-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 144-7
144:195
Chapter 150
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93.
§ 144-7 COLCHESTER CODE § 144-7
150:196
ARTICLE I
Water Conservation
[Adopted 9-25-1990]
§ 150-1. Adoption of article.
The following article relating to measures to ameliorate water shortages is
herewith adopted by the Town of Colchester.
§ 150-2. Authority of Utilities Commission.
The Colchester Utilities Commission is herewith authorized to adopt
regulations pertaining to the conservation of water and to further provide
in said regulations measures to address potential water shortages.
§ 150-3. Communication of regulations to water users.
The regulations so adopted shall be communicated to water users by way of
mail or publication.
§ 150-4. Previously adopted regulations.
Regulations previously adopted by the Colchester Board of Water
Commissioners relating to water conservation shall be deemed adopted
by the Colchester Utilities Commission, and copies of said regulations
previously distributed to water users shall excuse distribution except to new
water customers.
§ 150-5. Notice of violation.
Should the Colchester Utilities Commission determine that a water user
and/or customer is in violation of the regulations, the Commission shall give
written notice of said violation to the user and/or customer, which notice
shall direct the user and/or customer to cease and desist from said violation.
Said written notice shall be mailed and/or hand delivered to the residence
of the user and/or customer.
§ 150-6. Termination of water service.
In the event said customer and/or user fails to cease and desist from said
violation, the Board may, upon 12 hours prior notice terminate, either
permanently or temporarily, all water service to said user and/or customer.
§ 150-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any user and/or customer who violates a cease and desist order, shall, in
addition to being subjected to termination of water service, also be subject
to a penalty of $100 per day for each violation.
§ 150-1 WATER § 150-8
150:197
§ 150-8. Delegation of enforcement authority.
The Colchester Utilities Commission may delegate the enforcement of this
article to an employee of said Commission.
§ 150-8 COLCHESTER CODE § 150-8
150:198
Chapter A156
TOWN CENTER NEIGHBORHOOD STRATEGIC PLAN
§ 150-8 WATER § 150-8
150:199

Land Development Regulation
Effective Date: January 15, 2015
1
Table of Contents
Section Name Page
1.0 General Standards 2
1.1. Relationship to the Plan of Conservation and Development 2
1.2 Use of Discretion 2
2.0 Zoning Districts 3
2.1 Zoning Map 3
2.2 Zoning Districts 3
3.0 Rural Use District 4
3.1 Character of the Rural Use Zoning district 4
3.2 Permitted Uses 5
3.3 Special Permit Uses 5
3.4 Rural Use Design Standards 5
3.5 General Design Criteria 8
3.6 Residential Site Design Layout 9
3.7 Open Space and Development Restrictions 10
3.8 Potential Dimensional Reduction for Conservation Subdivisions 12
3.9 Flexibility Procedure for Conservation Subdivisions 12
4.0 Suburban Zone 14
4.1 Character of the Suburban Zone 14
4.2 Permitted Uses 14
4.3 Special Permit Uses in Suburban Zone 14
4.4 Dimensional requirements in the suburban residential districts 15
4.5 Multi family requirements for properties with available water and sewer 16
2
Table of Contents
Section Name Page
4.6 Non Residential Uses in Suburban Zone 16
5.0 Town Center and Westchester Village District 18
5.1 Character of Town Center and Westchester Village 18
5.2 Applicability and Administration 18
5.3 Uses Permitted 19
5.4 Dimensional Requirements 19
5.5 Performance Requirements 20
5.6 Design Requirements 21
5.7 Westchester Village District
24
6.0 Future Development District 27
6.1 Character 27
6.2 Uses Permitted 27
6.3 Special Permit 27
6.4 Dimensional Requirements in future development district for non-mixed use development 28
6.5 Standards for Mixed use Development 28
6.6 Design Guidelines for Mixed Use Devleopment 30
67 Other Requirements in the Future Development District 33
7.0 Arterial Commercial Use 34
7.1 Character of the Arterial Commercial District 34
7.2 Uses Permitted 34
3
7.3 Special Permit Uses in the Arterial Commercial District 34
Table of Contents
Section Name Page
7.4 Performance Standards 35
8.0 Use Standards 37
8.1 Housing 37
8.2 Affordable Housing 39
8.3 Accessory Apartments 42
8.4 Swimming Pools 44
8.5 Home business use 44
8.6 Home Occupation 44
8.7 Use of Mobile Homes during Construction 46
8.8 Non-Residential Development 47
8.9 Agricultural Uses 57
8.10 Design and Site Development Standards 62
8.11 Other Site Development Standards 65
9.0 Resource Protection 75
9.1 Historic Preservation 75
9.2 Aquifer Protection Zone 78
9.3 Flood Hazard Overlay Zone 83
10.0 Parking, Loading and Road Access Requirement 90
10.1 Character 90
10.2 Number of Parking Spaces 90
10.3 Parking Space Requirements for People with Disabilities 92
4
Table of Contents
Section Name Page
10.4 Waivers and Reduced/Shared Parking 92
10.5 Parking Lot Design 94
10.6 Landscaping Standards for Parking Lot Storm water Management 95
10.7 Bicycle and Pedestrian Accommodations 97
10.8 Loading Space Requirements 98
11.0 Signage 99
11.1 Intent 99
11.2 Purpose 99
11.3 General 99
11.4 Prohibited Signs 99
11.5 Exempt Signs 100
11.6 Waivers of Sign size, height and location 103
11.7 Non-conforming Signs 103
11.8 Signs within the historic district 104
11.9 Signs within the future development district 104
11.10 Specific Requirements for All Signs 104
11.11 Ground / free standing sign Maintenance and Landscaping 105
11.12 Measurement of Signs and Height 105
11.13 Building Mounted Sign Standards 106
11.14 Standards for Projecting Signs or Canopy/Awning Signs 107
11.15 Ground Freestanding Sign Standards 107
5
Table of Contents
Section Name Page
11.16 Sign Requirements for Small Commercial Developments 108
11.17 Sign Requirements for Medium Commercial Development 108
11.18 Sign Requirements for Large Commercial Developments 108
11.19 Sign Requirements for Commercial Land Uses in the FD Zone 109
11.20 Agricultural Signage 110
12.0 Lighting 111
12.1 Purpose 111
12.2 Applicability 111
12.3 Lighting Plan 111
12.4. General Requirements 112
12.5 Greater Height for Safety Waiver 112
12.6 Changes to Lighting Plan After Approval 113
12.7 Exempt Lighting 113
12.8 Gasoline Service Stations 113
12.9 Lighting in Historic Preservation Overlay 113
12.10 Lighting for Recreational Facilities 113
12.11 Lighting of Public Roadways and Public Parking Areas 114
12.12 Non-Conforming Lighting 114
12.13 Prohibited Lighting 114
12.14 Lighting of outdoor signs 115
13.0 Non Conformities and Nuisances 116
6
Table of Contents
Section Name Page
13.1 Intent 116
13.2 Non-Conforming Uses 116
13.3 Non-conforming Buildings 116
13.4 Non-conforming lots 117
13.5 Non-conforming Signs 118
13.6 Non-conforming Mobile Home Parks 118
14.0 Land Use Processes 119
14.1 Fees Associated with Permits 119
14.2 Zoning Permit 119
14.3 Land Disturbance 120
14.4 Inspection and Access 120
14.5 Administrative Review Application 120
14.6 Process – Commission Reviewed Application 121
14.7 Application Procedures – Special Permit 122
14.8 General Evaluation Criteria 122
14.9 Specific Evaluation Criteria 123
15.0 Site Plan Review 124
15.1 Site Plan Review Requirements 124
15.2 Traffic Study Requirement 124
15.3 Site Plan Class I 125
15.4 Site Plan Class II 126
7
Table of Contents
Section Name Page
15.5 Site Plan Approval by the Commission 128
15.6 Filing of Approved Class 2 Site Plan 129
15.7 Posting of Bond for Class 2 Site Plans 129
15.8 Sign Permit Application and Process for Approval 129
16.0 Subdivision 134
17.0 Administrative and Appeals Procedure 136
17.1 Penalties 136
17.2 Zoning Board of Appeals 136
17.3 Variances 136
17.4 Appeals 137
17.5 Applications 137
17.6 Notice 138
17.7 Hearings and Decisions 138
17.8 Filing – Voiding of Decision 139
18.0 Change of Use 140
18.1 Amendments 140
18.2 Procedures for Change of Use 140
18.3 Change of Use 140
19.0 Severability 141
20.0 Definitions 141
20.1 Adoption and Purpose 141
8
Table of Contents
Section Name Page
20.2 Meaning of Words 141
20.3 Classifications 142
20.4 Definitions 142
Effective date: January 15, 2015
2
1.0 GENERAL STANDARDS
The following General Standards apply to all land uses considered by the Town of Colchester Planning
Staff and Planning and Zoning Commission (“Commission”):
1.1 RELATIONSHIP TO THE PLAN OF CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT
All permits and development plans considered and approved shall be in conformance and generally
consistent with the Colchester Plan of Conservation and Development adopted by the Commission
under the provisions of Chapter 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS) particularly in regard, but
not limited, to the following:
1. Consideration and retention of community character;
2. The provision of Streets; limitations on the location and number of access Driveways and
provisions for traffic management;
3. The Setback, location and bulk of Buildings and structures; the appearance of Buildings and
structures from any Street or highway, or from other Lots;
4. The preservation of natural landform features, agricultural lands, Wetlands and water
resources;
5. The provision, location and character of landscaping;
6. The location, character and intensity of outside illumination; and,
7. The extent, character, purpose and location of Signs.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
3
2.0 ZONING DISTRICTS
2.1 ZONING MAP
The map entitled “Town of Colchester, Connecticut Zoning Map” (“Zoning Map”) is a part of these
Regulations. The Zoning Map shows the boundaries and zoning designations for each district of the
Town of Colchester. Use and dimensional requirements for each district are found in these Regulations.
2.2 ZONING DISTRICTS
1. Districts and Boundaries
A. All district boundaries shown on the Zoning Map are intended to follow the center
lines of Streets or lines drawn parallel to, and property lines, unless otherwise
specifically shown thereon.
B. The Town shall be divided into the following zoning and zoning overlay districts:
Rural Use
Suburban Use
Town Center/Westchester Village
Future Development
Arterial Commercial Overlay
Historic Preservation Overlay
Aquifer Protection Overlay
Flood Hazard Overlay
C. The following Sections identify and describe the various zoning districts and their
standards for use. These Regulations shall be enforced by the Commission and its duly
authorized agent, the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The Zoning Enforcement Officer is
empowered by the Commission to cause any Building or land to be inspected and
examined and to order, in writing, the remedying of any condition found to exist
therein or thereon in violation of any provisions of these Regulations.
D. The Regulations are permissive in nature. Uses not identified and permitted by these
Regulations are prohibited.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
4
3.0 RURAL USE ZONING DISTRICT (RU)
3.1 CHARACTER OF THE RURAL USE ZONING DISTRICT
1. Primary Character. The primary character determinants in the RU are the preservation and
enhancement of existing natural resources, vistas, and Open Space in general. The intent of
the district is to preserve rural character. Land uses in the rural use district areas are not
served and have no plans to be served by municipal water and sewer. Agriculture
operations are a large presence in the RU District. See Exhibit 1.
2. Relationship to Roads. While Arterial and Collector Roads exist in the RU, they are sparsely
lined by development. Open Space corridors provide primary character determinants of the
district and shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable through the regulation of
usage, site development, and design standards.
3. Relationship to the Natural Environment. The primary development issue to be addressed
in RU is the cohesion of the natural and built environment noting the primary goal of
preserving the natural Landscape. This Section addresses this primary objective by limiting
and directing on-site development intrusions that would affect various natural resources.
Another focus is the preservation of agricultural lands and uses.
4. Development Flexibility. Dimensional standards and parking requirements associated with
the RU are designed to be flexible. Applications shall be reviewed to determine compliance
with performance standards, but flexibility is provided to ensure that natural character as
well as economic issues are addressed.
Exhibit 1. Subdivision in the Rural Zone
Effective date: January 15, 2015
5
3.2 PERMITTED USES – The following uses are permitted in the RU District:
1. Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings and Accessory Uses to such Dwellings
2. Agricultural uses as permitted in Section 8.9
3. Home Occupation
4. Membership Clubs that relate to outdoor activities
5. Family day care homes, as defined by CGS Section 19a-77(a)(3) and licensed pursuant to
CGS Section 19a-87b, are permitted in all Single-Family, Two-Family or Multi-Family
Dwellings.
3.3 SPECIAL PERMIT USES in the RU District – The following are eligible for Special Permit after
consideration and approval from the Commission:
1. Commercial Kennel
2. Accessory Apartments
3. Bed and Breakfast
4. Golf course
5. Institutional and municipal land uses including public utilities
6. Day care/nursery schools in accordance with Section 8.8.9 of these Regulations and
licensed by the State of Connecticut.
7. Educational Institutions
8. Agricultural uses permitted by Special Permit pursuant to Section 8.9.
3.4 RURAL USE DISTRICT DESIGN STANDARDS
1. Minimum Lot Sizes
Land to be developed for residential uses in the RU District may be developed under the
following development options:
A. Conservation Subdivision: Development as a conservation subdivision is required
where new Roads or Road extensions are proposed or for any subdivision proposed
with more than four (4) lots.
Conservation subdivisions provide an opportunity for greater flexibility in the design
of subdivisions with a view towards preserving and enhancing the natural beauty of
the Landscape; protecting areas with unique or fragile natural resources; producing
more attractive, safe and healthy living environments, conserving natural resources,
and to encouraging low impact development (LID) methods.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
6
The minimum Lot size for calculating Gross Residential Density (GRD) for a
conservation subdivision shall be 80,000 square feet. Lot Frontage shall be three
hundred (300) feet on Arterial and Collector Roads and two hundred fifty (250) feet on
Local or dead end Roads. See Sections 3.8 and 3.9 for possible Lot size reductions.
B. Conventional Subdivision: For developing residential lots fronting on existing Roads,
the minimum Lot size for calculating Gross Residential Density (GRD) shall be 120,000
Square Feet. Lot Frontage shall be three hundred fifty (350) feet on Arterial and
Collector Roads and three hundred (300) feet on local or dead end Roads. Minimum
Lot width shall not be less than two hundred (200) feet at any point excepting Flag
Lots per Section 8.11.7.
2. Maximum Building Coverage for residential use on any Lot shall not exceed twelve percent
(12%) of the Buildable Area, and twenty percent (20%) for non-residential uses.
3. Maximum Building Height – The maximum Building Height for structures within the RU
District shall be thirty-five (35) feet, except where otherwise expressly permitted.
Agricultural uses are permitted to exceed thirty-five (35) feet in accordance with Section
8.9.5.E and certain architectural features are permitted to exceed thirty-five (35) feet in
accordance with Section 8.11.10.
4. Building Setbacks
A. Front Yard Setbacks for land uses on existing Arterial and Collector Roads in the RU
District shall preserve rural vistas to the maximum extent practicable. See Exhibit 2.
1. For proposed residential uses where the Road edges are cleared of trees, the
Front Yard Setback shall be a minimum of two hundred (200) feet and shall
include a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet of Meadow or active
agricultural land measured from the edge of the right of way. Significant trees,
ponds or other natural features may also be included in the Front Yard.
2. For proposed residential uses where the Road edges are forested, the Front Yard
Setback shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet and a minimum forested
buffer of fifty (50) feet shall be maintained. This Setback requirement may also be
applied to Road edges that are cleared if the applicant demonstrates, through the
use of a Landscape plan, prepared by a licensed landscape architect, that a fifty
(50) foot forested buffer will be installed at the time of construction.
3. For proposed residential uses utilizing existing Local Roads or proposed new
Roads or extensions, the Front Yard Setback shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
7
Exhibit 2 – Front Yard Setbacks
B. Side and Rear Yard Setbacks – For proposed conservation subdivisions, side and rear
Yard Setbacks shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. For Lots created within a
conventional subdivision, the side and rear Yard Setbacks shall be no less than
thirty-five (35) feet.
5. Buildable Area – Individual Lots shall contain a minimum contiguous and accessible
Buildable Area that can contain a square with sides equal to one hundred fifty (150) feet or
an equivalent sized rectangle with the shortest side not less than one hundred twenty-five
(125) feet.
6. Preservation of Conservation Features – The following conservation features shall be
maintained and preserved to the extent required by federal, state and local laws or
regulations:
A. Regulated conservation areas including: (Survey required)
1. Wetlands and Watercourses
2. Floodplains as shown on the latest FEMA mapping as amended;
3. Structures and features listed on the National or State Register of Historic Places;
4. Upland review areas, as defined by the Colchester Conservation Commission.
B. Unregulated conservation areas are not formally recognized by federal or state law
but the site development process shall take into consideration the following:
1. Naturally occurring Slopes greater than or equal to twenty-five percent (25%);
Effective date: January 15, 2015
8
2. Any portion of a contiguous forest area over twenty (20) acres in size;
3. State-wide vegetation cover types including, but not limited to: Meadow,
coniferous forest, Deciduous forest, mixed forest, old field, open Wetland,
forested Wetland, and scrub (survey not required for unregulated areas, applicant
may use interpretation of aerial photography to map in combination with field
reconnaissance);
4. Potential contiguous Open Space or connective greenbelts;
5. Locally Important Farmland Soils as defined in Section 20.4;
6. Areas that have recreation value per the Town’s Open Space Plan and the
Recreation and Open Space Section of the Plan of Conservation and Development;
and
7. Unregulated cultural features such as historic sites and structures, archaeological
sites, stone walls, cemeteries and scenic views.
3.5 GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA – The applicant for a residential subdivision or residential Lot in the
RU District must submit a narrative indicating how each objective or standard below has been
addressed. If there are areas that are not applicable to the specific site, it must be noted in the
narrative:
1. The existing Landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by
minimizing tree and Soil removal. Any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general
appearance of the neighboring developed areas. The orientation of individual building sites
shall be such as to maintain maximum natural topography and cover. Existing site
conditions are to be considered in Road design. Designs that significantly alter the
topography, tree cover, surface water buffers, and natural drainage will not be acceptable
under these Regulations.
2. Streets shall be designed and located in such a manner as to maintain and preserve natural
topography, significant landmarks, and trees; to minimize cuts and fills; and to preserve and
enhance views and vistas on or off the subject Parcel.
3. Development shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and the use, scale, and
architecture of existing Buildings in the vicinity that have a functional or visual relationship
to any proposed Building.
4. All Open Space on Lots (landscaped and usable) shall be designed to add to the visual
amenities of the area by maximizing its visibility for persons passing the site or overlooking it
from nearby properties.
5. The removal or disruption of historic or traditional uses, stone walls, structures, or
architectural elements shall be minimized insofar as practicable, whether these exist on the
site or on adjacent properties.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
9
3.6 RESIDENTIAL SITE DESIGN PROCESS – Any proposed residential development of three (3) or
more Lots, or a re-subdivision that results in the creation of four (4) or more Lots from the
original Parcel shall follow a rural residential siting process as described herein. The purpose of
this process is to determine the residential yield of a particular site and how to distribute those
units across a site in a manner that best achieves the economic, environmental, and character
objectives associated with the RU District.
1. Calculating Residential Yield of a Proposed Conservation Subdivision – The number of
Dwelling Units that may be developed on a given site shall be determined using the
following approach:
A. Subtract the cumulative area (in square feet) of the following site elements from the
total square foot area of the site:
1. Wetlands and Watercourses;
2. Floodplains as shown on the latest FEMA mapping, as amended;
3. Exposed ledge or rock outcrops exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in area;
4. Existing conservation or utility easements;
5. Steep Slopes exceeding twenty-five percent (25%).
B. Reduce the remaining area resulting from above by ten percent (10%) to account for
infrastructure needs such as Roads and drainage.
C. Divide the remaining area by:
1. 80,000
to determine the maximum number of Lots (Gross Residential Density (GRD))
permitted. Fractional numbers shall be rounded down to the whole number.
EXAMPLE
435,000 square feet Parcel
Subtract 30,000 square feet of conservation features in accordance with Section 3.6.1.A
Subtract 41,000 square feet of infrastructure
Leaving 364,000 square feet eligible for development
Divide by 80,000 (Density factor)
Result = 3 Dwelling Units maximum.
2. Residential Design Layout – See Exhibit 3.
A. Identify conservation features as listed in Section 3.4.6.
B. Locate proposed dedicated Open Space areas per Section 3.7.
C. Locate sites of Dwellings using the residential yield in Section 3.6.1.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
10
D. Locate the sites of Dwellings outside of the regulated conservation areas as identified
in Section 3.4.6.A.
E. Locate Roads and Driveways – Trace a logical alignment for Local Roads to the
Dwelling sites. Roads and Driveways shall follow the existing topography of the Parcel
where feasible to minimize cuts and fills. A Road plan shall be designed which strives
to maintain the rural character of the Town. Natural sheet flow drainage is
encouraged. The applicant should avoid curbing and drainage structures in favor of
grass swales or other low impact development (LID) techniques when possible and
refer to the Road design standards established in the Subdivision Regulations.
F. Draw in Lot Lines – Draw in the Lot lines in accordance with the applicable
requirements of Section 3.4.
Exhibit 3 – Design of Lots, Roads and Natural Areas
3.7 OPEN SPACE AND DEVELOPMENT RESTRICTIONS – All developments in the RU District shall
comply with the following Open Space requirements:
1. Required Open Space
Any proposed residential subdivision development in the RU District shall require the
dedication as Open Space of a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the total gross Parcel
area to be subdivided for conventional subdivisions and twenty-five (25%) for conservation
subdivisions. Family subdivisions, as defined in CGS Section 8-25, are exempted from this
requirement.
2. Including Wetlands in the Open Space
The percentage of required Open Space that may include Wetlands shall not exceed the
percentage of Wetlands on the entire site. A sample calculation for a conventional
subdivision is provided below:
Existing Conditions:
12 acre Parcel (522,720 square feet) with 1 acre (43,560 square feet) of Wetlands
43560 /522,720 = 0.083 X 100 = 8.3%
Effective date: January 15, 2015
11
Open Space Requirements:
15% Open Space = 2.4 acres (104,544 square feet) of Open Space required
Wetland Allowance:
2.4 acres (104,544 square feet) X 8.3% Wetlands coverage =.20 acres (8,677 square feet)
The Open Space shall contain at least 2.2 acres (95,832 square feet) of uplands and no
more than .2 acres (8,712 square feet) of Wetlands.
3. Use of Open Space
Dedicated Open Space shall be used for wildlife habitat, conservation, protection of water
resources and the following additional purposes: historic preservation, outdoor education,
low impact recreation, Aquifer protection, Agriculture, Horticulture, forestry, or a
combination of these uses, and shall be served by suitable access for such purposes.
Applicants are strongly encouraged to locate Open Space to provide additional Buffer Areas
to sensitive surface water resources and Wetlands areas. The Commission may permit a
small portion of the Open Space to be paved or built upon for structures accessory to the
dedicated use or uses of such Open Space (e.g., pedestrian walks and bike paths) provided
said improvements support the purposes of the Open Space and are consistent with state
and local level environmental protections. Under no circumstances shall stormwater from
impervious surfaces within the Open Space be allowed to drain directly to existing
Wetlands or Watercourses without adequate pre-treatment for pollutant removal.
4. Contiguous Open Space
Lands proposed to be used to satisfy the Open Space requirements shall be contiguous.
Open Space will be considered contiguous if it is separated by a Road or other
unobstructed way. The Open Space in Conservation Subdivisions shall be adjacent to and
accessible to all of the Lots of the subdivision. Non-contiguous Open Space may be
considered in meeting Open Space requirements where the requirement for contiguous
Open Space cannot be met because providing such Open Space is not feasible and prudent,
as those terms are defined in the State of Connecticut Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Act, CGS Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45 inclusive, as amended.
5. Flexibility for Open Space Preservation
This Section is intended to establish standards to allow for residential development
flexibility in conservation subdivisions in order to help preserve Colchester’s rural character
and encourage the preservation of Open Space. The Commission may, after making
findings on the record, approve one (1) or more of the modifications set forth in Section 3.8
for any conservation subdivision for residential uses provided both of the following
conditions are met:
A. More than twenty-five percent (25%) of the Parcel is permanently preserved as Open
Space meeting the General Design Criteria of Section 3.5 of these Regulations;
Effective date: January 15, 2015
12
B. The Open Space meets the functional criteria of Section 6.5.1.a of the Subdivision
Regulations.
3.8 POTENTIAL DIMENSIONAL REDUCTIONS FOR CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS
The Commission may, at the applicant’s written request, reduce the following Lot requirements
to the same extent that buildable land is preserved as Open Space in excess of twenty five
percent (25%) (i.e., if forty percent (40%) of the Parcel is preserved as Open Space, this is fifteen
percent (15%) greater than the minimum requirement of twenty-five percent (25%) and the
Commission may reduce the Lot requirements by up to fifteen percent (15%)).
1. Reduce the minimum Lot size requirement.
2. Reduce the minimum contiguous Buildable Area requirement.
3. Reduce the dimension of one (1) side of the minimum Buildable Square or rectangle.
4. Reduce the minimum Lot Frontage for a Lot fronting on and obtaining access from a local
or dead end Street.
5. Reduce the minimum Front Yard Setback requirement for a Lot fronting on and obtaining
access from a local or dead end Street.
3.9 FLEXIBILITY PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISIONS
Prior to applying the standards set forth in Section 3.8, above, the Commission shall make
findings on the record that all of the following have been demonstrated:
1. A licensed landscape architect has prepared a conceptual plan identifying significant
features on the site and identifying which of such features are to be preserved;
2. The proposed plan will conserve significant features on the site and promote the retention
of the rural character of the area;
3. All Public Health Code requirements have been satisfied;
4. There will be a significant benefit resulting from the Open Space that is being preserved in
perpetuity, such as:
A. Establishment of an Open Space corridor or greenway or interconnection of existing
Open Space;
B. Preservation of areas along Collector or Arterial Roads that will protect rural
appearance or character;
C. Protection of important natural and or scenic resources;
D. Providing for public access to the Open Space.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
13
5. The Open Space will not result in small or fragmented Open Space Parcels that do not
provide community benefits.
6. Any modification(s) granted on the basis of the standards set forth above shall be clearly
identified and delineated on the approved development Site Plan.
7. Farming is permitted on open space lands as required by this section but lands must be
permanently preserved or dedicated for agriculture uses to used.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
14
4.0. SUBURBAN USE ZONING DISTRICT (SU)
4.1 CHARACTER OF THE SUBURBAN USE ZONING DISTRICT
1. Primary Character – The majority of the Town’s population is located with Suburban Use
Zoning District (SU). The SU is primarily single-family residential in character with
multi-family development existing also.
2. Institutional and commercial/service land uses are primarily located along several Arterial
Roads that connect to surrounding towns. The primary function of these district regulations
is the protection of residential character by limiting incompatible land uses. The SU is
designed to contain most of the Town’s housing so that new developments do not sprawl
into the rural areas.
3. Relationship to Roads – Land uses in the SU shall be located predominantly on Collector
and Local Roads and are mainly single-family in type. Non-residential land uses are
permitted and located mostly on Arterial Roads in the SU.
4. Design standard – The character of Buildings in the SU reflects residential Dwellings of
various types and sizes. Multi-family residential areas are generally characterized by
two-family and Townhouse developments rather than centralized apartments.
4.2 PERMITTED USES – The following uses are permitted in the SU subject to all applicable
requirements of these Regulations:
1. Single family and two family residential development.
2. Publicly owned recreation area, such as a park or playground;
3. Family day care homes, as defined by CGS Section 19a-77(a)(3) and licensed pursuant to
CGS Section 19a-87b, are permitted in all Single-Family, Two-Family or Multi-Family
Dwellings;
4. Home Occupation.
4.3 SPECIAL PERMIT USES IN THE SU – The following are eligible for Special Permit after
consideration and approval from the Commission:
1. Religious facilities and Educational Institutions
2. Mobile Homes
3. Multi family Uses - the Parcel must be served by municipal water and sewer and comply
with Section 8.1.1 as applicable;
4. Municipal facilities
5. Private outdoor recreation
Effective date: January 15, 2015
15
6. Bed and Breakfasts/Inns
7. Day care/Nursery School in accordance with Section 8.8.9 of these Regulations and licensed
by the State of Connecticut.
8. Retail Sales/Service Development along Arterial or Collector Roads. See Section 4.6.
4.4 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS IN THE SU
4.4.1 Applicability of Dimensional Requirements
*Arterial and Collector Streets/Local and dead end Streets
With Available Municipal
Water and Sewer
Without Available Municipal
Water and Sewer
Single-family Two-family Single-family Two-family
Lot Area 30,000 Sq. Ft. 40,000 Sq. Ft. Lot Area 40,000 Sq. Ft. 50,000 Sq. Ft.
Minimum Buildable
Area
12,500 Sq. Ft. 20,000 Sq. Ft. Minimum Buildable
Area
30,000 Sq. Ft. 30,500 Sq. Ft.
Minimum. Buildable
Square
Rectangle
100’
80’
100’
80’
Minimum Buildable
Square
Rectangle
100’
125’
100’
125’
Density
1.1/buildable
acre
.8/buildable
acre
Density
0.5/buildable
acre
0.7/buildable
acre
Frontage 175/125’ * 175/125’ * Frontage 175/125’ * 175/125’ *
Front Yard 50’ 50’ Front Yard 50’ 50’
Side Yard 20’ 20’ Side Yard 20’ 20’
Rear Yard 20’ 20’ Rear Yard 20’ 20’
Building Height 35’ 35’ Building Height 35’ 35’
Lot Coverage
20% of
Buildable Area
20% of
Buildable Area
Lot Coverage
20% of Buildable
Area
20% of
Buildable Area
Effective date: January 15, 2015
16
The Density listed in the above table shall not apply to subdivisions of three (3) Lots or fewer provided
the Lot to be subdivided was not part of a subdivision approved by the Commission subsequent to
November 10, 1958. Further subdivision or re-subdivision of any Lot created thereafter shall be subject
to the Density requirement of the zoning district in which it is located.
4.5 MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPERTIES WITH AVAILABLE MUNICIPAL
WATER AND SEWER
Multi-family
Lot Size 175,000 Sq. Ft.
Minimum Buildable
Area
120,000 Sq. Ft.
Units/Buildable Area
10 units/buildable 40,000 sq. ft.
Requires satisfaction of affordable
provisions of Section 8.2.
Maximum
Units/Building
10 units/Building
Frontages 50’*
Front Yard 50’
Side Yard 25’/50’**
Rear Yard 25’/50’**
Building Height 45’
Building Coverage 25%
Impervious Coverage 35%
*Arterial and Collector Streets and Local and dead end Streets. Two (2) Driveways are required for greater than thirty (30) units,
Driveways must be separated by a minimum of 500’ between the center–lines on Arterial and Collector Roads.
** 50’ when the development will abut an existing Single-Family Dwelling
The minimum Buildable Square requirement shall be met by demonstrating a square of the
dimension required or a rectangle of the equivalent areas with the shortest side no shorter than
that required.
4.6 NON-RESIDENTIAL USES IN SUBURBAN USE DISTRICTS
Permitted non-residential uses in the SU District shall meet the following conditions and shall be
located along Arterial Roads:
Effective date: January 15, 2015
17
1. The proposed land use and the design of the Building or its alteration are compatible with
surrounding neighborhood.
2. Vehicle parking shall not be permitted in front of the building line.
3. Signs shall not be illuminated.
4. A planted Buffer Area at least five (5) feet wide, and containing shrubs that will be not less
than six (6) feet tall in three (3) years, shall be established along Lot lines abutting Lots used
for residential purposes to screen parking areas, refuse containers, Driveways or any use
not customarily found in a residential neighborhood.
5. No structure shall violate Setback requirements established for Buildings.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
18
5.0 TOWN CENTER AND WESTCHESTER VILLAGE DISTRICTS (TC OR WV)
5.1 CHARACTER OF TOWN CENTER AND WESTCHESTER VILLAGE DISTRICTS
It is the intent of this Section to encourage development in the Town Center that creates diverse
development opportunities in a mixed use environment that allows for residential development as well
as Commercial/Service Development and is less automobile dependent and more pedestrian friendly.
Such development is intended to:
1. Enhance the historic character of Colchester by encouraging preservation of Buildings and
context which make the Town unique.
2. Provide for work force, moderate income, elderly, and other housing needs.
3. Encourage a diverse mix of business, commercial, office, residential, institutional and
entertainment uses for workers, visitors, and residents.
4. Encourage the use of contemporary development practices which address the context of
the Town Center and Westchester Village.
5. Encourage pedestrian friendly environment and pedestrian-oriented commercial
enterprises and consumer services that do not rely on automobile traffic to bring
consumers into the area.
6. Permit uses that promote conversion of existing Buildings in a manner that maintains the
visual character of surrounding areas and reflects the architectural scale of existing
development within the district.
7. Minimize visual and functional conflicts between residential and non-residential uses
within and abutting the district.
8. Employ design concepts that address modern stormwater management planning including
rain gardens, pavement treatments and other measures to conserve land and appearance.
9. Promote Shared Parking, inter-lot access and other project features to conserve land and
limit impact of development.
10. Allow for more compact development than may be permitted in other zoning districts to
reduce the impacts of sprawl and traffic congestion.
11. Encourage live/work units.
5.2 APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION
The site and design guideline criteria within this Section shall be applicable to any land use containing a
standalone residential Building with two (2) or more Dwelling Units and all non-residential
developments and mixed uses within the district. This includes any new Building construction; a change
in Building use (adaptive reuse of an existing Building) or a significant alteration of an existing Building
Facade; work which results in the increase of Floor Area through either an Addition to the principal
Effective date: January 15, 2015
19
structure; addition of a new accessory structure, or significant change to an existing accessory structure;
or any activity requiring a new curb cut or increased parking.
5.3 USES PERMITTED
The following uses shall be permitted in the TC or WV Districts subject to all applicable requirements of
these Regulations:
1. Single-family, two-family or multi-family residential development and associated accessory
structures and uses;
2. Commercial development except auto related uses (sales, service, repair, parts) and oil,
propane sales/service;
3. Office development except construction/landscaping service that stores equipment and
materials. Administrative offices of construction/landscaping operations are permitted.
4. Service Development;
5. Religious facilities and Educational Institutions;
6. Family day care homes, as defined by CGS Section 19a-77(a)(3) and licensed pursuant to
CGS Section 19a-87b, are permitted in all Single-Family, Two-Family or Multi-Family
Dwellings. Other day care and nursery school uses are permitted through the approval of a
Special Permit.
7. Municipal facilities;
8. Hotel/Motel;
9. Mixed uses, provided that the ground floor of a mixed use Building (any combination of
retail, office, and residential) shall be occupied by non-residential uses only. Parcels
registered as historic can utilize rear sections of the ground floor for residential uses.
5.4 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Minimum Lot size: 10,000 square feet
2. Maximum height: Three (3) stories or forty (40) feet in height
3. Maximum residential Density shall be six (6) units per 40,000 square feet of Buildable Area
for Duplexes and ten (10) units per 40,000 square feet of Buildable Area for Multi-Family
Housing
4. Minimum Lot Frontage on a Street: Seventy-five (75) feet
5. No minimum Front Yard Setback.
6. Minimum side and rear Yard: No side or rear Yard is required between abutting Lots where
both are used for commercial purposes. Where a Lot abuts a strictly residential use and not
Effective date: January 15, 2015
20
a mixed or non-residential one, ten (10) feet shall be maintained, which Yard shall not be
used for parking, loading or storage.
7. Maximum Building Coverage: Seventy-five percent (75%) of the Buildable Area.
8. Maximum Impervious Coverage: Ninety percent (90%) of the Buildable Area.
5.5 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
The following standards relate to features/approaches that must be addressed in permitting
development within the TC. Some areas within the TC may be subject to additional review and
requirements of the Colchester Historic District Commission. See Map of the HDC Overlay Zone for
applicability.
1. Pedestrian and Bicycle Access – Provision for safe and convenient pedestrian access shall
be incorporated into plans for new construction of Buildings, enlargement or substantial
redevelopment/renovation and development of improved parking areas and should be
designed in concert with landscaping plans as required. Site Plans in the Town Center
District should provide for continuity from sidewalks in public Streets to all pedestrian
entrances on the site, and walkability should be given primary importance over Road and
other access criteria. New construction should improve pedestrian access to Buildings,
sidewalks and parking areas and should be completed with consideration of pedestrian
safety, handicapped access and visual quality. Where appropriate, applicants are
encouraged to provide pedestrian and/or bicycle paths (or connection to the Airline Trail)
connecting the site with abutting areas in order to promote pedestrian and bicycle
circulation and safety in the Town Center. When parking is located in the rear, pedestrian
access via a pedestrian-oriented alley or walkway through to the primary Street is
encouraged.
2. Landscaping – Landscaping shall be incorporated into new and redeveloped properties in
such a way as to create visual diversity and interest, to provide shade for pedestrian areas
and to screen parking and loading areas. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a registered
landscape architect and meet the specific guidelines as set forth herein. Landscape plans
shall show the location, type, and size of all proposed plantings as well as enough of the
surrounding context such that the Commission may determine the plan’s appropriateness.
A landscaping maintenance agreement may be required as a condition of approval.
3. Side Yard Treatment
A. Where the distance between structures on adjacent Lots is ten (10) feet or less, the
side Yard shall be screened by a solid fence, wall or Landscape treatment of Evergreen
plantings at a height not to exceed three (3) feet.
B. Where the distance between structures on adjacent Lots is greater than ten (10) feet,
landscaping shall consist of a combination of materials sufficient to break up the view
into the side Yard.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
21
C. Side Yards may, in the alternative, be established as pedestrian walkways to access
parking areas to the rear of the Building. Such walkways shall be landscaped and
lighted for safety.
5.6 DESIGN REGULATIONS
1. Orientation – Buildings shall be oriented predominantly parallel to the front Setback line to
preserve a consistent Facade line with the Street. Slight rotations from parallel may be
accepted, where the plans submitted are found to be consistent with the architectural
design and character of the district. Primary Building entrances should be easily identified
and be oriented to the Street. The primary entry should be clearly visible from the public
Street which provides the Building’s main orientation.
2. Articulation – New and redeveloped Buildings should reinforce the character of the existing
streetscape by creating visual interest and reinforcing pedestrian scale. The apparent bulk
and large wall expanses of multi-story Buildings as well as single story Buildings of fifteen
(15) feet height or more should be minimized by incorporating one or preferably a
combination of the following:
Windows
Architectural details
Canopies
Overhangs
Indented or projected bays, where not in conflict with pedestrian paths
Change of building materials.
3. The top of such Buildings should display a distinct profile or outline incorporating such
elements as a projecting parapet, cornice, upper level setback or pitched roofline. When
immediately adjacent to a Building with such articulation, new and redeveloped Buildings
should provide a treatment that is reflective of existing features, such as providing a
consistent cornice line or complementary roof configuration where possible.
4. Large expanses of blank walls are prohibited for commercial and mixed use Buildings. The
ground floor Facade along the primary Street shall have continuous storefront windows,
with the exception of necessary piers, columns, pilasters, etc. Indented or projecting bays
may be used to add variety, to the Facade for display purposes or to fulfill the transparency
requirements noted in Section 5.6.5, provided they do not conflict with any pedestrian
walks or circulation. Window openings at the ground floor Facade along the primary Street
may extend from floor to ceiling, but shall not be more than thirty (30) inches above the
finished floor, nor lower than adjacent door heads. Wall areas remaining below windows
not extending to the floor shall be articulated by the use of architectural features, such as
panels, siding, etc.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
22
Exhibit 4 – Streetscape Perspectives
5. Transparency – For commercial and mixed use Buildings, a maximum of twenty-five
percent (25%) of the Building Facade on the ground floor oriented to the street can be used
for inside lighting, promotional materials or banners.
6. Doors and Entrances
A. Buildings must have a primary entrance facing a public Street or way and should be
visually prominent.
B. In Buildings with multiple ground floor tenants, entries should provide a coordinated
design theme, i.e., a common canopy, architectural projection or awning design.
7. Pedestrian Spaces and Comfort – For the purpose of providing a pedestrian friendly
environment in the TC, new and redeveloped Buildings should provide for outdoor seating
areas, scaled to the size and demands of the proposed use, where feasible. A mixed-use
project with ground floor Restaurant may provide an area for outdoor dining which
extends the indoor dining space for seasonal use. A ground floor use may provide a
sidewalk bench where there is sufficient width.
8. Such pedestrian areas are best located when they take advantage of southern exposure
and provide space that affords visual connectivity but is set back from major pedestrian
flow and vehicular ways and is appropriate to the location.
9. Outdoor sales and display areas should be well organized and located against a Building so
as not to impede pedestrian circulation if located on a public walk or way.
10. The following guidelines should be considered in the design and location of pedestrian
spaces:
A. Buffering from major vehicular areas such as parking lots or main traffic ways
B. Lighting for nighttime comfort and safety
C. Appropriate Street furnishing, i.e., benches, trash receptacles
Effective date: January 15, 2015
23
D. A focal element where appropriate such as a water feature, special Landscape feature
or public art installation
E. Decorative paving and seasonal planting
F. South facing locations
G. Visual connectivity, especially to important views such as an historic structure
H. Appropriate scale in relation to the development
I. Continuity of pedestrian sidewalks
11. Utilities – Underground utilities for new and redeveloped Buildings are required unless
physically restricted or blocked by existing underground obstructions.
12. Lighting – Site lighting, security lighting and architectural/Landscape lighting should provide
the user with illumination levels appropriate for the designed activity (i.e., parking, walking,
outdoor dining space) while meeting minimum requirements of these Regulations.
Illumination levels should also be reasonably uniform throughout the site and strive to
minimize Glare. Lighting fixtures shall be of a style appropriate to the character of the
district, and be consistent throughout the development.
Adequate lighting levels shall be provided in all pedestrian areas, including Building entries,
along walkways, parking areas, and other public areas. The following requirements must be
met in lighting plans:
A. An overlapping pattern of light at a height of about ten to fifteen (10-15) feet in
lighted pedestrian areas and twenty to twenty-four (20-24) feet in parking areas.
DO
DON’T
Exhibit 5 – Lighting Focus
B. Lighting at consistent Lumens with a gradual transition to unlighted areas. Highly
contrasting pools of light and dark can be temporarily blinding and should be avoided.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
24
C. In each lighted area, design lighting levels that will allow pedestrians to identify a face
fifteen (15) yards away (generally, a minimum of four (4) Foot-Candles). Adequate
lighting reduces anonymity and gives pedestrians an opportunity to choose another
route.
D. Confine site lighting to the project site as much as possible; use shields or other
methods to eliminate Glare on adjacent properties.
E. Place light posts and standards so that they do not create hazards for pedestrians or
vehicles.
F. Indicate specific lighting levels in each lighted area.
13. Quality of site furnishings – Provide for the following Site Plan elements:
A. High-quality fixtures and materials in site furnishings and features, such as durable
and easily maintained walls and paving.
B. Site features and furnishings that discourage vandalism. Furnishings that are easily
removed or do not convey an image of misuse.
C. Safety materials, such as non-slip walkway surfaces.
D. Site furnishings shall be of a style appropriate to the character of the district, and be
consistent throughout the development.
5.7 WESTCHESTER VILLAGE DISTRICT
This district is intended to recognize and encourage development and redevelopment of the
commercial patterns at the intersection of RT 16 and 149. This district is intended to meet many
of the village needs for basic retail shopping, tourism, and local services. The district also
recognizes and reflects the significant rural Commercial Use of the Village. Uses in this district
will utilize the standards in Section 5.7 only and not the other requirements of Section 5.
The following standards apply to development in the Westchester Village District:
1. Permitted Uses, subject to all applicable requirements of these Regulations:
A. Single-family, two-family or multi-family residential development and associated
accessory structures and uses.
2. Special Permit Uses
The following are eligible for Special Permit after consideration and approval from the
Commission:
A. Commercial development excepting auto related uses (sales, service, repair, parts)
and oil, propane sales/service.
B. Automobile gasoline stations
Effective date: January 15, 2015
25
C. Automobile service/repair
D. Marine dealership and repair
E. Office development except construction/landscaping services that store equipment
and materials. Administrative offices of construction/landscaping operations are
permitted.
F. Service Development
G. Religious facilities and Educational Institutions
H. Municipal facilities
I. Mixed uses, provided that the ground floor of a mixed use Building (any combination
of retail, office, and residential) shall be occupied by non-residential uses only. Parcels
registered as historic can utilize rear sections of the ground floor for residential uses.
3. Minimum Lot size – 40,000 square feet
4. Maximum Height – Thirty (30) feet or two (2) stories
5. Maximum residential Density – Four (4) Dwelling Units/acre unless serviced by centralized
sewer/water that is shown to have capacity to support development proposed. If the
capacity of water/sewer is demonstrated, the Density can exceed four (4) Dwelling
Units/acre to a maximum of six (6) Dwelling Units/acre.
6. Minimum Lot Frontage – Seventy-five (75) feet
7. Minimum side and rear Yard – No side or rear Yard is required between abutting Lots
where both are used for commercial purposes. Where a Lot abuts a strictly residential use
and not a mixed or non-residential use, ten (10) foot yard shall be maintained, which Yard
shall not be used for parking, loading or storage.
8. Maximum Building Coverage – Thirty-five percent (35%) of the Buildable Area
9. Maximum Impervious Coverage – Fifty percent (50%) of the Buildable Area
10. Performance Requirements – The following standards relate to features/approaches that
must be addressed in permitting development within the Westchester Village District.
A. Pedestrian and Bicycle Access – Provision for safe and convenient pedestrian access
shall be incorporated into plans for new construction of Buildings, enlargement or
substantial redevelopment/renovation and development of improved parking areas
and should be designed in concert with landscaping plans as required.
B. Landscaping – Landscaping shall be incorporated into new and redeveloped properties
in such a way as to create visual diversity and interest, to provide shade for pedestrian
areas and to screen parking and loading areas. As the Westchester Village District is a
Effective date: January 15, 2015
26
small location within a rural area, landscaping and the treatment of Open Space on all
developed sites are important. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a registered
landscape architect or may be accepted, where the plans submitted are found to be
consistent with the intent of this Regulation and meet the specific guidelines as set
forth herein. Landscape plans shall show the location, type, and size of all proposed
plantings as well as enough of the surrounding context such that the Commission may
determine the plan’s appropriateness. A landscaping maintenance agreement may be
required as a condition of approval.
C. Side Yard Treatment
1. Where the distance between structures on adjacent Lots is ten (10) feet or less,
the side Yard shall be screened by a solid fence, wall or Landscape treatment of
Evergreen plantings at a height not to exceed three (3) feet.
2. Where the distance between structures on adjacent Lots is greater than ten (10)
feet, landscaping shall consist of a combination of materials sufficient to break up
the view into the side Yard.
3. Side Yards may, in the alternative, be established as pedestrian walkways to
access parking areas to the rear of the Building. Such walkways shall be
landscaped and lighted for safety.
11. Design Regulations
A. Articulation – New and redeveloped Buildings should reinforce the rural character of
the existing streetscape by utilizing Open Spaces and landscaping.
B. Parking associated with an individual use shall, to the greatest extent feasible, be
located behind structures or otherwise fully screened from Street view.
C. Low impact development drainage and paving schemes are encouraged.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
27
6.0 FUTURE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (FD)
6.1 CHARACTER
This district is intended to provide an area for non-residential development of a variety of
business uses in appropriate locations in Colchester that are well served by transportation and
utility infrastructure. These areas have been designated for economic development in the Plan
of Conservation and Development. Mixed Use Development is encouraged as a goal in the
creation of diverse and pedestrian friendly areas with a mix of housing, shopping, workplace and
entertainment uses and nodes for transportation access, all within a short walk of one another.
A range of types, sizes, amenities and uses will enhance a series of inviting functional public
spaces including shopping Streets, pedestrian friendly streetscapes, Open Spaces, courtyards,
trails, residential, office and retail in mixed use Buildings. Finally, the design principles for
Buildings and Streets should reflect traditional small town character that provides opportunities
for intimate pedestrian friendly community life.
6.2 USES PERMITTED
The following uses are permitted in the FD District subject to all applicable requirements of
these Regulations. All sites must be serviced by public water and public sewer. Each site must
utilize best management practices to protect water quality. Each site must derive access from
internal Roads as much as possible.
1. Business, corporate, or Professional Offices.
2. Medical, dental, or optical laboratories.
3. Laboratories and research facilities.
4. Accessory Buildings and accessory structures.
5. Retail business where the total gross Floor Area shall not exceed 200,000 square feet.
6. Restaurants and eating and drinking establishments when most food and drink is intended
to be consumed on the Premises at tables, counters or bars
7. Family day care homes, as defined by CGS Section 19a-77(a)(3) and licensed pursuant to
CGS Section 19a-87b, as amended, are permitted in all Single-Family, Two-Family or
Multi-Family Dwellings.
6.3 SPECIAL PERMIT
The following uses are permitted by Special Permit in the FD District provided they are served by
public water and public sewer, derive access from internal Roads rather than existing Collector
or Arterial Roads, and use best management practices to protect water quality.
1. Warehouse, storage and distribution facilities, except not to include Mini Storage Facilities.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
28
2. Light Manufacturing or assembly conducted entirely within a Building, such as computer or
electronic components and equipment, and light industrial machinery or equipment and
sub-assemblies for commercial applications.
3. Hotel, Motel or banquet facility.
4. Retail businesses with a total gross floor area that exceeds 200,000sf.
5. Mixed Use Development including multi-family residential development of no more than
seventy-five (75) total units on a Parcel. No more than four hundred (400) additional
residential units will be permitted in all of the FD District. When the total of Multi-Family
Dwelling Units permitted meets this threshold, there shall be no additional residential units
permitted under this Section.
6. Movie Theater.
7. Municipal facilities.
8. Day care and nursery school uses in accordance with Section 8-9 of these Regulations.
6.4 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT IN FUTURE
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
1. Minimum Lot size: 40,000 square feet of which at least 30,000 square feet is Buildable
Area.
2. Minimum Lot Frontage on a Street: Two hundred (200) feet on Arterial and Collector
Streets and one hundred fifty (150) on local and dead end Streets.
3. Minimum Front Yard Setback: Fifty (50) feet to public Streets.
4. Minimum Side and Rear Yard: see buffering distance chart, Table 6.1.
5. Maximum Building Height: Forty-five (45) feet.
6. Maximum Building Coverage: Forty percent (40%) of Buildable Area.
7. Maximum Impervious Coverage: Seventy-five (75%) of Buildable Area.
6.5 STANDARDS FOR MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT
1. Mixed use within Buildings – Mixed uses within Buildings are permitted by Special Permit.
To qualify to develop residential lands uses in this district, at least thirty percent (30%) of
the total residential units must be in Buildings that contain non-residential uses.
Construction of separate distinct multi-family blocks is prohibited and instead, Dwelling
Units at grade or at upper levels of mixed use Buildings are encouraged and permitted
subject to standards of the district.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
29
2. Minimum Building Frontage – In the FD District, side and rear Yards shall be a minimum of
fifteen (15) feet. If there are two (2) entrances proposed at the front, the Commission will
determine which entrance will be considered the main or front.
3. Utilities – All utilities (water, sewer, power, and data) shall be installed underground.
4. Minimum amount of non-residential development to permit residential mixed use
component – In order to qualify for residential use, the proposed development shall also
contain a minimum of 40,000 square feet or more of permitted non-residential uses or
retail business as permitted in Sections 6.2 and 6.3.
5. Phasing, concurrent development – It is the aim of this Regulation to ensure that
residential units are constructed at the same time as non-residential land uses. The size
and amount of a site development area containing multi-family residential uses shall be
limited by the Commission during the approval process by requiring phasing of
construction. No more than fifty (50) residential units may be constructed concurrently
with the non-residential section of the development. In order to exceed fifty (50) units,
the non-residential section of the development must be more than seventy-five percent
(75%) completed.
6. Density – Notwithstanding the Density requirements in Section 8.1.1, the overall
residential Density of a mixed use site in this district may not exceed seven (7) Dwelling
Units/acre of Buildable Area. There may be no more than six (6) Dwelling Units per
Building for residential only Buildings; for mixed use Buildings there may be no more than
ten (10) Dwelling Units per Building.
7. Unit Size – No more than ten percent (10%) of residential units in any Mixed Use
Development in the FD District shall contain three (3) bedrooms and no unit can include
more than three (3) bedrooms. Residential units will be limited to 1,750 square feet of
total area or less.
8. Integration – The location of the Multi-Family Dwelling Units must be fully integrated with
non-residential uses (commercial, retail, office, and/or recreational uses). Maximum
Building footprint occupied entirely by a non-residential use shall be 50,000 square feet.
See Exhibit 6.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
30
Exhibit 6 – Mixed Use Integration
9. Live Work Units – Mixed Use Development should promote the development of
pedestrian oriented live work units. A live work unit is a structure that combines a limited
office, retail services or Business Services with a residential living space and has no more
than four (4) employees. A live work unit can be used to satisfy the non-residential
development requirement in an amount equal to the space within the non-residential
section of the unit.
1. Building Setback – Setbacks of Buildings within developments constructed under Section
6.4.2 are not required.
2. Setbacks/Buffers to public Streets or Parcel boundaries – Minimum Setback distances to
Parcel boundaries/public Streets are identified in the Buffering Chart, Table 6.1. The
Commission may require, as a condition of approval for Special Permit use, additional
planting and other buffering features to minimize impacts on adjacent properties.
3. In cases of mixed uses within structures, buffering will be based on the most restrictive use
of the structure.
Table 6.1 Buffering Distances (feet) Between Uses
Adjacent Use
Subject use
Residential
(under 35’ in
height)
Residential
(over 35’ in
height) Commercial Industrial
Residential 25 50 75 75
Commercial 75 75 25 25
Industrial 75 75 25 25
6.6 DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT
1. Building Placement
A. Zero Lot line – The majority of Buildings on the site shall be placed within ten (10) feet
of the front Lot line or up to the sidewalk edge if the sidewalk is larger than or equal
to ten (10) feet in width. Off-street parking shall be located in the side Yard or back
Yard of the property. This will be done to maintain a Street focus with the emphasis
on pedestrian activity. See Exhibit 7.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
31
Exhibit 7 – Building Placement = Zero Lot Lines
B. Lighting – In addition to the regular lighting requirements in Regulation Section 12, the
following standards shall be met in the FD District to ensure that site lighting
contributes to the character of the site and does not disturb adjacent development.
See Exhibit 8.
1. Lighting should be provided within the parking lots and along pedestrian
walkways.
2. Lighting fixtures shall be limited to heights of eighteen (18) feet to twenty (20)
feet for parking lots and twelve (12) feet to sixteen (16) feet for pedestrian
walkways.
3. All lighting should be shielded from producing off-site Glare, through optical
design inside fixture so that the direction of the lighting is downward.
4. Street lights shall have brackets to mount special event and other flags and
banners.
5. Site lighting shall be consistent throughout the site.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
32
Exhibit 8 – Consistent Lighting
2. Architectural Character
The following guidelines shall apply to Mixed Use Development in the FD District proposed
under this Section. Street level businesses are a prime focus of this Regulation. Toward this
end, Street level Facades are encouraged and shall incorporate a minimum of two (2)
continuous details. A minimum of forty percent (40%) of the Street level Facades of each
Building shall be transparent. Upper floors shall have a minimum of twenty percent (20%)
transparency. See Exhibit 9.
Exhibit 9 – Transparency – Character
Screening – All utilities including dumpsters shall be screened by parapets, walls, fences,
landscaping and roofing.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
33
3. Pedestrian Circulation – In order to emphasize the goal of successful pedestrian
integration, the Commission will require sidewalks in all internal sections of the
development and the following features shall be utilized:
1. Require short Street lengths
2. Require cross walks
3. Require installation of pedestrian activated signals
4. Prohibit cul-de-sacs, except where significant barriers exists.
4. Sidewalks, within the interior of a Mixed Use Development, must be located in front of all
mixed use and non-residential Buildings and must be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width.
All residential interior sidewalks shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. Sidewalks can
include alternative materials, i.e., pavers and other “green devices”.
5. Site Plans shall include a Street furniture plan which identifies elements proposed to be
used including seating, art, utilities (garbage cans, postal boxes, etc.).
6. Pedestrian activities shall be concentrated at Street corners.
7. Entrances and Open Spaces should be wide and covered.
6.7 OTHER REQUIREMENTS IN FUTURE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
1. Development of all types in the Future Development District(s) shall:
A. Promote implementation of the Transportation Plan, particularly with regard to the
location and configuration of a conceptual ring Road, as depicted in the Plan of
Conservation and Development, and
B. Derive access from Roads internal to the future development rather than existing
Collector or Arterial Roads such as Parum Road or Chestnut Hill Road unless the
Commission has granted a Special Permit that permits access from an existing
Collector or Arterial Road, and
C. Not derive access from Local Roads that are not internal to the Future Development
District.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
34
7.0 ARTERIAL COMMERCIAL USE (AC)
7.1 CHARACTER OF THE ARTERIAL COMMERCIAL (AC) OVERLAY
The Arterial Commercial Overlay is both a fixed and Overlay Zone that is intended to provide for
commercial and industrial use development along Arterial Roads. Included in this zone are areas
that are not serviced by water and sewer but are adjacent to major transportation routes and
therefore are developed with commercial and light industrial land uses as well as residential
land uses. Areas eligible to utilize this zone are located along Arterial Roads that traverse
through other zoning districts and areas that are wholly zoned in this category. Certain Lots are
zoned for exclusive Arterial Commercial Use while other Lots, zoned for Rural Use but with
frontage and direct Driveway access to an Arterial Road, may be developed as Arterial
Commercial with the uses permitted or specifically permitted in the Arterial Commercial Zone
provided the Lot requirements can be met.
These uses should be designed in a manner that minimizes the potential for polluting the air or
contaminating any body of water or Aquifer given that many properties in the zone are located
near or within the Town Aquifer Protection Zone. Development in these areas should be in
well-designed Buildings and attractively landscaped sites as they are visible from major
transportation routes.
7.2 USES PERMITTED – The following uses are permitted in the AC, subject to all applicable
requirements of these Regulations:
1. Agriculture
2. Public or private recreation and Open Space
3. Retail uses under 20,000 square feet
4. Business Services
5. Repair services including auto, boat and truck without outdoor storage or activity that
utilize no more than two (2) acres
6. Light industrial under 20,000 square feet
7. Restaurant without drive through
8. Bed and Breakfast
7.3 SPECIAL PERMIT USES IN ARTERIAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
The following uses are permitted by Special Permit in the AC, subject to all applicable
requirements of these Regulations:
1. Construction Services including staging and equipment storage (except salvage and
wrecking services)
Effective date: January 15, 2015
35
2. Auto dealership and repair including outdoor storage and/or activity
3. Manufacture and assembly
4. Retail uses over 20,000 square feet if serviced by municipal water and sewer
5. Public utility structures
6. Private Warehousing and storage including Mini Storage Facilities
7. Wholesale storage and distribution uses if serviced by municipal water
8. Light industrial uses over 20,000 square feet
9. Hotel/Motel
10. Banquet, conference and convention facilities
11. Restaurant with drive through
12. Gasoline stations provided that the site is adjacent to a transportation interchange and no
portion of the lot is within the Town Aquifer Protection Area, in accordance with Section
9.2.1, and/or within the Town Aquifer Protection Zone. See Section 9.2.2.
7.4 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR THE AC DISTRICT
1. The use shall emit no offensive odors perceptible from any property line of the Lot on
which the operation is located, and shall emit no obnoxious, toxic, or corrosive fumes or
gases.
2. Maximum Impervious Coverage allowed on any site is sixty percent (60%) of the total area
of the site.
3. Front Yard Setback shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet.
4. Side Yard Setback is not required for areas that are adjacent on a side to another
non-residential use. In the case where a non-residential use abuts an existing residential
use, the Setback shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
5. Height limitation – thirty-five (35) feet and can be no more than two (2) stories.
6. Minimum Frontage – Two hundred (200) feet on Arterial and Collectors Roads, one
hundred fifty (150) feet on local and dead end Roads.
7. Minimum area of 40,000 square feet of which 30,000 square feet is contiguous Buildable
Area.
8. Minimum separation distance of impervious surface to the Salmon/Jeremy River and
associated Wetlands shall be one hundred (100) feet.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
36
9. Minimum undisturbed buffer to the Salmon/Jeremy River and associated Wetlands shall be
fifty (50) feet.
10. The Commission may permit outside storage, as an Accessory Use, behind the rear wall of
the principal Building, if appropriate screening is provided to screen such storage from view
from public rights-of-way, the Airline Trail, and neighboring properties.
7.5 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR PROPERTIES LOCATED IN THE EIGHT MILE RIVER DISTRICT
1. Properties may only utilize the overlay standards if they were occupied with
non-residential uses as of January 15, 2015
2. Each use must be located 200 feet or more from a wetland or water course
Effective date: January 15, 2015
37
8.0 USE STANDARDS
8.1 HOUSING (INCLUDES NON-RESIDENTIAL USES TAKING PLACE IN RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES)
1. Multi-family Development – Multi-family developments shall be designed, located,
landscaped and buffered in a manner that does not adversely alter the character of
established single-family neighborhoods.
A. Every multi-family development (development of multi-family Buildings) shall meet
the following requirements:
1. Multi-Family Dwellings shall only be permitted when the entire area of the
property proposed is serviced by municipal water and sewer or is scheduled to be
serviced by municipal water and sewer.
2. The maximum Density for multi-family development shall not exceed ten (10)
units per acre of Buildable Area. No multi-family Building shall contain more than
eight (8) Dwelling Units.
3. In Town Center and Future Development Districts, Dwelling Units may be included
in a Building used for commercial purposes provided that:
b. The street-level floor of the Building shall not be used only for residential
purposes except in Buildings that are designated historic;
c. The Dwelling Units do not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the total
gross Floor Area of the Building.
4. No Building shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from any property line of a
Lot containing a Single-Family Dwelling.
5. No multi-family development shall exceed twenty-five percent (25%) Building
Coverage or thirty-five percent (35%) Impervious Coverage.
6. Every Multi-Family Dwelling shall be serviced by a private Road internal to the site
and shall not derive direct Driveway access from a public Street. Any Road or
Driveway shall have a permanent all-weather surface and shall be properly
drained.
7. Except in the TC District, every multi-family development shall have the main
access Road connecting directly to a Collector or Arterial Street which shall be
capable of accommodating the added traffic flow generated by the development.
8. Any development containing more than thirty (30) units shall have a second Road
access to a public Street accessible to all of the units. Such secondary access may
be located on a local or dead end Street provided it is located within 600 feet of
the Collector or Arterial Street.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
38
9. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) Open Space shall be provided on the site.
Open Space is to be calculated as described in Section 3.7.
10. Designated recreation and Open Space area(s) shall contain a minimum of 3,600
contiguous square feet which shall:
a. be at least fifty (50) feet in width, and
b. not be designated as inland Wetland soils or contain Slopes in excess of ten
percent (10%).
11. Garages and off-street parking spaces, or a combination thereof, shall be provided
on the Lot for not less than one car per Dwelling Unit. Guest parking spaces should
be provided at a rate of one space per every four units. Such required spaces shall
be located with convenient access to the principal Building(s). Parking areas and
Driveways shall have a permanent all-weather surface and shall be properly
drained.
12. All utilities shall be installed underground.
2. Age Restricted Housing – Age restricted Housing developments shall meet the
requirements for multi-family developments and must also conform to the following
standards:
A. An Age Restricted Housing development shall not exceed six (6) units per acre of
Buildable Area.
B. An Age Restricted Housing development shall be deed restricted in perpetuity in
accordance with the Federal Fair Housing Act for utilization as Age Restricted Housing.
C. Age Restricted Housing developments shall be designed, located, landscaped and
buffered in a manner that would not adversely alter the character of an established
single-family neighborhood. If located in a Town Center or Future Development
District, developments must demonstrate design compatibility with surrounding
Buildings.
D. Management of the Age Restricted Housing development shall establish a procedure
to routinely determine that occupancy of the units is in accordance with the Federal
Fair Housing Act and shall report this information to the Town at least once every two
(2) years, or promptly upon request.
3. Planned Development (PD)
Planned Developments shall meet the following requirements:
A. PD’s shall only be permitted when the entire area of the property proposed for
development is within the municipal water and sewer service areas and the
development and will connect to public water and public sewer systems.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
39
B. A PD shall not exceed the maximum Density permitted for the Parcel.
C. No Building shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from any property line of a Lot
containing a Single-Family Dwelling.
D. Every Dwelling in a PD shall be serviced by a private Road internal to the site and shall
not derive direct Driveway access from a public Street. Any Road or Driveway shall
have a permanent all-weather surface and shall be properly drained.
E. Private Roads serving a PD shall have the main access Road connecting directly to a
Collector or Arterial Street which shall be capable of accommodating the added traffic
flow generated by development.
F. Any development containing more than thirty (30) units shall have a second Road
access accessible to all units to a public Street. Such secondary access may be located
on a local or dead end Street provided it is located within 600 feet of the Collector or
Arterial Street.
G. Twenty-five percent (25%) of the total site area shall be maintained for Open Space
and recreational facilities. Designated recreation and Open Space area(s) shall contain
a minimum of 3,600 contiguous square feet which shall:
1. be at least fifty (50) feet in width, and
2. not be designated as Wetland soils or contain Slopes in excess of 10%.
3. In cases where recreational facilities are intended for use by children, they shall be
protected by suitable fencing and plantings from parking areas, Driveways,
garages, service areas and Streets.
H. Garages and off-street parking spaces, or a combination thereof, shall be provided for
not less than one (1) car per Dwelling Unit. Guest parking spaces should be provided
at a rate of one (1) space per every four (4) units. Such required spaces shall be
located with convenient access to the principal Building(s). Parking areas shall have a
permanent all-weather surface and shall be properly drained.
8.2 AFFORDABLE HOUSING
1. Any housing development with more than six (6) Dwelling Units proposed for single-family
use or more than three (3) units for multi-family use shall contain an Affordable Housing
component that demonstrates that ten percent (10%) of all units will be affordable and
provided in the following manner:
A. Applicability: In order for a unit to be deemed an “affordable Dwelling Unit” for
purposes of these Regulations it must conform to the definition in CGS Section 8-30g
as Section 8-30g relates to persons or families whose household income is less than or
equal to eighty percent (80%) of the area or statewide Median Income, whichever is
less, and must be deed restricted in accordance with CGS Section 8-30g, as amended.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
40
B. Density Bonus: If fifteen percent (15%) or more Dwelling Units in a development are
sold or rented as units of Affordable Housing in accordance with Section 8.2.1.A, the
development can qualify for a twenty percent (20%) increase in gross Density provided
there is adequate capacity and connection to Town water and sewer.
C. Quality and Size: The affordable Dwelling Units shall be of a construction quality and
size that is comparable to market-rate units within the development and shall be
dispersed throughout the development. A developer can reduce the size of half (50%)
of the affordable Dwelling Units that will be sold or rented, but may not diminish the
size of affordable Dwelling Units by more than twenty-five percent (25%) when
compared to Dwelling Units sold at market rate.
D. Phasing: The affordable Dwelling Units shall be built at the same time as other
residential construction.
E. Bedrooms: The ratio of one (1), two (2) and three (3) bedroom units among the
affordable Dwelling Units shall be comparable to the ratio of one (1), two (2) and three
(3) bedroom units among the market-rate Dwelling Units.
F. Qualification of Occupants: Prospective occupants of the affordable Dwelling Units will
be required to fill out an application form containing instructions for calculating their
Family income and allowing the property manager to verify the information. Income
definitions prepared by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development will
serve as a principal guideline for such calculation. Applicants will be required to sign a
verification of their review and understanding of the income maximums, the penalties
for false information, and, with regard to tenants, the applicable procedures in the
event that their income increases at some future time above the allowable maximum.
Applicants will also be required to provide appropriate documentation to verify their
income. Incomes of tenant(s) in each affordable Dwelling Unit that is rented will be
re-verified annually.
G. Standard Lease Provision: Each lease for an affordable Dwelling Unit will contain a
provision reflecting that this unit is being rented as “affordable housing” as defined in
CGS Section 8-30g, and is available only to persons or families whose household
income is less than or equal to eighty percent (80%) or sixty percent (60%), where
applicable, of the statewide Median Income as determined by the Connecticut
Department of Economic and Community Development in conjunction with the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development. Approval by the Commission of such
development is based in part on the condition that a defined percentage of units will
be always be rented as affordable Dwelling Units. The owner is required by law to
strictly enforce these restrictions at all times.
H. Monthly Payment: Calculation of the maximum monthly payment for an affordable
Dwelling Unit that is leased, so as to satisfy CGS Section 8-30g, shall utilize the area
Median Income data as published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development for a rental unit, as in effect on the day the lease is signed. The
maximum monthly payment, adjusted by bedroom size, for an affordable Dwelling
Unit shall not be greater than the amount that will preserve such unit as “affordable
Effective date: January 15, 2015
41
housing” as that term is defined in CGS Section 8-30g, as it applies to eighty percent
(80%) units.
I. Utility Allowance: The monthly rent for an affordable Dwelling Unit shall include a
monthly allowance for utilities, which are heat, hot water and electricity, but exclude
telephone and cable television. Heat and utility costs may be calculated by reasonable
estimate.
J. Principal Residence: Affordable Dwelling Units shall be occupied only as tenant’s
principal residence. Subletting of affordable rental units for more than the affordable
rate is prohibited.
K. Affordability Period: The affordable period for each affordable Dwelling Unit shall be
based on CGS Section 8-30g, as amended, and shall begin on the initial date of
occupancy of each available affordable Dwelling Unit.
L. Change of Income or Qualifying Status of Tenant: In the event that an affordable
Dwelling Unit tenant’s income changes so as to exceed the qualifying maximum at the
time of re-verification, such tenant must provide notice to the property manager
within seven (7) days of the disqualification. Upon being disqualified, such tenant,
following the procedures set forth below, shall have the option to vacate the unit
within ninety (90) days, or to remain in the unit paying a market-rate rent. Within
fifteen (15) days of receiving notice of a tenant’s disqualification, the property
manager shall provide written notice to the tenant of the market rate rent for the unit.
The tenant shall notify the property manager within fifteen (15) days of receipt of such
notice whether the tenant will accept the market-rate rent or vacate. If the tenant
elects to remain in the unit at the market rate, the property manager shall offer the
next available unit as an affordable Dwelling Unit, if necessary, in order for the
development to comply with the proper minimum set aside for affordable Dwelling
Units.
M. Compliance Reporting: No later than January 31 of each year, beginning the year after
the initial occupancy of the last affordable Dwelling Unit to be rented, the property
manager shall prepare and file with the Commission or its designee (Colchester
Housing Authority) a report, containing a list of the units utilized as affordable
Dwelling Units, a list of the incomes of all tenants, and a certification by the property
manager of compliance. A violation of these Regulations shall not result in a forfeiture
or reversion of title, but in enforcing these Regulations the Commission shall retain all
enforcement powers granted by the Connecticut General Statutes, including Section
8-12, which powers include the authority, at any reasonable time, to inspect the
property and to examine the books and records of the property manager to determine
compliance of the development or individual units with these Regulations.
N. There shall be several restrictions placed on the deeds of affordable Dwelling Units.
They are identified below:
1. If an affordable Dwelling Unit is proposed to be sold, it must be sold to a Family
that has household income below eighty percent (80%) or sixty percent (60%) of
the area or statewide Median Income, whichever is less.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
42
2. Homebuyers cannot incur monthly housing costs that exceed thirty percent (30%)
of their monthly income.
8.3 ACCESSORY APARTMENTS – Accessory Apartments shall be permitted in connection with all
Single-Family Dwellings in accordance with the standards contained herein.
1. The Zoning Permit application and Site Plan shall be of sufficient detail, as determined by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer, to determine compliance with the design standards of this
Section and, in addition, the applicant for an Accessory Apartment use shall submit:
A. Required application form, completed, signed, and dated by the property owner.
B. A copy of the current deed for the subject Parcel.
C. A sworn notarized statement from the applicant(s) that he/she/they will reside at the
subject Premises as a condition of maintaining the validity of the Accessory
Apartment. This statement shall be placed on the Land Records against the name of
the owner and shall only be released upon a written request to remove the Accessory
Apartment or replacement with a similar statement executed by a subsequent owner.
Failure to comply with the owner occupancy requirements herein shall be deemed a
violation of these Regulations, and be grounds for enforcement, which may include
revocation of the Zoning Permit.
D. A set of floor plans and Building elevations, with dimensions or drawn to scale,
depicting the existing interior and exterior of the structure and clearly depicting the
proposed interior and exterior of the structure after the creation of the Accessory
Apartment. If no exterior Building improvements are proposed, Building elevations are
not required.
E. A calculation of Floor Area for the existing Dwelling and Accessory Apartment.
F. A Site Plan prepared by a licensed surveyor that indicates the location of any existing
and proposed structures on the Parcel, the existing and/or proposed utilities to
service the Dwelling and Accessory Apartment, parking and Driveway areas, and any
other information or reports that the Zoning Enforcement Officer may require to
determine compliance with the intent and purpose of these Regulations.
2. Design Standards
A. The Accessory Apartment must be created within or attached to a Single-Family
Dwelling and have a common wall with living space in the primary Dwelling and there
shall be only one Accessory Apartment permitted for each Single-Family Dwelling.
Principal access must occur through the primary Building. Secondary access is
acceptable through a common garage, rear entrance or breezeway from the primary
residence. See Exhibit 10.
B. The owner of the Dwelling Unit with which the Accessory Apartment is associated
must occupy at least one of the Dwelling Units.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
43
Exhibit 10 – Accessory Apartment – Entrance and Relationship to Primary Unit
C. All new construction shall meet the Building Coverage, minimum Setback
requirements, and Building Height requirements applicable to the principal structures
for the zoning district in which the Accessory Apartment is to be located.
D. The Accessory Apartment shall be serviced by the same water and wastewater system
serving the principal residence provided such service complies with all current
requirements of the Public Health Code. The Accessory Apartment may share utilities
(electric and heat) with the principal residence.
E. The Accessory Apartment shall clearly be the secondary and subordinate use and is
limited to one (1) bedroom. The maximum Floor Area of the Accessory Apartment
shall not exceed 600 square feet or thirty-three percent (33%) of the combined Floor
Areas of the principal Single-Family Dwelling and the Accessory Apartment, whichever
is less. The definition of Floor Area in Section 20.4 of these Regulations shall be used
for the purposes of calculating the size of the Accessory Apartment.
F. Off-street parking shall be provided for all Accessory Apartments and for the principal
Single-Family Dwelling Unit. Parking and access from the public right-of-way shall
serve both the principal and accessory unit, and shall not be distinguishable as
separate facilities.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
44
G. The Accessory Apartment shall have its own independent sleeping, cooking and
sanitary facilities and shall comply with all other applicable building, housing and
health codes.
H. The entire Building to be converted shall comply with all current applicable, state,
local, health, building and housing codes after conversion and shall maintain the
exterior appearance and architectural style (roof line, roof pitch, building materials,
colors, window style, and spacing, etc.) of the principal residence. Accessory
Apartments created through conversion or Addition shall have a common wall with
the living quarters of the principal residence and main access through the principal
residence. This may be accomplished via the incorporation of one entrance to both
the principal residence and Accessory Apartment to reflect the single-family
architectural style.
I. Accessory Apartments shall not be considered as “units” for the purpose of calculating
the maximum residential Density.
8.4 SWIMMING POOLS
Swimming pools and associated decks and other appurtenances are permitted as Accessory Uses
on residential Lots provided they are not closer than fifteen (15) feet from any property line.
8.5 HOME BUSINESS USE
1. The use of a residence for personal business purposes is permitted as-of-right provided
that:
A. No business is conducted on Premises except by mail, telephone or computer;
B. No people other than residents of the Dwelling Unit are employed on the Premises;
C. No external evidence of the business is visible;
D. No business or directional signs are erected;
E. No pedestrian or vehicular traffic other than that normally generated by a residence is
generated; and
F. The business is registered with Town Clerk.
8.6 HOME OCCUPATION
1. A Home Occupation requires a permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer and must meet
the following criteria:
A. It is clearly secondary to the use of the Dwelling Unit for residential purposes, is
conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, and does not change the residential
character of the Dwelling or neighborhood in any visible manner.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
45
B. There shall be no external evidence of the Home Occupation other than permitted
Signs. It shall not create objectionable noise, dust, odors, vibrations, illumination,
pollution, interference with communication reception or transmissions in the vicinity,
change the traffic or drainage characteristics of the property, or create any conditions
that are perceptibly different at the property line from those that may reasonably be
expected from the residential use.
C. Not more than one (1) person not residing on the Premises shall be employed on the
Premises.
D. The Home Occupation is to be conducted within a Single-Family Dwelling or accessory
structure and shall occupy no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the Floor Area
of the Dwelling (exclusive of garage, attic and the basement). All materials and/or
equipment associated with the Home Occupation shall be contained or otherwise
stored within the total Floor Area designated for the Home Occupation. No additional
accessory structures shall be permitted for any use, including storage, that is
associated with the Home Occupation.
E. There is to be no outside storage or display of supplies, materials, equipment or
machinery related to the Home Occupation use. No hazardous or toxic materials are to
be stored on the site and there is to be no bulk storage of fuel or materials.
F. All client, patron and employee vehicle parking shall be accommodated off-street, and
be suitably screened from the Street and adjoining properties.
G. Only one (1) commercial vehicle, not to exceed 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight,
may be used in connection with the Home Occupation. Such commercial vehicle shall
be garaged or otherwise screened and hidden from view from the Street and adjacent
properties.
H. There shall be no Retail Sales on the Premises.
I. The hours of operation of any Home Occupation use may be limited by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer during the approval process to minimize adverse impacts on the
neighborhood or as modified after Zoning Permit issuance if it is determined that
there are impacts to the neighborhood that were not anticipated at the time of initial
application.
2. Home Occupation Permit Submission Requirements
A. Any application for Home Occupation shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement
Officer for review. If approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, a Home Occupation
is granted to the applicant specifically and not the property. In the event that a Home
Occupation permit holder moves, a new Zoning Permit must be secured prior to the
Parcel being used for Home Occupation.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
46
B. An application for Home Occupation shall include:
1. A Class 1 Site Plan that includes:
a. Property boundaries and topography;
b. Location of all existing and proposed structures;
c. Location of well and septic system;
d. Existing and proposed Driveway/parking areas;
e. Existing and proposed on-site buffering/screening;
f. The location and size of any proposed signage per Section 11 of these
Regulations;
g. Any other information required by the Zoning Enforcement Officer as it relates
to the proposed permit application.
2. A detailed statement of use addressing the criteria listed in Section 8.6.1 and fully
describing the proposed Home Occupation use, number of employees, hours of
operation, estimated number of patrons (daily, weekly) and mitigation measures
to be employed in minimize potential neighborhood impacts.
3. Floor Plans (with dimensions) of the Dwelling Unit and any accessory structure to
be used for the Home Occupation, with the area of the Home Occupation
indicated.
4. If the applicant is not the owner of the property, the submission of a letter from
the property owner is required giving permission for the applicant to apply for the
proposed Home Occupation use.
C. The Home Occupation permit is valid only to and for the person and property issued
and is void upon discontinuance of the Home Occupation use or upon sale of the
property.
D. A Home Occupation certificate of zoning compliance shall be filed on the land records
by the applicant.
E. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall report all decisions relating to Home Occupation
to the Commission within thirty (30) days of the decision.
8.7 USE OF MOBILE HOME OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE DURING CONSTRUCTION OF A
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING
1. The use of a Mobile Home (MH)/Recreational Vehicle (RV) as a temporary residence during
the construction of a permanent Single-Family Dwelling may be permitted by Zoning Permit
Effective date: January 15, 2015
47
issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer in any district provided the conditions of this
Section 8.7 of these Regulations are complied with.
2. Use of a Mobile home/Recreation Vehicle during construction of a Single-Family Dwelling
Unit: A permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer to occupy a MH/RV may be issued
for one (1) year under the following conditions:
A. Such Zoning Permit is issued to the owner of a Parcel on which the Single-Family
Dwelling is to be constructed, altered, or reconstructed.
B. A Building Permit has been issued for such Building construction.
C. The MH/RV before occupancy is connected to the permanent water supply and
sewerage disposal system that will service the completed Single-Family Dwelling.
D. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may issue an emergency permit for use of a MH/RV
during re-construction of a damaged Single-Family Dwelling under the following
conditions:
1. A copy of the report from the Fire Marshal and/or Building Official is provided to
the Zoning Enforcement Officer; and
2. The Chatham Health District has inspected and approved the sewerage disposal
system and water connection.
E. The Site Plan filed with the application for the Single-Family Dwelling Building Permit
shall show, in addition to information required for Building construction, the proposed
location of the MH/RV, water supply and sewerage disposal system and such Site Plan
shall become a part of the application for a Zoning Permit.
F. The MH/RV shall not be occupied after the Single-Family Dwelling is occupied, and
failure to remove the MH/RV from the Premises or discontinue the dwelling use of the
MH/RV within sixty (60) days after occupancy of the Single-Family Dwelling shall be
considered a violation of these Regulations.
G. Cash or bond in the amount of $2,000 shall be posted prior to placement of a MH or
RV. Said bond shall be released upon removal of the MH or RV from the site.
8.8 NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
1. Religious or Entertainment Gatherings – Zoning Permits for short term events of less than
ten (10) days, may be granted by the Commission in any district provided the event will be
conducted in accordance with the provision of the permit during the permit period.
Adequate provision shall be made for safe access and traffic control, off-street parking,
water supply, sewage disposal and emergency medical treatment for those attending the
activity.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
48
2. Adult Oriented Business – In the development and execution of these Regulations, it is
recognized that there are some uses which, because of their very nature, have serious
objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are
concentrated under certain circumstances thereby having a deleterious effect upon the
adjacent areas. Special Permit regulation of Adult Oriented Businesses is necessary to
ensure that the purposes of the Town, as specified in Section 4-1 of Town Ordinance
Chapter 4 are satisfied. All Adult Oriented Business shall meet the following requirements:
A. The property containing an Adult Oriented Business shall be no closer than 500 feet
from any property in the Suburban Use District; no closer than 1,000 feet from
property containing a school, nursery school, day care center, day care home, or other
educational facility, church or recognized place of worship, public library, museum,
public park or playground, or another Adult Oriented Business. Measurement of the
distance shall be from the property boundary containing the Adult Oriented Business
in a direct line to the property boundary of uses noted in this subsection or the
boundary of any RU or SU District.
B. A Sign, two feet by two feet (2’ x 2’), clearly stating “Adult Oriented Business – Persons
under 18 Not Admitted” – shall be displayed outside of, and adjacent to, each
entrance to the Adult Oriented Business.
C. The area of the Premises outside of each entrance, the parking area, and the area
between the parking and any entrance shall be illuminated throughout the hours of
operation.
D. No Adult Oriented Business shall be operated in any manner that permits the
observation of any material depicting, describing, or relating to Specified Sexual
Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas, from any public way or any adjacent property.
This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, Sign, show window or other
opening.
E. No residential use shall be allowed on any property or in any Building containing an
Adult Oriented Business. Any approval of a Special Permit by the Commission for an
Adult Oriented Business shall be conditioned upon the presentation of a valid license
issued by the Town of Colchester for the operation of such business.
3. Private Kennels and Commercial Kennels – Private Kennels and Commercial Kennels shall
meet the following standards:
A. The minimum Lot size for a Private Kennel shall be 120,000 square feet, and for
Commercial Kennels shall be 200,000 square feet.
B. No Private Kennel or Commercial Kennel or associated structure shall be located
within one hundred (100) feet of any property line.
C. All Buildings in which animals are housed shall have adequate noise insulation or
buffering so as to avoid impacting adjacent properties due to noise.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
49
D. Private Kennels shall be maintained as an Accessory Use to a Single-Family Dwelling.
No more than five (5) dogs may be kept in a Private Kennel.
E. No animals shall be maintained exclusively in outdoor pens or runs.
F. Runs for Commercial Kennels shall be paved with six (6) inches of concrete and shall
be equipped with wash-down facilities connected to an approved sewage disposal
system and with gutter guards to avoid overflow.
G. Applicable requirements of the State Health Code shall be met.
4. Proposed increase in Impervious Coverage – A Special Permit may be granted by the
Commission to permit an increase of no more than twenty percent (20%) in permitted
Impervious Coverage. The Commission cannot approve an increase that would permit
Impervious Coverage exceeding seventy-five percent (75%) of the Buildable Area of the site.
The Commission shall base its decision on the General Evaluation Criteria for Special
Permits and on the character of the area, the provision or availability of Shared Parking
and/or access, the impact on the streetscape, and provisions made for stormwater
recharge.
5. Excavations – Excavation activities may be permitted by the Commission by Special Permit
only in the Rural Use District and provided that the detrimental effects of the activity are
minimal and provided the future usefulness of these Premises is assured when the
activities are completed. Special Permits for Excavations shall not be issued for periods
exceeding two (2) years and may be renewed in an administrative manner by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer if it can be shown that the operation has been conducted in
compliance with the provisions of these Regulations and all conditions of the Special
Permit. The following additional conditions shall be met by all Excavation activity:
A. Such operations and associated activities shall be conducted Monday through
Saturday between the hours of 7 A.M. and 5 P.M. excluding the celebrated day of the
following holidays: January 1st, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day,
and Christmas Day.
B. The Site Plan accompanying the Special Permit application shall demonstrate that
adequate measures are to be taken to guard against Erosion and Sedimentation both
during and after Excavation activity.
C. No bank may exceed a Slope of one (1) foot vertical rise in two (2) feet of horizontal
distance (1:2) unless in ledge when the finished Slope may be one and one-half (1½)
feet vertical rise in one (1) foot horizontal distance (1½ :1).
D. No removal shall take place within twenty (20) feet of a property line.
E. At the conclusion of the operation or of any substantial portion thereof, the whole
area where Excavation has taken place shall be reclaimed by Grading, covering with at
least four (4) inches of top Soil and stabilizing with vegetation to prevent Erosion and
to restore or improve the appearance of the area.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
50
F. Before a Special Permit for Excavation is issued, the applicant shall post a bond in a
form and an amount approved by the Commission as sufficient to guarantee
conformity with the provisions of these Regulations and of any Special Permit issued in
connection with the Excavation operations. Additionally, the owner(s) shall grant
written easement to the Town of Colchester to allow reclamation work in the case of
forfeiture. This bond must be sufficient to re-grade a partially excavated site, to
purchase and spread topsoil for at least a four (4) inch cover over the Excavation site
and purchase a plant stabilizing vegetation over the Excavation site. If the reclamation
work has not been completed within one (1) year of the expiration of a non-renewed
Excavation Special Permit, the bond shall be called and reclamation completed by the
Town of Colchester or its designated contractor(s). When reclamation work has been
completed, ten percent (10%) of the bond shall be held for an additional year to
ensure full reclamation worked has been completed.
G. Where any Excavation shall have a depth of fifteen (15) feet or more and creates a
Slope of more than one in two (1:2), there shall be a substantial fence at least six (6)
feet in height with suitable gates and such fence shall be located fifteen (15) feet or
more from the edge of the Excavation.
H. A written plan with sufficient detail shall be submitted to the Commission showing
dust control measures to be instituted.
I. Locations for access Roads, stockpiling and equipment storage shall be selected so as
to minimize adverse effects on surrounding properties. Such locations shall be shown
on the Site Plan accompanying the Special Permit application.
J. Equipment used for processing of excavated material under an Excavation Special
Permit, such as a crusher or screener, shall be no closer than 1,000 feet to any Building
used for residential purposes on a neighboring property (See Section 8.11.12 for
further conditions). Such equipment may not be operated in any district except as an
adjunct to an authorized Excavation operation or an approved Site Plan and must be
physically located on the approved site. Such equipment shall be operated only during
the hours between 8 A.M. and 5 P.M. on weekdays, excluding the celebrated day of
the holidays listed in Section 8.8.5.A of these Regulations.
6. Earth Materials Processing and Recycling (“EMPAR”)
A. Purpose – To allow limited materials processing and aggregate recycling as a use
associated with an approved Earth Materials Excavation operation, and only in
locations that will not have a negative impact on natural resources, are in reasonable
proximity to regional highways, and that will promote the orderly development of the
Town by protecting existing residential neighborhoods and uses.
B. General Requirements – No processing or recycling of Earth Materials shall occur
without a valid Special Permit. Special Permits for Earth Material Processing and
Recycling may be issued for periods not exceeding two (2) years and may be renewed
for periods not exceeding two (2) years. All Earth Materials Processing And Recycling
operations shall require a public hearing on the initial application. Renewals of Special
Permits for Earth Materials Processing And Recycling may be issued by the Zoning
Effective date: January 15, 2015
51
Enforcement Officer after staff review only if the applicant can demonstrate that the
operation has been conducted in compliance with the provisions of these Regulations
and all conditions of the Special Permit. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may refer a
renewal request to the Commission for review and a determination of whether a
public hearing is required. Renewal applications shall be accompanied by proof of
notice to abutters as prescribed by Section 14.8. of these Regulations. In order to be
eligible for a Special Permit for Earth Materials Processing And Recycling the site and
operation shall meet all of the following criteria:
1. Such Earth Materials Processing And Recycling operations, and associated
activities, may only be conducted Monday through Friday between the hours of
7:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M., excluding the celebrated day of the following holidays:
January 1st, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas
Day.
2. Crushing and grinding operations in connection with an EMPAR operation may
only be performed for ten (10) days per calendar month. Rock Crushing
Equipment used for EMPAR operations must meet all requirements of Sections
8.8.5.J and 8.11.12 regarding location and use.
3. No Special Permit for an Earth Materials Processing And Recycling operation shall
be issued unless the EMPAR operation also has a valid Special Permit for earth
Excavation pursuant to Section 8.8.5 of these Regulations, as evidenced by a valid
and current Special Permit, Zoning Permit and any other required Town of
Colchester approvals. Upon the conclusion or termination of the lawfully
permitted active earth Excavation activity, the associated Earth Materials
Processing And Recycling operation shall be concluded within one (1) year from
the date of conclusion and the site fully reclaimed pursuant to Section 8.8.6.D.16
of these Regulations.
4. The site shall not be subject to any current or outstanding enforcement action,
including any notice of violation, administrative order, consent order or stipulated
judgment, from any governmental or administrative agency, including without
limitation, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (E.P.A.), State of
Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP),
Department of Transportation (D.O.T.), Department of Public Health (DPH) or the
Town of Colchester, as of the date of application for the Special Permit or
renewal.
5. The EMPAR operation must be conducted on a site containing a minimum of one
hundred (100) contiguous acres of land, as evidenced by a deed recorded in the
office of the Town Clerk.
6. No Earth Materials Processing And Recycling operation shall be located or
conducted within the Aquifer Protection Overlay zone unless such Earth Materials
Processing And Recycling operation is designed to control stockpile runoff and
infiltration into the Ground Water in a means acceptable to the Commission and
Town Engineer. Such design shall be submitted on the Class 2 Site Plan required in
Effective date: January 15, 2015
52
Section 15.4 of these Regulations. The installation, operation, and maintenance of
the design details shall be addressed in written form as well as meeting all Site
Plan requirements.
7. The site shall have direct frontage on and obtain all vehicular access/egress to a
Collector or Arterial Street as defined by the Town of Colchester.
8. No activity permitted under this Section shall be permitted within one thousand
(1,000) feet of the border of any neighboring town. Further, any activity permitted
within twelve hundred (1,200) feet of any neighboring town border shall comply
with any and all buffering requirements of such neighboring town.
9. The production of composting material is not deemed to be EMPAR provided that
at least thirty percent (30%) of the material used in the compost is obtained
on-site and that the composting operation is accessory to an established farm or
other agricultural enterprise rather than an excavation/EMPAR activity. An entity
desiring to produce and distribute compost may be required to formally verify
that the operation is an accessory part of a farm or agriculture operation and how
the 30% of the material is generated on-site.
C. EMPAR Performance Standards – Consistent with the purpose of these provisions, and
in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the Town’s citizens, the extent of
a EMPAR operation shall be expressly limited as follows:
1. The total amount of Earth Material processed shall not exceed more than eighty
(80) cubic yards per hour of Earth Material.
2. The types of material processed shall be limited to Earth Material as defined in
Section 20.4 of these Regulations. The storage, burial, processing or recycling of
any type of Hazardous Waste, Bulky Waste, Municipal Solid Waste, or scrap tires is
expressly prohibited.
3. The Commission may attach conditions that limit the area or method of operation,
including but not limited to parking, access, stockpiles; type, capacity, and number
of equipment proposed on the site.
4. The Commission may attach conditions that require buffering, including but not
limited to additional landscaping, vegetation, and fencing, to adjacent uses and
Streets.
5. In order to establish compliance with any or all requirements, the Commission
and/or its agent(s) may at any time require written documentation to
demonstrate compliance, including but not limited to daily logs, invoices or other
financial documentation, tax records, and/or notarized statements.
D. EMPAR Statement of Use – In addition to any other application requirements of these
Regulations, an application for Special Permit to conduct an Earth Materials Processing
And Recycling operation shall contain a detailed Statement of Use, which shall include
the following information:
Effective date: January 15, 2015
53
1. The type of Earth Material(s) to be processed and recycled.
2. The volumes of Earth Material(s), by type, to be processed on a daily, weekly and
annual basis and the total volume of all Earth Materials to be processed on such
bases.
3. The volumes of Earth Material(s), by type, to be stockpiled on-site, specifically the
maximum, both by type and by total combined volume, at one time.
4. The number of employees.
5. The number of anticipated truck trips to and from the site on a daily, weekly, and
annual basis and the anticipated distribution of truck traffic.
6. The hours and days of processing activity.
7. The type, number, make, model, and maximum operational capacity of equipment
proposed to be used.
8. Any other uses, existing or proposed, on-site.
9. Information demonstrating compliance with the General Evaluation Criteria for
Special Permits, set forth in Section 14.9 of these Regulations.
10. A detailed Class 2 Site Plan in accordance with Section 15.4 of these Regulations
and modified as necessary.
11. The Site Plan shall show that adequate measures are to be taken to guard against
Erosion and Sedimentation from the stockpiling of materials both before and after
processing.
12. A written plan with sufficient detail shall be submitted to the Commission showing
dust control measures to be instituted and the best management practices to be
followed.
13. Location for access Roads, stockpiling, and equipment storage shall be selected to
minimize adverse effects to surrounding properties. Such locations shall be shown
on the Site Plan accompanying the Special Permit application.
14. Where other permits may be necessary from the E.P.A., DEEP, D.O.T. or any other
governmental agency, evidence that application has been made, permit obtained
or not required from the applicable agency shall be submitted to the Commission.
15. The Commission may, as a condition of Special Permit approval, require the
installation and implementation of Ground Water quality monitoring wells and a
Ground Water quality monitoring program, including but not limited, to annual or
semi-annual sampling and reporting.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
54
16. Upon expiration of a Special Permit issued pursuant to this Section, any area
where the EMPAR operation has been permitted and has taken place shall be
reclaimed by Grading and covering with at least four (4) inches of topsoil and
stabilized with vegetation to prevent Erosion. The Special Permit holder shall
restore or improve the appearance of the area. If restoration in connection with
an EMPAR Special Permit has been completed (either by the Town, its
contractor(s), or the applicant), ten percent (10%) of the bond shall be held for an
additional two (2) full growing seasons to ensure full reclamation. Such bond shall
be released provided an eighty percent (80%) survival rate of the vegetation is
achieved.
17. Prior to the issuance of a Special Permit for the permitted EMPAR operation, the
applicant shall post a bond, in an amount approved by the Commission and
acceptable to the Town and in consultation with the Town Engineer, as sufficient
to guarantee conformity with the provisions of these Regulations and of any
Special Permit issued in connection with the EMPAR operation. The bond must be
sufficient to re-grade the site, to purchase and apply top Soil for at least four (4)
inch cover over the site and purchase and apply a plant stabilizing vegetation over
the site.
7. Heliport or Airstrip
Such facility may be permitted in any district by Special Permit for private use by the
occupants of the Premises provided there is no Commercial Use of the facility and provided
further that the use shall be licensed by the Connecticut Department of Transportation,
Bureau of Aeronautics.
8. Temporary Saw Mill – Such uses may be permitted by Special Permit only in the RU District
subject to the following conditions:
A. Such operations shall be conducted between the hours of 7 A.M. to 6 P.M.
B. No operation, except the felling of trees, shall occur within 300 feet of a residence or
any adjacent property.
9. Day Care/Nursery School – Day care/nursery schools, other than family day care homes,
are permitted by Special Permit, subject to the following:
A. This use requires the minimum Lot area for the district where the use is permitted.
B. A Single-Family Dwelling may coexist on the same Lot in the same Building as the day
care/nursery school.
C. In the Suburban Use District, a Single-Family Dwelling may occupy a second Building
on the same Lot provided the Lot has twice the area requirement and it can be
demonstrated that the Lot can be divided such that each use can stand alone on its
own Lot and the Lots meet all the district requirements. This requirement shall be
demonstrated on the Site Plan submitted for the Special Permit.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
55
D. Parking areas and Driveways must have capacity to accommodate all vehicles dropping
off or picking up children at any one time. There shall be no in-street drop-off or
waiting except for school buses.
E. A minimum twenty-five (25) foot Buffer Area shall be established around the
perimeter of the Lot. No Building, parking lot, Driveway (except for the entrance of the
Driveway onto the Street), play area or any other use is permitted in this Buffer Area.
F. In the Suburban Use District, a sound-absorption plan that meets the approval of the
Commission must be submitted.
G. In the Suburban Use District, the use and any structure related to the day care/nursery
school, shall be designed so as to blend into the neighborhood. Parking and
playground areas shall be fully screened from adjacent properties and the Street with
year-round Evergreen plantings.
10. Public Utility Buildings
Public utility Buildings and uses, when permitted by Special Permit, may be located on Lots
that do not meet the area and width requirements of these Regulations, provided the Yard
requirements are met and there is no visible storage of supplies and equipment, including
vehicle parking other than parking of vehicles owned by employees, as viewed from any
adjacent RU or SU District.
11. Automotive Service Stations – Such uses shall meet the following requirements and be
approved by Special Permit :
A. Except in Arterial Commercial Overlay Zones, no Lot or Building shall be approved for
automobile service/repair that is within 1,500 feet of another Lot used for the same
purpose.
B. Only such repairs and mechanical work may be performed at an automobile/repair
service station as is permitted by a Limited Repairer’s License issued by the State of
Connecticut pursuant to CGS Chapter 246, and all such work shall be performed within
the Building.
12. Junk Vehicles
No Junk Vehicles as defined in Section 20.4 are permitted in any district except no more
than one (1) unregistered vehicle may be stored or parked on any Lot except where
automotive repairs are permitted, or at an authorized and licensed salvage or recycling
operation. This paragraph shall not apply to vehicles used for agricultural purposes.
13. Alcoholic Beverage
A. Buildings used for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages shall be located no
closer than 500 feet to the boundary line of a property used as an Education
Institution; except that the sale of beer/wine in a grocery store is exempt from these
provisions.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
56
B. In the Town Center District, Buildings used for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic
beverages shall be located no closer than 500 feet to the boundary line of the
Colchester Intermediate, Jackter or Johnston school properties. The limitation in
8.8.13.A shall not otherwise apply in the Town Center District.
14. Refuse Disposal
Except as permitted by Special Permit in an authorized refuse disposal, salvage or recycling
operation, no property shall be used for the outside storage, keeping or abandonment of
worked out, cast off, or discarded articles or materials ready for destruction or collected or
stored for salvage or conversion to some other use.
15. Camper units/Recreational Vehicles
No more than one (1) camper unit or Recreational Vehicle (RV) shall be parked or stored on
a Lot, except in an authorized recreation campground. Recreational Vehicles shall be
located behind the front building line in side or rear Yards. Recreational Vehicles cannot be
used as permanent Dwelling Unit or for office use. See Exhibit 11.
Exhibit 11 – RV Parking Requirement
16. Yard Sales
Yard sales, garage sales, tag sales and the like are permitted in any district and on any
property where residential use is the primary use of the property. There shall be no more
than three (3) events in any calendar year on a Lot and each sale shall not be longer than
three (3) consecutive days.
17. Hours of Operation
The hours of operation of any non-residential use may be limited by the Commission or
Zoning Enforcement Officer during the approval process to minimize noise, traffic, light, or
Effective date: January 15, 2015
57
other impacts on residential properties within one hundred (100) feet of any property used
for non-residential uses.
18. Bed and Breakfast/Inn – Bed and Breakfasts and Inns are permitted by Special Permit and
must meet the following requirements in addition to all other Special Permit requirements:
A. The use of a Building for a Bed and Breakfast or an Inn shall not change the residential
character of the Building or neighborhood. Parking shall be provided at the rate of one
(1) space per guest room plus one (1) space for each employee.
B. A Bed and Breakfast shall have two (2) additional parking spaces for the owner
Dwelling Unit. An Inn, which has an associated Restaurant, shall have one (1) space
per fifty (50) square feet of patron floor space in addition to the guest
room/employee requirement.
C. All parking shall be off-street and to the side or rear of the Building.
D. The Regional Health District shall be satisfied that the existing or proposed sanitation
facilities are adequate to the proposed use, and shall report its findings to the
Commission in writing. The Sanitarian’s disapproval shall constitute sufficient reason
for denial of a Special Permit application by the Commission.
8.9 AGRICULTURAL USES
1. Purpose and Authority
The purpose of this Section is to promote the preservation of agricultural land and support
Agriculture as an important and viable business and lifestyle within the Town of Colchester,
while preserving the public health, safety and welfare. This rural character has its roots in
the tradition of the Town’s Agriculture: the small farm, the chicken farmers, the dairy
farms. Agriculture is not just important from a character stand-point. Farms are a business
and the Regulations seek to promote sustainability.
2. Agriculture is defined as that included in CGS Section 1-1 (q), as follows:
Except as otherwise specifically defined, the words “agriculture” and “farming” shall include
cultivation of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural or
horticultural commodity, including the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and
management of livestock, including horses, bees, poultry, fur-bearing animals and wildlife,
and the raising or harvesting of oysters, clams, mussels, other molluscan shellfish or fish;
the operation, management, conservation, improvement or maintenance of a farm and its
buildings, tools and equipment, or salvaging timber or cleared land of brush or other debris
left by a storm, as an incident to such farming operations; the production or harvesting of
maple syrup or maple sugar, or any agricultural commodity, including lumber, as an
incident to ordinary farming operations or the harvesting of mushrooms, the hatching of
poultry, or the construction, operation or maintenance of ditches, canals, reservoirs or
waterways used exclusively for farming purposes; handling, planting, drying, packing,
packaging, processing, freezing, grading, storing or delivering to storage or to market, or to
a carrier for transportation to market, or for direct sale any agricultural or horticultural
Effective date: January 15, 2015
58
commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or, in the case of fruits and
vegetables, as an incident to the preparation of such fruits or vegetables for market or for
direct sale. The term “farm” includes farm buildings, and accessory buildings thereto,
nurseries, orchards, ranges, greenhouses, hoop houses and other temporary structures or
other structures used primarily for the raising and, as an incident to ordinary farming
operations, the sale of agricultural or horticultural commodities. The term “aquaculture”
means the farming of the waters of the state and tidal wetlands and the production of
protein food, including fish, oysters, clams, mussels and other molluscan shellfish, on
leased, franchised and public underwater farm lands. Nothing herein shall restrict the
power of a local zoning authority under chapter 124.
3. The Right to Farm is guaranteed in accordance with Colchester Ordinance Chapter 55.
4. Generally Accepted Agricultural Practices (GAAP) are actions that ensure that lands,
waters, and animals are protected and respected and any impacts to surrounding
properties are mitigated to the greatest extent possible as defined by the State of
Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP), the State of
Connecticut Department of Agriculture (DOA), or other accepted source. GAAPs are
designed to protect or improve water, land and air quality while maintaining agricultural
production.
5. Farm Buildings and Structures
A. The raising of livestock is permitted on properties in the Rural Use District provided
that all appropriate GAAPs are observed and that the Parcel exceeds 100,000 square
feet in area.
B. Agricultural Buildings and structures on Parcels that are used for Agriculture are
permitted by right, subject to the limitations below and all applicable building codes
and other applicable regulations.
C. All agricultural Buildings and structures, except commercial Buildings that are open to
the general public, shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from any property
line except in cases where a property line abuts publicly owned Open Space. In cases
where agricultural Buildings abut publicly owned Open Space, the Commission can
reduce the Setback distances.
D. Agricultural Buildings and structures with footprints totaling greater than 6,000 square
feet on a farm Parcel less than 120,000 square feet require Special Permit approval
unless adjacent to another Parcel in common ownership where both Lots in total size
are greater than 120,000 square feet.
E. Agricultural Buildings and structures shall have a one hundred (100) foot height limit
except for commercial agriculture buildings regulated under sections 8.9.6 and 8.9.7
and all non-agriculture Buildings as identified in section 8.9.8 and 8.9.9 and farm labor
housing as identified in section 8.9.5.H which shall have a thirty five foot (35’) height
limitation.
F. Any food services shall comply with the state and municipal health codes.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
59
G. Structures, such as hoop houses, run-in sheds, birthing sheds and similar structures
easily moved and not permanently mounted to the ground are allowed by right and no
Zoning Permits are required, provided such structures are never placed within 100 feet
of any property line.
H. Farm labor housing is permitted by Special Permit provided the workers are providing
service on-site to a farm and the housing meets health requirements and does not
exceed five (5) units. If the farm operation ceases, the farm housing must be removed
and is no longer permitted.
6. Farm Stores – One (1) farm store per active farming Parcel may be permitted by Special
Permit provided the farm store meets all standards of this Section and has access from an
Arterial or Collector Road and is sited more than fifty (50) feet from any property boundary.
A pre-existing non-conforming structure may be converted to farm store use, with the
Commission’s approval, provided all public parking is located to the side or rear of the
Building.
A. Every application for a farm store use Special Permit shall include a Statement of Use.
The Statement of Use shall describe the following as they apply to the proposed farm
store use:
1. Hours of operation, number of employees, types of items sold, and size of the
retail area.
2. The Statement of Use shall become a part of any Special Permit approval for a
farm store use, and the farm store use shall be operated in accordance with the
provisions of the Statement of Use. The Statement of Use may be amended by the
Commission, at the request of the applicant, without a new public hearing if, in
the Commission’s opinion, the requested amendments are minor in nature. If the
requested amendments are not minor in nature, the Commission shall require a
modification to the Special Permit and hold a new public hearing.
B. At least fifty percent (50%) of gross sales of the farm store shall be from agricultural
goods produced on the owner’s farm or processed products made from raw materials
that were produced on the owner’s farm.
C. To ensure public safety, farm stores are required to have off-street parking that is
code compliant as it relates to grade and drainage. A parking area of three (3) square
feet for every one (1) square foot of Building footprint and/or outdoor display area
shall be provided. Paved parking areas are not required and permeable parking
surfaces are encouraged.
D. Greenhouses used to sell nursery stock are not counted in this maximum size
requirement.
7. Seasonal Farm Stand
A. Temporary farm stands are permitted by right on all farms provided they meet the
following conditions:
Effective date: January 15, 2015
60
1. The seasonal farm stand and sales area shall not exceed 750 square feet in size.
Greenhouses used to sell nursery stock are not counted in this maximum size
requirement. A seasonal farm stand must cease operations at least six (6) weeks in
one (1) year, unless primary product(s) are produced year round, such as dairy
products.
2. At least fifty percent (50%) of the gross value of the products available on-site for
sale shall be from agricultural goods produced on the owner’s farm, for at least
three (3) of the immediately preceding five (5) years. All products sold must be
from the Town of Colchester. For new farm stands, the stand must meet this
requirement moving forward until an adequate history is present to revert to the
rear-looking requirement.
3. To ensure public safety, seasonal farm stands are required to provide parking for
five (5) cars (not in a public right-of-way) with adequate ingress and egress.
Parking does not have to be paved or improved, just accessible to and useable in
all weather conditions for visiting vehicles (a section of a field works, provided it is
passable). The seasonal farm stand must be placed at least ten (10) feet from the
front Lot line, at least fifty (50) feet from any Road intersection and at least
twenty-five (25) feet from any side or rear Lot line.
8. Permitting for All Agricultural and Section 8.9.9 Non-agricultural Land Uses
A. All proposed non-agricultural related land uses must submit a Site Plan to the
Commission. The Site Plan must show in detail planned use areas, parking and traffic
movements. If lighting and signage are proposed, they must be included on the Site
Plan.
B. Once the Site Plan is approved and all conditions, if any, satisfied, the applicant must
annually submit a list of scheduled events noting the date, number of persons
expected and the nature of the event. The applicant will not have to receive Site Plan
approval on an annual basis so long as the approved activities do not significantly
change.
9. Agricultural and Related Non-agricultural Uses of Agricultural Land
A. Agricultural-related uses of agricultural land include events such as corn mazes,
pick-your-own, harvest festivals, educational demonstrations, hay rides, petting zoos,
or other accessory agricultural uses.
B. Agricultural-related uses are allowed on farms provided adequate off-street parking is
provided for guests/customers. Parking does not have to be paved or improved, just
accessible to and useable in all weather conditions for visiting vehicles (a section of a
field works, provided it is passable).
C. Permanent agricultural-related uses include events on a farm, which are accessory to
agricultural uses and which occur regularly:
Effective date: January 15, 2015
61
1. These include uses such as horseback riding and/or lessons for pay, processing of
farm products, farm Restaurants serving products produced on the farm or similar
activities.
2. Permanent agricultural-related uses are permitted on farms provided a Zoning
Permit is issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and adequate off-street
parking is provided for the anticipated number of guests/customers. Limits on the
use may be established by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, depending on the
available parking.
3. Off-street parking shall be improved, using a gravel or other stable base or
pavement, and have safe access, including sight lines, as specified in the Public
Improvement Specifications of the Town of Colchester and determined by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer.
D. Non-agricultural related uses on agricultural land: Fee-based activities that are part of
a farm operation’s total offerings, but are not accessory to agricultural, or tied to
agricultural Buildings, structures, equipment and fields, are permitted subject to the
following requirements:
1. Such uses include, but are not limited to, fee-based outdoor recreation, such as
cross country skiing and mountain biking and event hosting, such as banquets,
weddings, horse shows, etc.
2. Non-agricultural related uses are allowed on farms only by Special Permit and
shall meet Special Permit requirements for special events as identified below:
E. Special event standards for agricultural-related and non-agricultural related events
conducted on agricultural land:
1. Outdoor Events: Outdoor events and activities shall be a minimum of two
hundred (200) feet from any residence and one hundred (100) feet from any
property boundary. There shall be an appropriate Buffer Area that screens any
such activity from the adjacent property(ies)
2. Attendees: The Commission may specify a maximum number of attendees
permitted for any event, based upon site conditions, parking availability impacts
on Town infrastructure and neighboring properties, and public health and safety
considerations.
3. Sound: Sound systems used at outdoor or indoor events shall comply with the
State of Connecticut DEEP noise standards with regard to maximum decibel
output (55 db daytime/45db night time at least one (1) foot beyond the property
line of the property on which the emitter is located). No outdoor music shall be
played before 10:00 A.M. or after 10 P.M. Monday through Saturday or before
11:00 A.M. and after 9:30 P.M. on Sunday.
F. Open Public Events: These are events open to the general public and subject to the
following provisions:
Effective date: January 15, 2015
62
1. Six (6) such events are permitted throughout the calendar year.
2. At least two (2) weeks prior to any such event, a Zoning Permit application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The applicant shall provide the date
of the event(s) and the number of estimated guests. A Zoning Permit shall
ordinarily be issued unless the application is not timely filed or lacks sufficient
information.
G. Private Events: These are events not open to the general public. These include
weddings, private parties, charitable and similar events. The following requirements
apply:
1. Full meals and/or serving hors d’oevres and/or pastries are permitted for these
events; however, only those alcoholic beverages produced on Premises shall be
served, unless the event is catered and the caterer has a valid liquor license in
accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes.
2. Music/entertainment is permitted per State sound regulations.
3. There shall be no more than three (3) such events per week. The Commission may
reduce the number of events to address potential impacts on the neighborhood.
8.10 DESIGN AND SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1. Access and Circulation
A. Lot Access – General provisions for all Lots:
1. Where a Lot has frontage on two (2) or more Streets, the entry and exit from the
Street shall be provided where potential traffic congestion and for hazards to
traffic and pedestrians are minimized.
2. Access Driveways shall be of a design and have sufficient capacity to avoid queuing
of entering vehicles on any Street.
3. There shall be no more than one (1) Driveway connection from any Lot to any
Street except that:
a. Separate entrance and exit Driveways may be provided where necessary to
safeguard against hazards and to avoid congestion.
b. Additional Driveway connections may be provided, particularly for, but not
limited to, large tracts and uses of extensive scope, if traffic flow in the Street
will be facilitated by the additional connection.
4. Common Driveway aprons should be used wherever feasible.
5. To promote public safety and efficient land use, common Driveways may be
permitted under the following conditions:
Effective date: January 15, 2015
63
a. All plans for subdivision and re-subdivision which show common Driveways
shall clearly state which Lots are sharing the Driveways. The Commission shall
require a note to be placed on the Site Plan stating that the deed(s) are to
include all information regarding easements, rights and responsibilities
regarding the common Driveway including snow removal and maintenance. All
proposed easements shall be shown on the Site Plan with metes and bounds
descriptions.
b. Common Driveways may be used in conjunction with a Flag Lot; however, this
shall not change the required acreage, frontage, or access requirement for a
Flag lot. (See Section 8.11.7 - Flag Lots)
B. Residential Lot Access
1. The Street(s) giving access to the Lot shall have traffic carrying capacity and be
suitably improved to accommodate the amount and types of traffic generated by
the proposed use.
2. Driveways into a Lot shall have proper alignment and grade, not exceeding one
percent (1%) in thirty (30) feet extending in from Town Roads. No Driveway shall
be greater than fifteen percent (15%) Slope at any point. Any Driveway, at any
point, having a grade of ten percent (10%) or more, but not exceeding fifteen
percent (15%), shall be paved for the entire length of the Driveway.
3. All residential Driveway aprons shall be in conformance with Section 7.1a,
Standard Construction Details, of the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of
Colchester or ConnDOT Form 814, as appropriate.
4. All residential Driveways shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width, and shall
not exceed thirty (30) feet in width at the Street line. Any turn or curve in a
Driveway shall have a minimum turning radius of thirty-five (35) feet.
5. All Driveways shall be constructed to the following minimum standards: Driveway
cross section shall consist of a compacted eight (8) inch base of bank run gravel
(five (5) inch minus); a four (4) inch Grading layer of compacted processed gravel;
and a finish course of two (2) inches of 3/4” stone or compacted bituminous
concrete.
6. For the health, safety and welfare of the public, Driveways shall be accessible to
emergency vehicles, cleared of all obstructions to a minimum width of twenty-two
(22) feet and a minimum height of fourteen (14) feet.
7. No more than two (2) Single-Family Dwellings or two (2) Duplexes shall share a
common Driveway.
8. The common Driveway for residential use shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide in
its entirety; the entrance shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet wide. The
Commission may determine that a minimum of one (1) turn-around, twenty (20)
feet by twenty (20) feet, will be required if the length of the Driveway exceeds
Effective date: January 15, 2015
64
three hundred (300) feet, or if the surrounding terrain will pose a safety problem.
The Commission may also, if it chooses, direct that the Zoning Enforcement Officer
make such a determination as to the need for, and location of, any additional turn
around.
9. Clear sight distance shall be provided at the intersection of the Driveway and the
Street as follows:
On Local Streets, two hundred (200) feet, on Collector Streets three hundred (300)
feet, on Arterial Streets as required by the Connecticut Department of
Transportation (DOT); unless a lesser distance for a specific Lot has been approved
by the Town Engineer. Sight distance shall be measured from a point of ten (10)
feet from the paved edge of a Road at a height of three and one half (3.5) feet to
the center of the oncoming traffic lane.
C. Non-residential, Mixed Use and Multi-family Lot Access
1. Provision shall be made for both pedestrian and vehicular access to the Lot and
circulation upon the Lot in such a manner as to safeguard against hazards to traffic
and pedestrians, to avoid traffic congestion on any Street and to provide safe and
convenient circulation. The Road condition and its measurements, traffic flow,
volume, and congestion, and the effect of the traffic on the surrounding area shall
be taken into consideration on all applications. Applicants should provide a traffic
study/analysis to assist the Commission in evaluating the application when
requested by the Commission and/or the Town Engineer and circulation shall also
conform to the following:
a. Where reasonable alternate access is available, the vehicular access to the Lot
shall be arranged to minimize traffic use of local residential Streets situated in
or bordered by the RU or SU Districts.
b. The Street(s) giving access to the Lot shall have traffic carrying capacity and be
suitably improved to accommodate the amount and types of traffic generated
by the proposed use.
c. Where necessary to safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians
and/or to avoid traffic congestion, provision shall be made for turning lanes,
traffic directional islands, frontage Road Driveways, inter-lot access and traffic
controls within the Street.
d. Where topographic and other conditions permit, provisions shall be made for
circulation and/or Driveway connections to adjoining Lots of similar existing or
potential use when such Driveway connection will facilitate fire protection
services, as approved by the Town Fire Marshal and/or when such Driveway
will enable the public to travel between two (2) existing or potential sites,
open to the public generally, without need to travel upon a Street.
e. All parking areas and Driveways shall be paved with a two (2) inch layer of
bituminous concrete over a suitable gravel base, and provided with adequate
Effective date: January 15, 2015
65
storm drainage to ensure protection from surface runoff over adjacent
properties and Roads. Driveways shall conform to Town of Colchester Standard
Construction Details in Section 7.1a of the Subdivision Regulations. Each
parking space shall be shown. Two-way traffic Driveways shall be at least
twenty-four (24 ) feet in width from the face of the curb while one-way traffic
Driveways shall be at least fifteen (15) feet in width. Maximum grade for a
parking area is five percent (5%). Cross pitch on any Driveway shall not exceed
three-eighths inch (3/8”) per foot. No parking will be permitted within a Street
right-of-way. Horizontal and vertical control for Driveways shall conform to
Residential Street Requirements of the Subdivision Regulations. Where
Driveways intersect with Street or other Driveways, the radius of the gutter
shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. With the intent of promoting
on-site Ground Water recharge where applicable, alternative surface
treatments for Driveways and parking areas may be approved by the
Commission if it is documented that such alternative treatment is technically
adequate, represents sound engineering principles, and is satisfactory to the
Commission and the Town Engineer.
2. Existing Streets
Where a Lot has frontage on an existing Street, proper provision shall be made for Grading
and improvement of shoulders and sidewalk areas within the right-of-way of the Street and
for provision of curbs and sidewalks, as approved by the Commission and in accordance
with the pattern of development along the Street. Where necessary to provide for suitable
access or for a system of neighborhood circulation Streets, provision shall also be made for
appropriate continuation and improvement of Streets terminating at the Lot where the use
is to be located.
3. Visibility at Intersections
On a Corner Lot in any district, no fence, wall, hedge or other visual obstruction more than
three (3) feet high shall be erected, placed or maintained within the triangular area formed
by the intersecting Street lines and a straight line adjoining said Street lines at the point fifty
(50) feet distant from the point of intersection measured along said Street line.
4. Residential Unit Standards
A. Minimum Floor Area. The following minimum Floor Areas are required for residential
Dwellings.
1. Single-Family Dwelling
a. One (1) story, including raised ranch – 1,000 square feet.
b. One and one-half (1½) story – 1,200 square feet (900 on ground floor and 300
on second floor).
c. Two (2) story – 1,400 square feet (800 on first floor and 600 on second floor).
Effective date: January 15, 2015
66
d. Multi-Family Dwellings and Two-Family Dwellings shall contain a minimum of
500 square feet plus 150 square feet for each bedroom.
8.11 OTHER SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1. Drainage
All drainage structures shall be in conformance with Appendix 1 of these Regulations.
2. Erosion
Provision shall be made for control of Erosion and sedimentation both during and upon
completion of development in accordance with the applicable criteria of the Erosion and
Sediment Control Handbook of the U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service and the State of
Connecticut DEEP 2002 Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, as revised.
3. Wetlands, Watercourses and Aquifer Protection Zones
Where Wetlands, Watercourses and Aquifer Protection Zones are located on or adjacent to
the Lot, provision shall be made for their protection unless modification is approved by the
Commission and authorized by the Colchester Conservation Commission, Sewer and Water
Commission and/or the State agency having jurisdiction, prior to approval of the Site Plan.
4. Flood Hazard Areas
When any part of the Lot is located within a FEMA Flood Plain District, the requirements of
Section 9.3 Flood Hazard Overlay District shall be met.
5. Emergency Services
Suitable provision shall be made on the Lot for access to Buildings and other structures by
fire, police and other emergency services, and for fire hydrants where appropriate and
where public water supply is available, in accordance with good fire protection practices.
6. Water and Wastewater
Provision shall be made for water supply, sewage disposal, control of wastes and protection
of water quality in accordance with the following criteria:
A. Proper provision shall be made for the water supply and sewage disposal
requirements of the proposed use. When on-site systems are to be used:
1. Such systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with applicable
State and Town laws.
2. The design concept and layout shall be approved by the Chatham Health District
and/or Town Engineer prior to approval of the Site Plan, and
3. Any Lot, prior to approval for development for any use, shall require a certification
by the Chatham Health District that a functioning septic system and adequate
Effective date: January 15, 2015
67
reserve area can be provided in accordance with the requirements of the State
Health Code, as amended.
B. Proper provision shall be made for the collection, storage and disposal of all solid and
liquid wastes accumulated in connection with the proposed use and for control of
litter by means of receptacles, fences, a program for site maintenance and cleaning
and other means approved by the Commission.
C. The Site Plan shall demonstrate how any exotic or hazardous substances are to be
managed in accordance with applicable law and so as to avoid danger to the public
health and degradation of surface and Ground Waters and tidal and inland Wetlands.
D. Proper provision shall be made for any above ground or in-ground storage of fuels,
de-icing salts and chemicals in a manner that protects Stratified Drift Ground Water
having potential for significant water supply.
E. No Building or subsurface water disposal system shall be located within one hundred
(100) feet of the mean water level of any Watercourse or within seventy-five (75) feet
of any Wetland as defined by the Inland Wetland Regulations for the Town of
Colchester, unless approved by the Conservation Commission. Under no conditions
shall a subsurface waste disposal system be located closer than fifty (50) feet to a
Wetland or Watercourse.
F. All permitted uses requiring sanitary sewerage disposal facilities, whether public or
private, shall comply with the following procedure: All applications for Building
Permits, subdivision approval, Zoning Permits, or Special Permits shall be accompanied
by a written statement signed by the Chatham Heath District, the Building Inspector or
a Sanitarian from the State of Connecticut Department of Health that all required
sanitary regulations have been complied with and that all percolation test
requirements have been conducted in the presence of one of the above three officials
or their designated delegates.
7. Flag Lots
A Flag Lot is permitted in any district provided:
A. The Flag Lot was recorded on the land records or was approved by the Commission
prior to December 12, 2003, or
B. The Flag Lot was approved by the Commission as part of a residential subdivision after
December 12, 2003, in accordance with the Town of Colchester Subdivision
Regulations.
C. The Flag Lot is approved by the Commission as part of a non-residential subdivision in
accordance with the Town of Colchester Subdivision Regulations, or the Flag Lot is
approved the Zoning Enforcement Officer as part of a “first cut/split” of a Lot of
record.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
68
D. The separating distance between the frontages of Flag Lots on the same side of the
Street shall be a minimum of three hundred (300) feet. This distance shall be
measured along the Road frontage between the closest Lot lines of each Flag Lot. See
Exhibit 13.
E. The Flag Lot shall be accessible from an approved Street over a private Driveway which
shall be located on the Flag Lot and not require an easement across other property.
Exhibit 13 – Flag Lot Design
F. Residential Flag Lot – A residential Flag Lot shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. Dimensional requirements within the district shall be complied with except that:
a. The minimum frontage on a Street shall be twenty-five (25) feet;
b. Setbacks for all Yards shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet. The front Setback
line shall be established at fifty (50) feet from the “flag” corridor entry to the
Lot.
c. The corridor entrance to the Flag Lot (flag pole) (Exhibit 13) shall not exceed
six hundred (600) feet in length as measured within the flag portion from the
Street line to the point where the Flag Lot achieves a minimum one hundred
(100) feet width between the side property lines and at no point shall be less
than twenty-five (25) feet in width.
d. The Flag Lot shall be at least twice the minimum Lot size required for the
district in which it is located. The area contained in the “flag” corridor shall not
be considered in the minimum Lot area requirement. See Exhibit 14.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
69
Exhibit 14 – Flag Lot – Lot size
2. The Flag Lot shall be accessible from an approved Street over a private Driveway
which shall be located on the Flag Lot and not require an easement across other
property.
G. Non-Residential Flag Lot – A non-residential Flag Lot shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. Dimensional requirements within the district shall be complied with except that:
a. The minimum access-way width and frontage on a Street shall be fifty (50)
feet.
b. The Flag Lot shall be at least twice the minimum Lot size required for the zone
in which it is located. The area contained in the “flag” corridor shall not be
considered in the minimum Lot area requirement. See Exhibit 14.
c. The Flag Lot shall be accessible from an approved Street over a private
Driveway which shall be located on the Flag Lot and not require an easement
across other property. The Commission may, by Special Permit, approve access
to the Flag Lot not over the “flag” portion of the Flag Lot if it is demonstrated
that:
1. The access-way is adequate for the potential use, meets the Special Permit
criteria, and promotes public safety and efficient land use, and
Effective date: January 15, 2015
70
2. Access over the frontage corridor is not feasible due to:
A. The length of the access corridor;
B. Topographic conditions that would require engineering methods that
are not feasible and prudent to provide access or where required sight
lines cannot be established;
C. Significant impacts to environmental resources, i.e., Wetlands,
streetscapes, large trees, etc.;
3. A permanent access easement shall be established.
8. Fencing
Substantial fencing (chain link not less than four (4) feet high) shall be required in all areas
close to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or where hazardous conditions exist. This includes
the top of high retaining walls, headwalls, top of steep embankments, or near vertical
embankments into Watercourses. Fencing for non-residential uses shall not exceed four (4)
feet in height in the Front Yard, or eight (8) feet in height in the side and rear Yards. Fencing
for residential uses shall not exceed four (4) feet in height in the Front Yard nor six (6) feet
in height in the side and rear Yards or elsewhere on the site. All fencing as described above
shall be constructed with the finished side facing the exterior of the Lot on all sides. No
fencing shall be placed as to hamper line-of-sight for vehicular flow on public or private
Roads and Driveways.
9. Outside Storage and Display of Merchandise or Equipment
A. Outside storage (including any sales or display of merchandise, any storage of
supplies, wastes, machinery, equipment and other materials and any manufacture,
processing or assembling of goods, not in an enclosed Building, but excluding the
parking of registered motor vehicles in daily use) shall conform to these requirements
and otherwise shall be located in areas of the Lot as shown on the Site Plan and shall
be limited and screened in non-residential uses as follows:
1. All non-residential outside storage areas shall be screened on all sides by a
Building, fence, wall, embankment or other suitable device not less than six (6)
feet in height. This provision, however, does not apply to areas designated on the
Site Plan and approved for outside sale or display of merchandise or equipment
on the site and approved for outside sale or display of merchandise or for storage
in connection with marine facilities and services.
2. No outside storage shall be located in the area required for Setback from a Street
line or from any boundary line of an RU or SU District, or in the area required for
Setback on a Parcel used for residential purposes.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
71
B. Outside display of merchandise for sale or equipment, including trash dumpsters.
1. No merchandise or equipment, including trash dumpsters or containers, shall be
displayed outside of commercial Buildings except as follows:
a. Outside display of merchandise or equipment shall not be located in the
required Setbacks or required Yard buffers.
b. Outside display areas shall be shown on the Site Plan and shall be in areas
specifically designated for display or may be displayed directly against a
Building provided there is no impact upon pedestrian access-ways and the
display does not interfere with parking or fire lanes.
c. Display areas for merchandise or equipment may not be used for other uses.
d. Areas designated for outside display of merchandise or equipment must be
suitably surfaced, landscaped and separated from parking or loading areas.
e. Trash dumpsters are to be completely enclosed by solid fencing and
landscaping.
f. Areas designated for outside display or merchandise or equipment shall be
maintained with safety factors in mind and merchandise or equipment shall
not be stacked or displayed higher than ten (10) feet or two (2) units,
whichever is greater.
10. Exceptions to Height Limits
Except where otherwise specifically provided by these Regulations, the maximum height
for accessory architectural features, including, without limitation, steeples and chimneys,
shall be twenty (20) feet above the height limit otherwise established for the Building.
11. Setback Line in Infill/Developed Areas
In a SU District where the average Setback of at least two (2) developed Lots within 150
feet of the Lot in question and within the same block is less than the minimum Setback
prescribed elsewhere in these Regulations, the required Setback on such Lots shall be
modified so that the Setback shall not be less than the average Setback of the two (2) Lots
immediately adjacent, or in the case of a Corner Lot, the Setback on the Lot immediately
adjacent; provided, however, that the Setback on any Lot shall be at least fifteen (15) feet.
See Exhibit 15.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
72
Exhibit 15 – Setback/Infill in developed areas
8 FRONT YARDS ON CORNER LOTS
On a corner lot, front yard requirements shall be met for both street frontages.
12. Rock Crushing Equipment
A. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may authorize, as part of an authorized construction
project, the use of Rock Crushing Equipment, including, without limitation, rock
crushers and screeners, for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days when the following
conditions are met:
1. The Rock Crushing Equipment is located on-site such that it allows compliance
with these Regulations.
2. The Rock Crushing Equipment will be located no closer than five hundred (500)
feet from any residential Dwelling.
3. The Rock Crushing Equipment is operated only during the hours from 8:00 A.M.
until 4:30 P.M. on weekdays and excluding holidays identified in Section 8.8.6.B.1
of these Regulations.
4. The Rock Crushing Equipment meets all state or federal permit requirements.
5. The purpose of the Rock Crushing Equipment is to accomplish the authorized
Grading or construction of an approved Site Plan and to process materials from
that authorized construction site for use on that authorized construction site.
Off-site materials are not to be processed on-site. Excess processed materials may
be sold from the site.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
73
6. All necessary permits for an approved Site Plan have been issued.
B. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may renew any permit granted under this provision
for an additional thirty (30) days as long as the above requirements are met and not to
exceed three (3) renewals in a calendar year.
C. The applicant shall submit an application, either as part of the Site Plan submission or
as a separate application, showing the location and type of the proposed Rock
Crushing Equipment. It is the responsibility of the applicant to report the starting date
of the rock crushing/screening operation to the Zoning Enforcement Officer at least
seven (7) days prior to the desired starting date. The applicant will report to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer the commencement of the operation and when such
operation has been completed.
D. Any change of location of the authorized Rock Crushing Equipment will require a new
permit. A minimum distance of 500 feet is required for any relocation of Rock
Crushing Equipment to qualify for a new permit.
13. Wind Powered Devices
A. Findings
1. The Commission finds that alternative energy sources are important.
2. Wind technology is building better and more efficient wind gathering
infrastructure.
3. It is in the Town’s interest to permit such facilities provided they are placed in
locations that are safe to other structures and properties and the sound and view
impacts are mitigated to the greatest extent possible. For these reasons, wind
powered devices, including, without limitation, wind turbines, shall be by Special
Permit.
4. Applicants proposing a wind powered device for home use shall only be permitted
to erect a wind powered device that services their residence. Larger regional
devices will not be permitted.
B. Submittals
An applicant wishing to construct a wind turbine structure or other wind powered
device in excess of thirty-five (35) feet in height must submit a Class 1 survey showing
the location of the wind turbine or device, noting the distances from the turbine or
device base to each property boundary and distances between the base of the wind
turbine structure or device and all other structures on applicant’s property. Applicant
must also submit photos that illustrate the viewpoint from each direction in relation
to the proposed wind turbine or device.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
74
Performance Standards
1. Height – towers of turbines or other wind-powered devices can be no higher
than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet in height in residential areas as
measured from the base of the tower to the tip of the blade or other highest
equipment component as shown in Exhibit 16.
2. Distance from property lines and other structures – The wind turbine or other
wind powered device must be located in a position farther from the property line
than its height, meaning that if the structure should fall it would wholly fall on
the applicant’s property.
3. Sound – Applicant must present detailed verifiable information on the noise
associated with the proposed wind turbine or other wind powered device and
must quantify its impacts on neighboring properties.
4. View – Applicant must conduct a balloon demonstration to illustrate the visibility
of the wind turbine or other wind powered device from surrounding properties.
5. Length of blade – The length of the blade can be no more than fifteen (15) feet.
Exhibit 16 – Wind-power Setback/Collapse Standards
Effective date: January 15, 2015
75
9.0 RESOURCE PROTECTION
9.1 HISTORIC PRESERVATION
1. Purpose – A Historic Preservation Overlay Zone (HPOZ) is hereby established for the
purpose of encouraging the protection, enhancement, and use of Buildings and structures
and appurtenant vistas having historic and/or aesthetic value which represent or reflect
elements of the Town’s cultural, social, economic and architectural history. Areas or
properties are eligible for designation as Historic Preservation Overlay Zone if any portions
of such properties are listed on the National Register of Historic Places, either individually
or as part of a National Register District, or a property is designated as historically
significant by the Connecticut Historical Commission (Lusignan Historical and Architectural
Survey, 1991). Properties may also be considered for inclusion in the Historic Preservation
Overlay Zone if: (1) an historic association to a listed property can be documented (i.e., mill
housing to a mill), or (2) a portion of the property is located within 500 feet of the
Colchester Village National Register Historic District and the Commission determines that
the Parcel has significant potential to negatively impact the protection and enhancement
of the distinctive character, Landscape or historic values identified in the Colchester Plan of
Conservation and Development and in this Section, including the protection, enhancement,
and use of Buildings, structures and appurtenant vistas having historic or aesthetic value,
which represent or reflect elements of Colchester’s cultural, social, economic and
architectural history.
2. Uses Not Allowed in the Historic Preservation Overlay Zone – Uses shall be those permitted
as-of-right or by Special Permit in the underlying zone; however, specifically excluding all of
the following uses as being inconsistent with the purpose of the Historic Preservation
Overlay Zone:
A. Excavations or EMPAR
B. Heliport or airstrip
C. Kennels
D. Town garage/municipal storage facility
E. Automobile and truck rental facilities or warehousing
F. Automobile livery services
G. Automotive service stations (gas stations)
H. Automotive sales, service, parts and repairs
I. Sales/storage of propane gas, or other fuels
J. Mini Storage Facilities
K. Wireless Telecommunication Sites
Effective date: January 15, 2015
76
3. Zoning Designation of Properties – Properties included in the Historic Preservation Overlay
Zone shall be designated by the appending of the initials “HPO” to the original and
underlying zone designation.
4. Procedures for Designation of the Historic Preservation Overlay Zone – Application for
inclusion of property in the Historic Preservation Overlay Zone may be made by the owner
of the structure and/or property eligible under the purposes and criteria of Section 9.1., or
by action of the Commission. Designation as Historic Preservation Overlay Zone shall follow
the same procedures as a Change of Zone, as outlined in Section 18 of these Regulations.
5. Architectural Guidelines
A. For purposes of this HPOZ Regulation, the following definitions shall apply.
1. New construction is the erection of an entirely new structure, whether on a new
or existing foundation system, including Additions to existing Buildings.
2. Substantial re-construction is when the cost of re-construction and/or restoration
of the structure is in excess of fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value,
exclusive of foundations.
3. Rehabilitation is the process of returning a property to a state of utility, through
repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while
preserving those portions and features of the property which are significant to its
historic, architectural and cultural values.
B. New construction, substantial re-construction, and rehabilitation of properties within
the Historic Preservation Overlay Zone shall comply with the secretary of the Interior’s
“Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings”
revised through 1990, as amended (referred to hereafter as “Standards and
Guidelines”), as they apply to the exterior of structures and/or the site. These
Standards and Guidelines are made part of these Regulations and are found in
Appendix A. For information on the architectural fabric of the Town, applicants and
developers are referred to the “Historical and Architectural Survey of Colchester,
Connecticut” by Paul R. Lusignan (1991). This Survey is available in the Town Clerk’s
Office and Code Administration Department, Municipal Office Complex, as well as
Cragin Memorial Library, Colchester, CT.
C. Application for new construction, substantial re-construction and/or rehabilitation in
the Historic Preservation Overlay Zone requiring a Class I Site Plan pursuant to Section
15.3 of these Regulations shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer with
sketches and other documentation adequate to review the proposal pursuant to the
Standards and Guidelines and to other requirements set forth in Section 9. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer will render a decision regarding compliance with the Standards
and Guidelines and other requirements within fourteen (14) days, unless the
application is referred to the Commission. Either the applicant or Zoning Enforcement
Officer may refer an application to the Commission for review. In either case, a
determination regarding compliance with the Standards and Guidelines and other
requirements will be rendered within thirty-five (35) days of application.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
77
D. An informal application for new construction, substantial re-construction and/or
rehabilitation in the Historic Preservation Overlay Zone requiring a Class 2 Site Plan
pursuant to Section 15.4 of these Regulations may be submitted to the Commission
for preliminary review pursuant to Section 14.7.2 prior to submittal of a formal
application for Site Plan approval.
E. All new construction and substantial re-construction within an Historic Preservation
Overlay Zone shall be by Special Permit only, and shall be subject to review and
recommendation by an architect or architectural firm selected and contracted by the
Commission and designated as “HPO Architectural Consultant”, pursuant to the
Standards and Guidelines.
F. All new construction and substantial re-construction within the Historic Preservation
Overlay Zone will, upon receipt, be submitted by the Zoning Enforcement Officer to
the HPO Architectural Consultant for review. The HPO Architectural Consultant shall
review and report to the Commission within thirty-five (35) days. The report and
recommendation of the HPO Architectural Consultant shall be entered into the public
hearing record and considered by the Commission in making its decision. Failure of
HPO Architectural Consultant to report within the thirty-five (35) days will not alter or
delay statutory application time lines.
6. Site Development Alternatives within the Historic Preservation Overlay Zone
A. The Commission may allow for off-street parking in the Historic Preservation Overlay
Zone to be provided at eighty percent (80%) of the requirements of Section 10 of these
Regulations if it can be documented that:
1. The proposed uses have significantly different peak usage periods,
2. The proposed uses will share trips with adjacent uses sufficiently to reduce
parking demand or
3. Off-street public parking exists within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed site.
B. Parking Layouts and Paving Materials: Large areas of pavement surrounding Buildings
remove a structure from its historical context and detract from the visual integrity of
the architecture. Parking areas should be located at the rear of the Building, if possible,
with provisions made for handicapped or special needs as necessary. Avoid large
unrelieved areas of asphalt paving through landscaping, screening and terracing.
Though access from the rear of Buildings to parking lots may be required, main
entrances in most cases should continue to be located in the front of Buildings. If rear
parking is not possible, parking areas should be located on the sides of Buildings, with
proper landscaping and screening. Alternatives to asphalt paving, such as stone pavers,
can be used effectively in parking areas and on walks.
C. Alternative surface treatments for Driveways and parking areas may be approved by
the Commission if the alternative treatment is documented to be technically adequate,
represents sound engineering principles, and is satisfactory to the Town Engineer.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
78
D. Shared (common) Driveways may be utilized for access to the site where
cross-easements have been recorded.
E. Buffering and landscaping for sites in the Historic Preservation Overlay Zone must be
demonstrated to be consistent with or an enhancement to existing landscaping and/or
vistas. Stone walls are a feature of Colchester’s Landscape and should be maintained
and restored where possible. Fencing, when used, should respect the scale and
proportions of surrounding materials and Landscape features. Trees form an important
natural feature of the environment, and in many instances the older ones have
historical significance in themselves, and should be preserved if possible, consistent
with the health of the tree.
7. Signage
Signs play an important role in defining the character of architecture and are especially
important in commercial Buildings which rely on their Signs as a means to locate and
advertise business. Signs should relate to the pedestrian scale of their surroundings in
Colchester. They should be compatible with the Building’s style and materials; lettering and
composition should relate to the architectural style. Signs should be scaled and located to
complement the Building’s composition and architectural detail and avoid covering or
obscuring significant architectural detail or features. They should consist of materials and
colors appropriate and compatible with the Facade design and materials. The removal of
signs whose designs are inappropriate to the architecture can dramatically improve the
appearance of a Building. Older signs of historic or artistic value shall be retained and
restored. This can include a large range of styles and types, including Signs painted on
Buildings, early advertisements and early 20th-century Neon Signs.
9.2 AQUIFER PROTECTION
9.2.1 Aquifer Protection Zone (APZ)
A. Purpose, Statement of Intent – The purpose of this Regulation is to protect and preserve
Ground Water quality within Stratified Drift Aquifers which are existing or are potential
public drinking water supplies. These Ground Water resources have been shown to be
easily contaminated by many land uses and activities and it is necessary that specific
controls over land use be exercised within these areas to protect these resources.
B. Authority – These Regulations are promulgated pursuant to CGS Sections 8-2 and 8-23.
C. Applicability The provisions of these Regulations shall apply to all land within or partially
within the area designated on the Zoning Map as the Aquifer Protection Zone (APZ). This
zone is established as an overlay and these Regulations shall be in addition to the
underlying zone or other underlying Regulations. In the case of conflict, the most
restrictive Regulation shall apply.
D. Designation of the Zone – The APZ consists of the Stratified Drift Aquifer and its Primary
and Secondary Recharge Areas. Determination of all Aquifer Protection Zones shall be the
responsibility of the Commission, who shall act upon the recommendation of the
Colchester Sewer and Water Commission (CSWC). Maps demonstrating boundaries of all
Effective date: January 15, 2015
79
APZs will be on file in the office of the CSWC and shall be updated as necessary to reflect
current water resources. Where the boundary of the zone is in doubt or dispute, the
CSWC may amend the boundary. The burden of proof for amendment shall be on the
applicant or petitioner questioning the boundary to demonstrate why and where the
boundary should be amended. A petition for amendment shall be in the form of maps on
a scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet and shall include information sufficient to
justify the change based on the zone boundary as defined and shall be in accordance with
procedures to amend these Regulations. All applications for amendment shall be filed
simultaneously with the Commission and the CSWC, and, within thirty (30) days following
receipt of an application to amend the zone, the CSWC shall furnish the Commission with
a written report detailing its recommendations concerning the proposed amendment.
E. Use Regulations – All uses which are permitted in the existing underlying zones are
permitted by Special Permit in the APZ except for Single-Family Dwellings for which no
Special Permit is required and except those prohibited or restricted by the following
standards:
1. Prohibited Uses:
a. Any use in which the manufacture, use, handling, storage or disposal of hazardous
materials is a principal activity.
b. Waste disposal facilities such as sanitary landfills, septage lagoons, Hazardous
Waste, Bulky Waste, sludge disposal, water softener brines, and similar disposal
facilities.
c. Any use involving septic system discharge of non-domestic waste.
d. Any use involving underground leaching systems for stormwater from paved
highways, parking and developed areas.
e. Waste processing systems such as, but not limited to, resource recovery, facilities
for municipal sanitary wastes, Solid Waste transfer station, recycling processing
centers, sewage treatment plants, salvage or Junk Yards.
f. Any use involving storage or transmission of liquid fuels and hazardous chemicals
such as, but not limited to, underground storage tanks, underground distribution
systems, or liquid fuel pipelines.
g. Any use involving outdoor, unprotected storage of chemical products and wastes
above ground.
F. Special Permit Requirements – All uses in the APZ except Single-Family Dwellings shall be
by Special Permit. An application shall be accompanied by the required information and
plans, and be evaluated for potential impact to Ground Water quality, in accordance with
the following provisions. All such applications shall be submitted to the Commission and
to the CSWC for determination of whether the use should be permitted in the APZ. The
CSWC shall furnish the Commission with a written report containing its recommendations
within thirty (30) days of receipt of each application.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
80
1. Required Information – The following written and mapped information shall be
submitted:
a. Description of proposed use, type of use or activity, commercial (trades and
services), industrial (Manufacturing and processing), product produced, Standard
Industrial Code (S.I.C.) if applicable.
b. A complete list of the types and volumes of all hazardous materials (including
fuels) used, stored, processed, handled or disposed, other than those volumes
and types associated with normal household use.
c. Description of types of wastes generated and method of disposal including: Solid
Wastes, Hazardous Wastes, sewage and non-sewage wastewater discharges.
d. Location of adjacent (within two hundred (200) feet of property line) private
drinking water supply wells. Location of public water supply wells within 1,000
feet.
e. Provisions for management of stormwater runoff.
f. A Site Plan and Building plan showing: hazardous materials loading, storage,
handling and process areas; floor drains; process vents; sewage disposal; and
waste storage or disposal areas.
g. Plans and documents containing information to show compliance with the
Performance and Design Standards in Section 9.2.7 of these Regulations.
2. Other additional information may be required by reviewing agencies regarding the
proposed use, its potential impact to water quality, hydrogeologic information,
monitoring, and mitigation measures.
3. Evaluation Criteria and Considerations. In considering a Special Permit for any use in
the APZ, the Commission shall consider the following:
1. The type of use and the area in which the use is proposed.
2. The degree of threat to Ground water quality caused by the proposed use.
3. Compliance with the Performance and Design Standards in Section 9.2.7.
4. The Commission may attach conditions to a permit to insure the protection of
Ground Water quality.
G. Performance and Design Standards – All uses in the APZ shall conform to the following
standards. The objective of these standards is to prevent or minimize potential
contamination of Ground Water supplies by: prohibiting or controlling waste disposal and
other high risk activities; preventing direct and accidental releases of hazardous materials;
and providing for inspection and emergency response. An alternative standard or
Effective date: January 15, 2015
81
protection method may be approved if it is clearly demonstrated to provide equivalent or
better protection than that listed.
1. Stormwater Disposal and Management Facilities
a. The use of drywells or leaching structures for disposal of stormwater runoff from
developed areas is prohibited. All parking, storage, and loading areas shall be
paved unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town
Engineer and the CSWC that the proposed alternative will not affect Ground
Water. (Certain clean discharge from rooftops and from Lawn or landscaped areas
may be directed to dry wells or leaching structures where recharge is a concern).
b. A maintenance plan shall be provided for any stormwater treatment structure
(i.e., basins, separators).
2. Building Floor Drains – No floor drains shall be connected to drywells, subsurface
leaching structures, or surface waters. Floor drains may be connected to public
sanitary sewers with DEEP (or its authorized agent) approval and approved treatment
where necessary. (Bathroom and kitchen facility drains connected to a septic system
in accordance with the Public Health Code are exempt).
3. Non-Sewage Wastewater Discharges – No non-domestic wastewater discharge shall
be directed to an on-site sewage disposal system (individual or community), dry well,
or surface water, except for certain clean water discharges or for certain treated
wastewater discharges which have been approved through state water discharge
permit regulations.
4. Public Sewage Systems – Sewer system pipes and accessory structures may be
required to be designed for low ex-filtration. Sewage pumping equipment is required
to have emergency power and may be required to have emergency storage.
5. Bulk Material and Solid Waste Storage
a. Bulk storage facilities of non-hazardous materials which may leach into the
ground, such as de-icing salt, sludge, manure, or silage shall have an impervious
floor and roof, and be raised or designed to prevent surface water runoff from
entering.
b. Solid Waste dumpsters shall be on a concrete pad, covered and be plugged so as
to be watertight.
6. Security and Emergency Spill Contingency Plan for Hazardous Materials – A plan and
procedure shall be submitted that identifies the following:
a. Security and inspection measures to control vandalism or accident.
b. Procedures to contain and clean-up spills or leaks of hazardous materials.
c. Procedures for notification of local and state officials.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
82
d. Schedule of update when any changes in materials or procedure occur.
e. Procedure to control hazardous materials release in case of total structure loss
because of fire.
7. Pesticide, Herbicide and Fertilizer Use – Any use which includes more than three (3)
acres of land used for crop, Lawn, garden or landscaping requiring regular applications
of chemical pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers or any use requiring regular application
of pesticide or herbicide shall be accompanied by a management plan. The
management plan shall indicate types of materials, application schedule, and
conformance with applicable best management practices.
8. Monitoring – If it is determined that additional safety measures and monitoring are
needed because of hydrogeologic conditions or potential contamination, then a
monitoring program may be required, which may consist of:
a. Installation of monitoring wells.
b. Periodic sampling.
c. Reporting of analysis.
d. The costs of any required additional safety measures and monitoring
requirements shall be borne by the developer.
9.2.2 Aquifer Protection Area (APA) Regulations
All development is subject to the Town of Colchester Aquifer Protection Area (APA)
Regulations, which are found in the Town Code of Ordinances and are attached as
Appendix to these Regulations.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
83
9.3 FLOOD HAZARD OVERLAY DISTRICTS
1. Purpose – The purpose of this Section is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by
encouraging non-hazardous placement of structures and uses in relation to areas prone to
periodic flooding as determined by a report by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA ) entitled “Flood Insurance Study, New London County, Connecticut” revised
July 11, 2011, on file with the Town Clerk.
The degree of flood protection required by this Regulation is considered the minimum
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration and research. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural uses permitted in such areas that will be
free from flooding and flood damages. This Regulation shall not create liability on the part
of the Town of Colchester or by an officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this Regulation or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder. The Town of Colchester, its officers and employees shall assume no liability for
another person’s reliance on any maps, data or information provided by the Town of
Colchester.
2. Flood Hazard Overlay Districts Established – In order to carry out the purposes of this
Section 9.3, the following Flood Hazard Overlay Districts are hereby established, and shall
be considered as superimposed over any other zoning district established by these
Regulations:
Zone X Flood Hazard Overlay District (includes Zones X shaded and Zone X un-shaded)
Zone A Flood Hazard Overlay District
Zone AE Flood Hazard Overlay District
3. Flood Hazard Overlay Districts Map – The Flood Hazard Overlay Districts established by this
Section 9.3 are the areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in its Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) for New London County, Connecticut, dated July 18, 2011, and accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), dated July 18, 2011, and other supporting data
applicable to the Town of Colchester, and any subsequent revisions thereto, which are
adopted by reference and declared to be part of these Regulations. Since mapping is legally
adopted by reference into this Regulation it must take precedence when more restrictive
until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA. The area of
special flood hazard includes any area shown on the FIRM as Zones A and AE, including
areas designated as a Floodway on a FIRM. Areas of special flood hazard are determined
utilizing the Base Flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on a FIRM are only approximate
(rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a
specific location. The FIRM is on file in the Office of the Town Clerk, and shall constitute the
Flood Hazard Overlay District Map.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
84
4. Flood Hazard Overlay District Boundaries – Where the Flood Hazard Overlay District
boundaries divide a Lot, each portion of that Lot shall be subject to all the Regulations
applicable to the district in which it is located, except that where published, elevations
shown on the FIRM shall determine boundary locations represented on said map.
5. Zone X Flood Hazard Overlay District (including Zone X shaded and Zone Z un-shaded)
Regulations – The Zone X Flood Hazard Overlay District consists of all areas of the Town
lying outside the 500-year Floodplain, areas within the 500-year Floodplain, areas of
100-year flooding where average depths are less than one (1) foot, areas of 100-year
flooding where the contributing drainage area is less than one (1) square mile, and areas
protected from the 100-year flood by levees as shown in the FIS and on the FIRM. No Base
Flood elevations or depths are shown in this zone in the FIS and on the FIRM. The Zone X
Flood Hazard Overlay District does not include those areas within the Zone A Flood Hazard
Overlay District and Zone AE Flood Hazard Overlay Districts.
6. Permitted Uses – The following uses are permitted and prohibited in the Zone X Flood
Hazard Overlay District:
A. Any use permitted in the underlying zoning districts is permitted in the Zone X Floor
Hazard Overlay District.
B. Any use prohibited in the underlying zoning districts is prohibited in the Zone X Flood
Hazard Overlay District.
7. Zone A Flood Hazard Overlay District and Zone AE Flood Hazard Overlay District – The Zone
A Flood Hazard Overlay District consists of those areas of the Town in the 100-year
Floodplains as determined in the FIS by approximate methods. Because detailed hydraulic
analyses are not performed for such areas, no Base Flood elevations or depths are shown
within Zone A in the Flood Insurance Study and on the FIRM. The Zone AE Flood Hazard
Overlay District consists of those areas of the Town in the 100-year Floodplains that are
determined in the FIS by detailed methods. In most instances, whole-foot flood elevations
derived from the detailed hydraulic analyses are shown at selected intervals within Zone AE
in the FIS and on the FIRM. The Commission shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
Base Flood elevation and Floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, as
criteria for requiring that new construction, Substantial Improvements, repair to structures
which have sustained substantial damage or other development in any area of potential,
demonstrable or historical flooding within the community meet the standards in Section 9.
A. Any use permitted in the Zone A Flood Hazard Overlay District and Zone AE Flood
Hazard Overlay District underlying zoning districts is permitted, except for those uses
specifically prohibited by Section 9.3.7.B.
B. Prohibited Uses – The following uses are prohibited in the Zone A Flood Hazard
Overlay District and Zone AE Flood Hazard Overlay District:
1. Any use prohibited in the underlying zoning districts.
2. Any new construction, enlargement of existing structures, Substantial
Improvement to the same footprint, Substantial Improvement that enlarges the
Effective date: January 15, 2015
85
footprint, placement of any Manufactured Home or Recreational Vehicle
(including a Manufactured Home located outside a Manufactured Home park or
subdivision, in a new Manufactured Home park or subdivision, in an existing
Manufactured Home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing
Manufactured Home park or subdivision, or on a site in an existing Manufactured
Home park in which a Manufactured Home has incurred substantial damage as a
result of a flood) or any other development; except that existing structures
destroyed or made uninhabitable by flood, fire or other natural disaster, or which
have experienced substantial damage, may be reconstructed to their size and
shape immediately prior to their destruction, provided those structures meet the
requirements of this Section. This Section shall not apply to functionally
dependent uses or facilities (including docks, piers, etc.) if not otherwise
prohibited in these Regulations.
3. Mining, dredging, Filling, Grading, paving operations, Excavation
operations/EMPAR and/or drilling operations.
4. The storage of any equipment or any materials.
5. Any development activity within the “regulatory Floodway” as such regulatory
Floodway is shown on the FIRM.
C. Maintenance Provisions – Nothing in Section 9.3 shall be construed so as to prohibit
ordinary and routine maintenance to structures existing in accordance with these
Regulations as in effect at the time of the adoption of Section 9.3. Maintenance
projects that constitute a Substantial Improvement to an existing structure will subject
the structure to meeting the requirements of Section 9.
D. Reconstruction Provisions – Within the Zone A Flood Hazard Overlay District and the
Zone AE Flood Hazard Overlay District, reconstruction of existing structures destroyed
or made uninhabitable by flood, fire or other natural disaster shall only be allowed
subject to the following:
1. After reconstruction, the Lowest Floor (including a basement level) shall be
elevated to, at minimum, one (1) foot above the BFE as shown in the FIS and on
the FIRM.
2. A licensed engineer or registered architect shall certify that the requirements of
Section 9.3.7.D.1 herein are met.
3. In addition to these Regulations, any such improvement to be undertaken within
the Zone A Flood Hazard Overlay District or the Zone AE Flood Hazard Overlay
District shall also be in accordance with any applicable requirements of the
Connecticut State Building Code and/or the FEMA minimum standards contained
in the Code of Federal Regulations 44 C.F.R. 60.3, whichever is more restrictive.
Reconstruction of functionally dependent uses or facilities (including docks, piers,
etc.) shall not be subject to the requirements of Section 9.3.7 herein.
4. New construction, Substantial Improvements, and structures that have sustained
Effective date: January 15, 2015
86
substantial damage shall be constructed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage. Building sites must be reasonably safe from flooding.
New construction, Substantial Improvements, and structures that have sustained
substantial damage shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage.
5. New construction, Substantial Improvements, and repairs to structures that have
sustained substantial damage shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
6. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, HVAC
ductwork, and other service facilities, or any machinery or utility equipment or
connections servicing a structure shall be elevated to or above the BFE to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding. This includes, but is not limited to, furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air
conditioners, heat pumps, hot water heaters, ventilation ductwork, washer and
dryer hook-ups, electrical junction boxes, and circuit breaker boxes.
7. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
8. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the
system into flood waters.
9. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
10. The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated Watercourse must be
maintained. Adjacent communities, the DEEP and FEMA must be notified prior to
any alteration or relocation of a Watercourse.
8. All necessary federal or state permits must have been received. Copies of such permits be
shall be provided to the Town and maintained on file with the permit application.
9. Manufactured Homes shall be elevated so that the Lowest Floor is elevated to, at a
minimum, one (1) foot above the BFE as shown in the FIS and on the FIRM. Manufactured
Homes shall be placed on a permanent foundation which itself is securely anchored and to
which the structure is securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement
and hydrostatic pressures. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. Manufactured Homes shall be installed using
methods and practices which minimize flood damage. Adequate access and drainage
should be provided. Elevation construction standards include piling foundations placed no
more than ten (10) feet apart, and reinforcement for piers more than six (6) feet above
ground level.
10. Recreational Vehicles placed on-sites shall be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive
days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A Recreational Vehicle is ready for
Effective date: January 15, 2015
87
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices, and is not permanently attached.
11. Located within Special Flood Hazard Areas are areas designated as Floodways on the
community’s FIRM. Since the Floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity
of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has Erosion potential, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, Substantial Improvements, repairs to
substantially damaged structures and other developments shall be permitted unless
certification, with supporting technical data, by a licensed professional engineer is provided
demonstrating, through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice, that encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet)
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the Base Flood discharge. Fences in the
Floodway must be aligned with the flow and be of an open design.
When BFE have been determined within Zone AE on the community’s FIRM but a
regulatory Floodway has not been designated, the Commission must require that no new
construction, Substantial Improvements, repair to structures which have sustained
substantial damage or other development, including fill, shall be permitted which will
increase the Water Surface Elevation of the Base Flood more than one (1.0) foot at any
point within the Town when all existing and anticipated development is considered
cumulatively with the proposed development.
The Commission may request Floodway data of an applicant for Watercourses without
FEMA-published Floodways. When such data is provided by an applicant or whenever such
data is available from any other source (in response to the municipality’s request or not),
the community shall adopt a regulatory Floodway based on the principle that the Floodway
must be able to convey the waters of the Base Flood without increasing the water surface
elevation more than one (1.0) foot at any point within the Town.
12. Equal Conveyance – Within the Floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced,
as designated on the FIRM for the Town, encroachments resulting from Filling, new
construction or Substantial Improvements involving an increase in footprint of the
structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a licensed
professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachments
shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels (BFE). Work within the Floodplain
and the land adjacent to the Floodplain, including work to provide compensatory storage,
shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood
velocity.
13. Compensatory Storage – The water holding capacity of the Floodplain, except those areas
which are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by Filling, new
construction or Substantial Improvements involving an increase in footprint to the
structure, shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the Floodplain.
Storage shall be provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent
property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not
previously used for flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally
equal to the theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation, up to and including the
Effective date: January 15, 2015
88
100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such
compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same
waterway or water body. Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the
Town.
14. Subdivisions – All subdivision proposals shall include BFE data from the FIS and/or the
FIRM, and shall be designed (including utility and drainage systems) to be consistent with
the need to minimize flood damage. No proposed Building locations shall be located in the
Zone A Flood Hazard Overlay District and the Zone AE Flood Hazard Overlay Districts.
15. Special Permit – The Commission may grant a Special Permit in accordance with Section
14.8 for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the
provisions of this Section 9.3.
16. Records – The Town shall obtain and maintain records of the elevation (in relation to Mean
Sea Level) of the Lowest Floor (including basement) of all new construction, Substantial
Improvements or repair to a structure that has sustained substantial flood damage.
9.4 LANDSCAPING
1. Landscaping shall be provided and permanently maintained on all developments except for
Single-Family Dwellings and all Lots except single-family residential Lots will conform to the
following:
A. All portions of a Lot not covered by Buildings and other structures, outside storage
areas, areas for off-street parking, loading and Driveways and approved paved areas
shall be suitably landscaped with trees, shrubs, Lawns or other suitable landscaping or,
if not disturbed by Filling, Grading, Excavation or other construction activity, may be
left as natural terrain when having a location, size and shape that supports the
landscaping plan for the Lot.
B. In non-residential site development the area required for Setback from an existing
residential use shall be suitably landscaped with Evergreen shrubs or trees, or such
Evergreens in combination with embankments, fences, and/or walls, so as to provide a
transition from the non-residential use to the residential use. Suitable natural terrain
and existing Evergreen trees and shrubs may be preserved, or augmented with new
planting, to satisfy the landscaping requirement in the Setback area from the
residential use. Such Setback area shall contain no off-street parking or loading spaces
or Driveways. Within the required Buffer Area, a minimum fifteen (15) foot wide strip
of land shall be landscaped with Evergreens at least four (4) feet high of a density of at
least four (4) plants within each sixty (60) square feet of this strip or an equivalent.
Such Buffer Area may be located within the minimum Setback, side Yard and rear Yard
lines.
C. Each Lot shall be provided with a landscaped Buffer Area, fifteen (15) feet or more in
width, along the Street line. The Buffer Area shall be landscaped and maintained with
Lawn, shrubs, trees, and other suitable landscaping and shall be separated from any
adjoining off-street parking or loading area, Driveway or outside storage area by a curb
Effective date: January 15, 2015
89
six (6) inches in height. Necessary Driveways may be provided through and in the
Buffer Area. Plantings areas in Street buffers shall not be planted with vegetation types
that will obstruct vision at maturity.
D. All off-street loading docks and garbage storage or processing facilities shall be
suitably screened by a Building, fence, wall, embankment or other suitable device.
E. All landscaping, trees, shrubs and Lawns on an approved Site Plan shall be
well-maintained, and trees and shrubs that die or are destroyed shall be replaced with
similar trees and shrubs within the first two (2) spring growth seasons after the initial
planting. The Commission may require the posting of a suitable bond to ensure that
landscaping survives the initial two (2) spring growth periods.
F. All plant and other landscaping materials shall be provided in accordance with good
landscaping practice and shall be subject to the approval of the Commission.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
90
10.0 PARKING, LOADING AND ROAD ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
10.1 CHARACTER
Facilities for off-street parking shall be provided to serve all development in Town and shall be sufficient
to accommodate vehicles for all persons visiting the Building or Premises at any one time. Said parking
shall be part of the Site Plan or prepared as a separate plan and shall include a consideration of the
visual environment such as boundary screening and landscaping, landscaped islands and other natural
features. Parking plans will also consider the functional capacity of the proposed parking areas and
include identification of parking sites, traffic circulation patterns, loading areas, storm drainage facilities
and traffic access and egress including Driveways.
The development of parking areas for non-residential uses is in the RU is treated differently from other
zones in the Town as protection of the environment is factored into the parking expectation of rural
areas in a different manner than more developed areas. As rural character is dependent on the
enhancement and preservation of natural features, smaller parking areas with differing surfaces will be
encouraged in those areas. Natural substitutes to stormwater management are also a critical
component of rural parking areas.
Parking areas in the other zones must consider the built environment and would focus on function more
than in the RU. Parking areas in the SU should be limited and designed to reflect a neighborhood character.
Parking in the Town Center/Westchester Village and Future Development Areas would be larger but would
require more design consideration.
10.2 NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
Off-street parking shall be provided and maintained in accordance with requirements listed in Table 10.1.
For uses not listed in this Section, the number of parking spaces required shall be comparable to the
closest other similar use as determined by the Commission. If the precise figure is not identified an
applicant may submit accepted standards to support the number of parking spaces proposed.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
91
Table 10.1 Number of Parking Spaces Required
Land Use Minimum Spaces
Residential 1 per Dwelling Unit
Hotels/Motels 1 per guest room plus 0.5 per employee
Resident Mobile Home Parks 1 per Dwelling Unit plus 0.5 per employee
Hospitals, Sanitariums, Nursing or Convalescent
Homes
1 for every 6 beds plus 0.5 per employee
Medical and Dental Offices 4 for each doctor engaged at the office
Funeral Homes 1 for each “Official Vehicle”.
1 for each employee
1 for every 8 visitors at maximum capacity
Theaters and Places of Assembly 1 for every 6 potential occupants at maximum
capacity plus one for each employee
Business Offices and Financial Institutions 3 per 1,000 square feet Gross Floor Area (GFA)
Restaurants 1 for every 3 seats
Retail, Personal Services 2 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Roadside Stands 1 per 150 square foot GFA
Active Adult and Age Restricted 1 per Dwelling Unit plus 1 per employee
Congregate and Assisted Living 0.5 per Dwelling Unit plus 1 per employee
Light Industrial 2 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Small Shopping Centers
(under 40,000 square feet of gross leasable area)
3 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Bed and Breakfast & Country Inn 1 per guest room or suite
Personal Services 2 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Day Care Centers 1 per 8 children at maximum capacity
Churches and Places of Worship 1 per 5 seats in main sanctuary and other rooms
Effective date: January 15, 2015
92
Land Use Minimum Spaces
Museums and Libraries 1 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Social, Fraternal Clubs and Organizations 3 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Elementary, Middle, and High Schools 1 per 5 seats in the auditorium
Warehouse 1 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Commercial Kennel 1 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Automotive Sales and/or Rental 1 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Automotive Repair and/or Service 2 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Gymnasiums, Physical Fitness Centers, Health
Spas, Martial Arts Centers, and Dance Studios
2 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Indoor Recreation Facilities 5 per 1,000 square feet GFA based
10.3 PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
1. All off-street parking areas shall include paved parking spaces accessible to persons with
disabilities. Pursuant to CGS Section 14-253a(h), parking spaces for passenger motor
vehicles designated for persons with disabilities shall be as near as possible to a Building
entrance or walkway and shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide including five (5) feet of
cross hatch and twenty (20) feet long. Handicapped accessible parking spaces and access
aisles shall be provided in the following number relative to the total number of spaces
provided in the parking area:
A. One additional parking space for every twenty-five (25) regular spaces rounded up to
the nearest whole number.
B. For every six (6) or fraction of six (6) parking spaces accessible to persons with
disabilities, at least one (1) shall be a van-accessible parking space. Van parking spaces
shall be twenty (20) feet long, sixteen (16) feet wide including eight (8) feet of cross
hatch and designated as required by CGS Section 14-253a(h).
10.4 REDUCED AND SHARED PARKING
It is the intent of these Regulations that all structures and land uses be provided with a sufficient amount
of off-street motor vehicle parking, while allowing for some flexibility of site design to accommodate the
unique characteristics of individual properties. This Section of the Regulations is intended to set
standards for conditions under which Shared Parking may be allowed. The Commission may require the
submission of a parking demand analysis as part of any request for parking approval.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
93
1. Except for Buildings used or occupied for residential use, all or part of the off-street parking
requirement may be satisfied by Shared Parking arrangements or public transportation
where the proposed planning, design, and construction includes the following:
A. Sufficient publicly owned or Shared Parking spaces within five hundred (500) feet of
the proposed development site.
B. Access to a regularly scheduled transit stop within five hundred (500) feet of the
proposed development, with service available during the hours necessary to serve the
activities of the use.
2. Requests for Parking Below the Minimum Required
Where an applicant believes that the required parking amounts are in excess of what is
needed for the proposed use, the applicant may submit a request with justification to the
Commission to support reduced parking space requirements. The Commission will consider
and act on this request concurrent with and as part of the application process. Reduced
parking approval requires a seventy-five percent (75%) affirmative vote of the membership.
Requests for parking below the minimum required must include detailed study or data
which indicate how parking will be provided and why the request should be granted.
3. Parking Space Held on Reserve
For phased developments, the Commission may provide that up to fifty percent (50%) of
the parking spaces required by this Section be not be immediately constructed and kept in
reserve. Such reserve parking areas must be kept planted and maintained rather than
surfaced for parking until such time as the additional parking space is necessary to serve
completed phases of the associated development. No above ground improvements shall be
placed or constructed upon such reserve parking areas. The areas designated as reserve
parking must be clearly depicted on the phased development Site Plan and the terms and
conditions of phasing of the parking area completion, as determined by the Commission,
must clearly be set forth in notations on the approved Site Plan. Stormwater management
systems must either be sized to accommodate the full parking area at build out or
developed along with the phased construction of parking areas. The Commission may
require a bond or other mechanism to ensure that the reserve areas are developed if
necessary.
4. Shared Parking – At an applicant’s request, Shared Parking may be provided in any district,
subject to the following provisions:
A. A reciprocal written agreement has been executed by all the parties concerned that
assures the perpetual joint use of such common parking, a copy of which has been
submitted to and is acceptable to the Commission. The Commission may forward such
agreements to the Town legal counsel for review.
B. The Commission may require the applicant to provide a parking study with all
information deemed necessary to its decision-making on a Shared Parking agreement.
This information might include but is not limited to: a) the type and hours of operation
and parking demand, for each use, b) a Site Plan displaying shared use spaces in the
Effective date: January 15, 2015
94
Lot and walking distance to the uses sharing the Lot, c) a description of the character
of land use and parking patterns of adjacent land uses, and d) an estimate of
anticipated turnover in parking space use over the course of twelve (12) to
twenty-four (24) hours at the site. Parking spaces to be shared must not be reserved
for individuals or groups on a twenty-four (24) hour basis.
C. Uses sharing a Shared Parking facility do not need to be contained on the same Lot,
but shall be a maximum of five hundred (500) feet from the parking space in the
parking Lot which is to be used and allow for safe, convenient walking for parkers,
including safe pedestrian crossings, signage, and adequate lighting.
1. If the conditions for Shared Parking become null and void and/or the Shared
Parking arrangement is discontinued, this will constitute a violation of these
Regulations for any use approved expressly with Shared Parking. The applicant
must then provide written notification of the change to the Zoning Enforcement
Officer and, within sixty (60) days of that notice, provide a remedy satisfactory to
the Commission to provide adequate parking.
D. Reduction in Required Parking Space for Shared Parking – Where Shared Parking is
provided for a mixed use of land, the Commission may allow the following, at the
applicant’s request:
1. Up to thirty percent (30%) of the parking spaces required for the predominant use
on a site may be shared with other uses operating during the same time of day
and days of the week. The predominant use is considered to be that which
requires the most parking of those sharing the parking facilities.
2. Up to ninety percent (90%) of parking spaces required for uses such as public
auditoriums, bowling alleys, nightclubs, movie Theaters, and similar
predominately evening uses may be shared with such uses such as banks, offices,
and similar predominately daytime uses.
3. Up to ninety percent (90%) of the parking spaces required for such uses such as
houses of worship and other uses exclusively in operation during the weekend
may be shared with such uses as medical offices, banks, and other similar uses
predominately in operation on weekdays. Other reductions may be allowed by the
Commission if the applicant produces a credible peak parking demand study that
demonstrates that a different reduction value is appropriate.
10.5 PARKING LOT DESIGN
1. At a minimum, all parking lots shall:
A. Have a minimum stall size of nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet.
B. All line striping and traffic directional pavement markings and Signs shall conform to
the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), as amended.
C. Have spaces installed at ninety (90) or forty-five (45) degree angles (unless parallel
Effective date: January 15, 2015
95
parking is being used).
D. Have a twelve (12) foot travel lane for each direction of traffic except for one way lane
which shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet.
E. Have no greater than three percent (3%) Slope.
F. Have a number and location of access Driveways compatible with traffic circulation
patterns both within the site and on the abutting Street system.
G. Provide sufficient stacking area (area where cars may need to wait in line to exit onto
the Street or to enter to circulate in the parking lot) and stacking for at least two (2)
vehicles at the inbound access drives to the site.
H. Be designed to not allow any vehicle to protrude or overhang sidewalks or any
landscaped area.
I. Minimize potential conflict points between pedestrians, bicycles, and motor vehicles.
2. Required off-street parking facilities shall be maintained as long as the use or structure
exists for which the facilities are designed to serve.
3. Pervious Parking Area
A. Parking areas composed of pervious surfaces are encouraged for all land uses and
Lots, unless there are overriding environmental limitations or applicable Regulations
that specifically require bituminous or other impervious surface. Such areas may be
provided to meet all or part of any required parking spaces on a Lot. Impervious
surfaces can occupy no more than seventy-five percent (75%) of any parking lot.
B. Measures that may be considered to reduce the amount of impervious surfaces in all
proposed parking lots where such surfaces are not prohibited include:
1. Provide pervious parking stall surfaces
2. Provide pervious overflow parking
3. Provide pervious snow-storage space
4. Conserve existing natural areas, including trees on-site
5. Minimize Clearing to the extent practicable while retaining access, sight distance,
and safe vehicle flows.
10.6 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS FOR PARKING LOT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
1. The landscaping requirements for parking areas are intended to maximize the function of
natural features in order to optimize on-site natural infiltration of rainwater, intercept and
manage stormwater runoff, and provide an aesthetic setting for development. In order to
accomplish these goals the following standards shall apply:
Effective date: January 15, 2015
96
A. Developments with proposed parking areas of fifteen (15) spaces or more shall
provide a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the total parking area as landscaped
Open Space. Such landscaped Open Space may be provided in the form of islands,
aesthetic Landscape treatments, pedestrian refuge/oasis areas, and may include the
perimeter buffer between the parking area and adjacent Streets,
residential/commercial developments, or Open Space areas. Planting plans shall not
include invasive species as defined by the DEEP.
B. Developments with proposed parking areas of fifteen (15) or more parking spaces
should provide landscaped islands and perimeter landscaping throughout the parking
area planted with a mix of shrubs and trees. Such islands and perimeter plantings
should be located:
1. At each parking lot entrance;
2. At the ends of each parking aisle;
3. As intermediate islands in long rows of spaces, located every fifteen (15) spaces;
4. As separation between long rows of parking spaces where they abut other rows;
and
5. As separation between pedestrian walkways and parking spaces and/or driving
aisles.
Exhibit 16 – Parking Lot Design
Effective date: January 15, 2015
97
C. All landscaped islands should be situated below the grade of the parking spaces and
driving aisles such that stormwater runoff flow is directed to and trapped by such
islands.
D. Failure to maintain any landscaped area or Buffer Area shall constitute a violation of
these Regulations.
10.7 BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN ACCOMMODATIONS
1. It is the intent of these Regulations to promote and support access by bicycle and walking
throughout the community. To this end, all parking lots over fifteen (15) spaces must be
designed to provide safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle access as a part of any
parking area or structure design including safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle
movement to and from public walkways and/or bikeways, Streets, or transit stops.
A. Bicycle Access Design Standards:
1. Spaces shall be a minimum of two (2) feet by six (6) feet per bicycle.
2. Design shall provide for a minimum number possible of potential conflict points
between bicycles and motor vehicles.
3. Lighting shall be provided.
4. Provision shall be made for locking of bicycles to the rack or bicycle locker.
5. Adequate spacing shall be provided for access to the bicycle and locking device
when the spaces are occupied.
6. Where possible, bicycle parking shall be located within view of Building entrances
or in view of windows, and/or security personnel stations.
2. Pedestrian Access Design Standards – Provision for safe and convenient pedestrian access
shall be incorporated into landscaping plans for any parking area or parking structure. This
shall be clearly shown on all Site Plans. Any parking area designed, constructed, and
maintained as part of a development must be designed such that the flow of pedestrians
can be directed though a system of convenient routes that bring them to central walkways
leading to main entrances. All walkways shall be constructed to provide for:
A. Safe separation of all walkways from motor vehicle traffic through the use of raised
sidewalks and/or landscaping between sidewalks and parking spaces and/or driving
aisles.
B. Safe, well-articulated pedestrian crossings demarcated with pavement markings,
pedestrian warning signs, and lighting.
C. A minimum of four (4) feet in width.
D. Inclusion of plantings, benches, and lighting along walkways and at all pedestrian
Effective date: January 15, 2015
98
crossings.
E. Design, construction and maintenance to accommodate disabled persons in
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and other applicable
requirements.
10.8 LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
On the same Premises with every Building devoted to retail trade, retail and wholesale food
markets, Warehouses, supply houses, wholesale or Manufacturing trade, Hotels, hospitals,
laundry, dry cleaning establishments or other Buildings where large amounts of goods are
received or shipped, erected in any district after the date of the adoption of these Regulations,
loading and unloading space shall be provided as follows:
1. Every Building or block of Building containing more five thousand (5,000) to twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet gross Floor Area – one (1) loading space.
2. Every Building or block of Building containing more than twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet gross Floor Area – one (1) loading space for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
or fraction thereof.
3. A required loading space shall be not less than ten (10) feet wide, forty (40) feet long and
fourteen (14) feet high.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
99
11.0 SIGNAGE
11.1 INTENT – This Section is intended to protect and enhance the character of the community and
its various neighborhoods and districts and to provide protection from visual blight while
respecting the desire to promote and advertise.
11.2 PURPOSE – The purpose of these Regulations is to permit the identification of land uses for the
convenience of the general public, while regulating and restricting Signs so as to prevent them
from: being excessive in number, illumination, area, or height; distracting to motorists;
incompatible with the use of the land or Buildings to which they are accessory; having an
adverse impact on property values or the aesthetic and historic character of the Town of
Colchester; or otherwise impairing the public health, safety and welfare.
11.3 GENERAL:
1. These Regulations shall govern the size, height, location and illumination of Signs.
2. If a use is located on a Lot or Parcel that is within more than one zoning district, all Signs
erected in conjunction with such use shall conform to the Regulations for the zone in which
the Sign is located.
3. If a Building or group of Buildings is located on a single Lot within a zone that permits
non-residential or mixed use land uses and serves two (2) or more tenants or occupants, all
Signs erected on the Premises shall be of consistent dimensions, lighting and height.
4. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may issue sign Zoning Permits for replacement of existing
Signs or new Signs on an existing developed site. All new development requiring approval
of the Commission shall include proposed signage for Commission review and approval.
11.4 PROHIBITED SIGNS – The following Signs are prohibited in all zoning districts. Nothing in this
Section shall be construed as prohibiting Signs viewed principally from within a Building.
1. Moving Signs, including but not limited to Signs containing moving parts or Signs that move
as a result of wind pressure because of the manner of their suspension or attachment or
design, and including but not limited to spinners, streamers, Banner Signs, balloons, flags,
bunting, pennants, ribbon Signs and the like (excluding Signs relating to
approved/permitted temporary events, such as grand openings and festivals).
2. Portable Signs, including but not limited to so-called “A” frame Signs or “sandwich board”
and “step stick-in” type Signs.
3. Mobile Signs, including but not limited to any Sign, which is mounted on wheels, or is
collapsible. Signs on vehicles are permitted provided the Sign is attached or painted on the
vehicle and does not extend beyond the original manufactured body proper. Subject
vehicle must be parked in an approved parking area/space and must be properly registered
and operable.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
100
4. Signs painted or posted or otherwise attached to any fence, tree, utility pole, unregistered
vehicle, rock (except carved or engraved on a stone monument) or painted or otherwise
displayed upon the surface of the earth itself.
5. Roof Signs.
6. Billboard Signs.
7. Any Sign which displays lights resembling those customarily used by police, fire,
ambulance, or other emergency vehicles; and any Sign which uses the words “stop”,
“caution”, “slow”, or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character that might be
misconstrued to be a public safety warning Sign or other official traffic control Sign.
Excepted from this prohibition are traffic, regulatory, or informational Signs required and
approved by governmental agencies.
8. Any Illuminated Sign in which the background (as opposed to the text) is illuminated by
means of an internal light source through a translucent or transparent material.
9. Signs indicating uses not carried out on at the Premises on which the Sign is located or
indicating to off-Premises locations. Excepted from this prohibition are temporary
directional signs for notification of an “Open House” in connection with the sale or rental of
Premises or tag/yard sale Signs.
10. An on-Premises attached Sign end-mounted or otherwise attached to an exterior wall of a
Building and which projects more than three (3) feet from the wall to which it is attached.
11.5 EXEMPT SIGNS – The following Signs are authorized without a Zoning Permit, provided they
comply with the provisions of these Regulations. Exempt Signs shall not be internally
illuminated. External illumination is permitted, unless otherwise noted, only upon the issuance
of a Zoning Permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer. All Signs in this Section shall be set
back ten (10) feet from the edge of the traveled portion of a Road and side boundary lines.
These Signs shall be allowed in addition to any legally existing signage.
1. Public Signs – Signs of a non-commercial nature, erected in the public interest by or on the
order of a public official in the performance of his/her duty, including, but not limited to,
safety, trespassing, and traffic control Signs, legal notices and Signs of memorial or historic
interest.
2. Small Identification Signs – The following Signs are permitted so long as they meet the
requirements of this Section and do not possess any of the characteristics in Section 11.4.
A. One (1) public convenience Sign for each Building containing a non-residential or
mixed use is permitted, attached flat against the principal Building, identifying store
hours, the name of the business, or other basic information of a non-advertising
nature, and not exceeding two (2) square feet in area.
B. Trespass Signs and other Signs indicating the private nature of a Driveway or other
Premises, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area each and posted in accordance
with applicable state statutes.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
101
C. Bulletin Board or similar Sign, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area, in
connection with any church, museum, library, school, or similar public use, provided
that the height of such Sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet
D. Help wanted Signs not exceeding three (3) square feet.
E. Holiday Decorations and messages.
F. Temporary directional signs, maximum three (3) square feet in area used for the
notification of an “Open House” in connection with the sale or rental of Premises or
tag/yard sale signs. These signs may be located “off-site” Friday-Monday only.
G. Address Signs, as follows.
1. Address Signs associated with a residential or agricultural use that does not
require a Special Permit.
2. Address Signs displaying only the street number, name of the occupant, and/or
the name of the farm or estate.
3. The total area of all such address Signs on the property shall not exceed two (2)
square feet.
4. Such address Sign may be attached to the Building or be free standing; and, if free
standing, the top of the Sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet above the ground
immediately below the Sign.
3. “Open” flag Signs, provided that:
A. Such flag shall not be displayed unless the Premises at which it is located are open for
business.
B. No more than one (1) such flag may be located on any business Premises.
C. The total area of such flag shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet.
D. Such flag shall contain no advertising other than the logo of the business and the word
“Open.”
4. Official Insignias – The flag seal, or other official insignia of any nation, state, city or other
political unit, civic, fraternal, religious or similar organization provided the same shall be no
larger than fifteen (15) square feet in area.
5. Integral decorative or architectural features of Buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving
parts or moving lights.
6. Construction, Sale and Rental Temporary Signs (On-site).
A. One (1) Construction or project Sign per Lot, which Sign shall not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet in area for residential uses or forty-five (45) square feet in area for
Effective date: January 15, 2015
102
non-residential and mixed uses, not to exceed eight (8) feet in height for either
residential or non-residential/mixed uses.
B. One (1) Sign per Lot advertising for-sale or for-rent. Such for-sale or for-rent Signs shall
not exceed six (6) square feet in area for residential uses and forty-five (45) square feet
in area for non-residential and mixed uses. The height of such signs shall not exceed
four (4) feet in residential uses and eight (8) feet for non-residential and mixed uses.
C. Such Sign shall advertise only the property on which the Sign is located.
D. Such Sign shall not be illuminated and shall conform to all other provisions of these
Regulations.
7. Tag Sale Signs – One (1) Sign, not exceeding three (3) square feet in area, located on the
same Lot as the tag sale, and for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours.
8. Future/Grand Opening Signs – A Sign or Signs announcing a forth coming business or
activity may be erected on the site for that business or activity provided that the site has
received approval of the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer and the Signs are
removed at the time the approved permanent sign(s) is installed or within 60 (sixty) days,
whichever comes first. Maximum size shall be forty (40) square feet.
9. Signs Announcing Charitable or Civic Events: These Signs shall not be constructed, posted or
erected earlier than thirty (30) days prior to the event, and must be removed within seven
(7) days following the event. Maximum size shall be sixty (60) square feet.
10. Art Forms. Artistic paintings, sculptures, and similar works of art shall be permitted,
provided that such works of art contain no commercial message, motif, or image; are not
designed for the purpose of attracting the attention of the general public by their size,
colors, or other characteristics; comply with the height, location, size and other
requirements of these Regulations; and are limited to no more than one (1) such structure
for each Building on the Lot.
11. Political Signs. Signs pertaining to public policy issues, including those for which an election
or other date-certain event is involved, subject to the following restrictions:
A. No political position Sign may be posted within Town controlled rights of way or
elsewhere without the permission of the owner.
B. No political position Sign, on a residential parcel, shall exceed four (4) feet by four (4)
feet (sixteen (16) square feet in area) or four (4) feet by eight (8) feet (thirty-two (32)
square feet) in area on non-residential or mixed use Parcels. Such Signs shall not be
illuminated.
12. Window Signs – Signs displayed within the window of a non-residential use establishment
announcing an event or advertising merchandise sold within such establishment. Such
Signs shall contain no flashing lights. Window Signs will also be interpreted to include a
display of merchandise within the window of the establishment in which it is sold.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
103
However, in no case shall such Window Sign(s) occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of
the total window surface in which they are placed.
13. Directional Signs – Signs for the control of traffic and parking on a property provided such
signs conform to standards established by the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
and contain no business name, logo, or advertisement.
14. Date/Time/Temperature Signs – Signs indicating the current time, date, and/or
temperature are permitted provided they meet all other provisions of these Regulations.
The area of such Signs shall not be included in the calculation of the maximum total Sign
area permitted on the Premises, provided that the time and/or temperature Signs include
no advertising material. The area of time and/or temperature Signs that contain no
advertising material shall not exceed three (3) square feet.
15. Town Park and Recreation Facilities Signs – These Regulations shall not apply to signs
displayed at parks, recreation, and athletic facilities owned by the Town of Colchester,
including but not limited to:
A. Scoreboards
B. Informational Signs
C. Warning Signs
D. Sponsorship Signs and Banners
E. Any Sign displayed at a Town owned facility shall be authorized by the designated
authority of the Town of Colchester prior to installation.
11.6 SIGN SIZE, HEIGHT AND LOCATION – The Commission may permit increases in the height and
size standards of Ground/Freestanding Signs and to the size and placement of Building-mounted
Signs within the Town Center, Future Growth, and Commercial Arterial Zones by a 3/4
affirmative vote of the membership. All such requests are Special Permits and shall be
submitted in the form of a Special Permit application with fee to the Commission, or as part of
the submission for new site development and shall include all the information required in
Section 11.10. In addition, the applicant is required to submit a narrative and other materials
that demonstrate that the need to increase the size or height of a Ground/Freestanding Sign or
the size and placement of a Building-mounted Sign, is due to a physical limitation relating
specifically to the visibility of the use as viewed from the closest Arterial and/or Collector Street. In
approving such Signs, the Commission shall state upon the record its reasons for approval and
may establish conditions and stipulations regarding existing and future Signs, including those
allowed as-of-right.
11.7 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS – No Non-Conforming Sign shall be structurally altered, relocated, or
established except in compliance with these Regulations. On properties where legal
Non-Conforming Signs exist, the Sign area requirements of the district must be met before
permits for additional signage will be issued.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
104
11.8 SIGNS WITHIN THE HISTORIC DISTRICT – Except for those Signs exempted by Section 11.5, no
Sign shall be erected, altered, redesigned, relocated, reconstructed or established within the
Town of Colchester Historic District until issued a Certificate of Appropriateness by the
Colchester Historic District Commission. Such approval is required prior to or in conjunction with
the issuance of a Zoning Permit and/or Commission approval of a Special Permit and or Site
Plan.
11.9 SIGNS WITHIN THE FUTURE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
1. All signage including directional and informational signage within each development of a
FD District property shall be of the same style, size and design as others within the same
property/development. Individual properties shall not diverge from that style and design
except that trademarks and other logos can be included, provided that the size and scale of
such is consistent with overall signage.
2. Signage within a property not placed on Buildings, not including the main entrance signage,
cannot exceed nine (9) square feet in size.
11.10 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SIGNS
1. Location – Unless noted otherwise in these Regulations, no Ground/Freestanding Sign
except for Political Signs shall be located within the right-of-way for any Street unless an
encroachment permit is obtained from the holder of the right-of-way. New signs shall be
located such that they do not block the sight lines of existing Signs on neighboring
properties. No Sign shall be erected in such a manner that will, or reasonably may, be
expected to interfere with, obstruct, confuse, or mislead traffic. No Sign or a portion
thereof shall be erected at the intersection of public Streets, within the triangular area
formed by a line connecting points twenty-five (25) feet from the intersecting Street
lines. No Ground/Freestanding Sign located within fifteen (15) feet of the edge of the
traveled portion of the Road shall be larger than nine (9) square feet.
2. Height – No Ground/Freestanding Sign shall exceed the height limits listed for the zone in
which it is to be located. Any Sign attached to the wall of a Building shall not exceed twenty
(20) feet in height, extend above the sill of the windows of a second story, project above
any point of the roof of a Building with a flat roof, or above the eave of a Building with a
pitched or mansard roof or roof parapets.
3. Obstruction – No Signs shall be permitted to physically obstruct any window, door, fire
escape, stairway, or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress or egress for any
Building or structure. The foregoing shall not be construed to prohibit the placement of
paper or similar temporary Signs in windows, which do not physically obstruct or
structurally alter such window.
4. Illumination – All Illuminated Signs (internal and external) shall be of low intensity and
lighted from indirect or internal sources so shielded that the source of the illumination
(bulb, etc.) is not visible from any adjacent Lot. A Sign shall be illuminated only with steady,
stationary, shielded light sources without causing Glare and shall not scroll, blink or flash or
change copy more than twice in a twelve (12) hour period. Externally Illuminated Signs
shall be down lighted. Neon tubes used as abstract, graphic, decorative, or architectural
Effective date: January 15, 2015
105
elements shall be considered to constitute an Illuminated Sign. Neon Window Signs shall be
limited to a maximum of four (4) per establishment. L.E.D. lighting is permitted, but shall be
of low intensity to prevent Glare. Strings of light bulbs are prohibited, except as part of a
holiday celebration, provided that such display does not interfere with public safety or
neighboring land uses. Internally Illuminated Signs shall have “dark” backgrounds (opaque
or colored) and “light” lettering (white or lighter colored than the background) so as to
minimize Glare or luminous overload. No Sign shall be illuminated unless the site on which
it is located is open for business. This prohibition does not apply if the illumination occurs
as a consequence of lighting provided for public safety purposes.
11.11 GROUND/FREESTANDING SIGN MAINTENANCE/LANDSCAPING – Every Ground/Freestanding
Sign greater than fifteen (15) square feet in area shall be provided with suitable, properly
maintained landscaping at its base.
1. Maintenance – All Signs shall be maintained in a clean and inoffensive condition, free and
clear of rubbish and weeds. Normal maintenance shall include painting, changing, adding,
or removing advertising or information on display surfaces and routine repairs necessary to
keep the Sign in a neat, clean, attractive and safe condition, and reflecting the current
occupancy of the site.
2. Obsolete Signs – Any Sign now or hereafter existing that no longer advertises a bona fide
business or product sold shall be removed by the owner, agent, or person having the
beneficial use of the Building or structure upon which the Sign may be found. Failure to
comply with such notification shall be deemed a violation of these Regulations.
3. Hazardous Signs – Any Sign which has been found to be hazardous to the public by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer or Building Official shall be repaired, replaced, or removed
after the owner is notified of such a finding. Failure to comply with such notification shall
be deemed a violation of these Regulations, and subject the violator to such penalties as
may be provided by law.
11.12 MEASUREMENT OF SIGNS AND HEIGHT
1. Sign measurement shall be based upon the entire area of the Sign, with a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the actual Sign surface.
2. Sign area shall be considered to include all lettering, wording and accompanying designs or
symbols, together with any background of color different from the natural color of finish
material of the Building.
3. For a Sign consisting of individual letters or symbols attached to a Building, wall or window,
the area shall be considered to be the plane defined by one continuous perimeter of the
smallest rectangle, triangle, circle or oval that encompasses all the letters, wording, design
or symbols together with any background different from the balance of the surface on
which it is located.
4. The area of supporting framework (for example, brackets, posts, etc.) shall not be included
in the Sign area provided such framework is incidental to the display and contains no
advertising material or informational material other than a Street name or number. In the
Effective date: January 15, 2015
106
case of Ground/Freestanding Signs where such supporting framework, when viewed from a
point directly in front of the Sign area, covers an area exceeding twenty-five (25%) of the
total Sign area supported, the supporting framework shall be included as part of the
allowable Sign area.
5. When a Sign has two (2) or more Sign Faces, the area of all the Sign Faces shall be included
in determining the area, except where two (2) Sign Faces are placed back to back and are at
no point more than two (2) feet from each other. In this case, the Sign area shall be taken
as the area of either Sign Face and, if the two (2) Sign Faces are unequal in area, the larger
side shall determine the area.
6. The height of a Sign shall be measured from the natural ground surface directly below the
Sign up to the highest point of the display area of the Sign or the supporting structure of
the Sign; if the top of the Sign and the top of the supporting structure are of unequal
height, the higher measurement shall determine the height.
11.13 BUILDING-MOUNTED SIGN STANDARDS:
1. Wall Signs and lettering on windows or door awnings may, with Commission approval, be
placed on walls not containing the main entrance provided their size conforms to the
requirements of these Regulations.
2. No portion of a Building-mounted Sign shall overhang any property line or be closer than
fourteen (14) feet above areas used for vehicle parking or access.
3. The business or other use must have exclusive use of the face of the exterior wall being
used for a Building-mounted Sign. The Building face shall be taken to mean the side where
the primary entrance and/or display windows for that tenant are located. For purposes of
these Sign Regulations each tenant will have Building face on one side of the Building only
unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
4. Directory Signs shall be mounted within ten (10) feet of the common access door.
5. Building walls used for Signs must be visible from a public right-of-way.
6. The area calculation shall only apply to length of the Building wall that provides the main
public access to the Building.
7. Where there are two (2) or more occupants occupying a portion of the first floor frontage
of a given structure, each occupant shall be entitled to a Wall Sign equivalent in size to that
portion of the frontage so occupied, minus any proportionate amount of ground signage
either existing or proposed.
8. Where multiple tenants share a common Wall Sign, the maximum Sign area shall be limited
as if there was a single occupant.
9. Each business use or tenant, in a mixed use or multi-tenant Building, which is unable to have any
Business Sign because existing uses are utilizing all allowable Sign area with legally erected Signs
shall be allowed a maximum of eight (8) square feet of Wall or Hanging Sign.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
107
11.14 STANDARDS FOR PROJECTING SIGNS OR CANOPY/AWNING SIGNS:
1. The bottom edge of a Projecting Sign shall be at least eight (8) feet above ground level
when located in an area where the public walks.
2. No Projecting Sign shall extend more than six (6) feet from the wall to which it is attached.
3. A Projecting Sign shall only be placed on the wall containing the main entry.
4. Gasoline station Canopies may also contain Wall Signage on the Canopy fascia in
accordance with the following:
A. A maximum of two (2) Canopy Signs may be located on the fascia with a total Sign
area not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the longest side of the Canopy
fascia. No one Canopy Sign may be larger than twenty (20) square feet.
B. Not more than three (3) types of permitted Signs regulated by this Section shall be
allowed on a Parcel.
11.15 GROUND/FREESTANDING SIGN STANDARDS
1. All portions of any Ground/Freestanding Sign shall be no closer than ten (10) feet from the
edge of the traveled portion of a Road or to any side property boundary.
2. Every Ground/Freestanding Sign greater than fifteen (15) square feet in area shall be
located within a suitable, properly maintained landscaped area, as required by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer and/or Commission.
3. If there is not sufficient space in the Yard to meet these requirements, the Sign shall be set
back at least one-quarter the distance from the property line to the limiting structure or
natural object.
4. For residential uses the height of any Freestanding Sign shall not exceed six (6) feet. For
non-residential uses or mixed uses, the height shall not exceed the height of the Building to
which it relates or a height of fifteen (15) feet, whichever is less, unless otherwise provided
in these Regulations.
5. If the Premises on which the Sign is to be located does not contain a principal Building, the
Sign shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet.
6. Except as otherwise provided herein, only one (1) Freestanding Sign shall be permitted on a
Lot for each Street from which the Lot has vehicular access, even if there is more than one
(1) Building or use on that Lot.
11.16 SIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR SMALL COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENTS (less than 10,000 square feet
of total Floor Area)
1. The total Sign area permitted for the site is equivalent to one (1) square foot of Sign area per each one
(1) lineal foot of Building wall containing the main entrance per tenant. Signs may be internally or
externally illuminated.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
108
2. No more than one Ground/Freestanding Sign subject to 11.16.1, not to exceed thirty-six (36)
square feet in area and fifteen (15) feet in height, is permitted per site. Signs may be
internally or externally illuminated.
11.17 SIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR MEDIUM COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENTS (greater than 10,000 square
feet and less than 40,000 square feet of total Floor Area)
1. Ground/Freestanding Sign: One (1) Ground/Freestanding site identification Sign per access
drive entrance on to a Collector or Arterial Road, not to exceed seventy-five (75) square feet
in area and twenty (20) feet in height is permitted, provided there is a minimum of five
hundred (500) feet between the centerlines of the access Driveways on the same Road. Signs
may be internally or externally illuminated.
2. Wall/Ground: Each business or tenant within a Building shall be entitled to one (1) square
foot of Sign area per each one (1) lineal foot of Building wall containing the main entrance
per tenant. Signs may be internally or externally illuminated. One additional Business
Identification Sign, not to exceed four (4) square feet in area, may be located at a secondary
entrance facing a parking lot.
3. The total allowable ground Sign area for the site shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150)
square feet.
11.18 SIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR LARGE COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENTS (greater than 40,000 square
feet of total Floor Area)
1. Ground/Freestanding Sign: One (1) Ground/Freestanding site Identification Sign per access
drive entrance on Collector or Arterial Roads, not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet in
area and twenty-five (25) feet in height, provided there is a minimum of five hundred (500)
feet between the centerlines of the access Driveways on the same Road. Signs may be
internally or externally illuminated. Total Ground/Free Standing site Identification Sign area
shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
2. Wall/Ground: Each business or tenant within a Building shall be entitled to one (1) square
foot of Sign area per each one (1) lineal foot of Building wall containing the main entrance
per tenant. Signs may be internally or externally illuminated. One additional Business
Identification Sign, not to exceed four (4) square feet in area, may be located at a secondary
entrance facing a parking lot.
3. The total allowable Ground Sign area for business use on the site shall not exceed two
hundred (200) square feet. See Section 11.18.1.
11.19 SIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL LAND USES IN THE FD ZONE
1. Ground/Freestanding Sign: One (1) Ground/Freestanding site Identification Sign per access
entrance drive on Collector or Arterial Roads, not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area and
ten (10) feet in height is permitted, provided there is a minimum of five hundred (500) feet
between the centerlines of the access Driveways on the same Road. Signs may be internally
or externally illuminated. Total area shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
109
2. Wall/Ground: Each business or tenant within a Building shall be entitled to one half (1/2)
square foot of Sign area per each one (1) lineal foot of Building wall containing the main
entrance per tenant. Signs may be internally or externally illuminated. One additional
Business Identification Sign, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area, may be located at a
secondary entrance facing a parking lot.
3. The total allowable ground Sign area for business/Commercial Use on the site shall not
exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
Table 11.1 Signage Allowance *
Classification Number Size (square feet) Maximum
Height
(feet)
Illumination
Residential 1 2 6 External
Home Occupation 1 3 10 External
Agriculture 1 16 15 External
Multi-family 1/unit 2 10 External
Future Development
Zone
1 site
identification
50 square feet or
½ square foot per linear foot/tenant
Maximum 100 square feet of
Ground Sign area
10
10
Internal
External
Commercial under
10,000 square feet of
total Floor Area
1 per tenant
1 square foot per linear foot/tenant
Maximum of 36 square feet of
Ground Sign area
15 Internal
External
Commercial under
10,000 square feet to
40,000 square feet of
total Floor Area
1 per tenant
75
1 square foot per linear foot/tenant
Maximum 150 square feet of
Ground Sign area
20
20
Internal
External
Commercial over 40,000
square feet of total Floor
Area
1 per tenant
100
1 square foot per linear foot/tenant
Maximum 200 square feet of
Ground Sign area
25
20
Internal
External
* Subject to other Requirements of the Sign Regulation
Effective date: January 15, 2015
110
11.20 AGRICULTURAL SIGNAGE
1. Permanent Agricultural Signage – One permanent Freestanding or attached Sign may be
permitted for a farm or farm store with the following conditions:
A. Such Sign shall not have an area larger than thirty-six (36) square feet per side total
with a maximum of two (2) sides.
B. Permanent Agricultural Signs shall not be illuminated.
C. Freestanding Signs must be located ten (10) feet back from the front property line, and
meet the underlying zone’s side Yard Setback.
2. Temporary Seasonal Signage
A. Maximum size of eighteen (18) square feet of on-site signage advertising the sale of
farm products is permitted, with a maximum of four (4) signs total.
B. All such Signs shall be set back ten (10) feet from the front property line.
C. Temporary Seasonal Signs shall not be illuminated.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
111
12.0 LIGHTING
12.1 PURPOSE – Outdoor Lighting is an integral component of our environment that, when
appropriately planned and installed, increases safety, enhances the Town’s nighttime character,
and helps provide safety. This Regulation is designed to reduce the problems created by poorly
planned and/or installed Outdoor Lighting. Specifically, its intent is to establish standards that
control the area that certain kinds of Outdoor Lighting fixtures can illuminate, and limit the total
illumination per Lot, using guidelines established by the Illuminating Engineering Society of
North America (IES) (see Appendix B).
The purpose of these Regulations is to establish specific standards for Outdoor Lighting and to:
1. Maximize the effectiveness of site lighting to enhance public safety and welfare,
2. Control the number, size, location, and intensity of Outdoor Lighting,
3. Protect residents, drivers and pedestrians from light sources that produce unnecessary Glare,
and
4. Promote site lighting that avoids unnecessary upward illumination and illumination of
adjacent properties, and reduces Artificial Sky Glow.
12.2 APPLICABILITY – Except as herein provided, these Regulations shall apply to all public or private
Outdoor Lighting fixtures or Illuminated Signs installed, modified or refurbished within the Town
of Colchester. These Regulations apply to all sites located within Village Center, Future
Development and Arterial Commercial Districts, and apply to Special Permit uses in RU and SU
Districts and specifically to Age Restricted Housing, multi-family, condominium residential
development and non-residential uses permitted in the RU and SU Districts. This applies to new
construction as well as site changes.
12.3 LIGHTING PLAN – All applications requiring a Class 2 Site Plan pursuant to Section 15.4 of the
Regulations must include the following:
1. The location, height and type of any Outdoor Lighting Luminaires, including
Building-mounted;
2. The Luminaire manufacturer’s specification data, including Lumen output and photometric
data showing cutoff angles;
3. The type of lamp: metal halide, compact fluorescent, high-pressure sodium, light emitting
diode (LED);
4. An Isodiagram showing the average lighting on the site; maximum and minimum lighting
levels on the site, expressed in Foot-Candles at ground level. This requirement may be
waived by seventy-five percent (75%) vote the Commission membership upon a written
request submitted at the time of application.
5. A statement and copies of appropriate IES Standards for the proposed use demonstrating
that proposed lighting levels are consistent with recommended IES Standards.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
112
12.4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS – All Outdoor Lighting and Illuminated Signs shall be designed,
located, installed and directed in such a manner as to prevent objectionable Light Trespass at
(and Glare across) the property lines and disabling Glare at any location on or off the property.
Lighting design levels shall be maintained at levels and patterns as recommended in the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IES) Lighting Design Handbook (Latest
edition).
1. All lighting for parking and pedestrian areas, including wall-mounted lighting, shall be Full
Cut-Off Type Fixtures.
2. Lighting for flagpoles, Ornamental Lighting (trees, sculptures, etc.), Buildings and aesthetics
shall be shielded to prevent direct Glare and/or Light Trespass and shall also be, as much as
possible, contained to the target area. All Building lighting for security or aesthetics shall be
Full Cut-Off or a Fully Shielded/recessed type, not allowing any upward distribution of light.
3. Adjacent to all residential and multi-family uses and on properties in the RU and SU
districts, no direct light source shall be visible at the property line at three (3) feet above
ground level.
4. Adjacent to business, commercial or industrial uses the light source shall not be visible at a
height greater than five (5) feet above ground level.
5. All Street lighting installed as part of residential developments shall be Full Cut-Off Type
Fixtures.
6. Canopy lights shall be recessed into the structure or be surface mounted Full Cut-Off Type
Fixtures.
7. Use of metal halide, compact fluorescent, light emitting diodes (LED) or high-pressure
sodium lamp types is strongly encouraged.
8. Any lighting provided along pedestrian walkways shall be provided by light bollards or
other low-level lighting standards with shielded light sources.
9. All non-essential lighting should be reduced or turned off after business hours, leaving only
the necessary lighting for site security. Motion or infrared sensor lighting is encouraged.
10. The Height of Luminaires, except streetlights in public right-of-ways, shall not exceed a
height of twenty-five (25) feet including the base, except for lighting for recreational
facilities. The following performance standards shall be met:
A. No Luminaire shall be closer than five (5) feet from any property line, and
B. No lighting plan shall shed more than one-quarter (.25) Foot-Candles beyond any
property line.
12.5 GREATER HEIGHT FOR SAFETY – An applicant may request the Commission permit greater than
thirty-five (35) foot high light poles after demonstrating that the height of the pole is necessary
to meet adequate illumination for safety and can meet the performance requirements of this
Effective date: January 15, 2015
113
Regulation in regards to Light Trespass and spillage with the additional pole height. A
seventy-five percent (75%) vote of the Commission membership is required to exceed the height
requirement.
12.6 CHANGES TO LIGHTING PLAN AFTER APPROVAL – No change to Outdoor Lighting fixtures, type
of light source used, or location of Luminaires may be made after the lighting plan has been
approved, until a change request application has been submitted to the Commission
demonstrating that the proposed changes meet the requirements of these Regulations.
12.7 EXEMPT LIGHTING – The following lighting types shall be exempt from these Regulations.
1. Temporary Lighting used by police, fire, or emergency services,
2. Temporary Lighting needed for nighttime Road construction projects,
3. Lighting required and regulated by federal or state regulatory agencies,
4. Traditional seasonal or special event lighting,
5. Interior lighting,
6. Lighting in swimming pools and other water features governed by Article 680 of the
National Electrical Code,
7. Code required exit signs,
8. Code required lighting for stairs and ramps, and
9. Customary exterior illumination of a One-Family or Two-Family Dwelling and Driveway.
12.8 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS – Illumination recommendations set by the IES (see Appendix C)
shall be observed and not exceeded. All area lighting shall be Full Cut-Off.
12.9 LIGHTING IN HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY ZONE – In the HPOZ zone, lighting plans shall
use period type fixtures consistent with the Historic District and existing lighting concepts
adopted for the Historic District. Lighting in the HPOZ shall comply with the following standards:
1. Such lights shall be selected and arranged to minimize Glare and Light Trespass;
2. Where Full Cut-Off versions of these fixtures are available they shall be used;
3. Lighting shall be limited to twelve (12) foot height period type poles unless waived by the
Commission for reasons relating to public safety. Maximum pole height shall be eighteen
(18) feet. A seventy-five percent (75%) vote of the Commission membership is required to
approve the waiver.
12.10 LIGHTING FOR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES – Where outdoor Recreational Facilities (public or
private) are to be illuminated, lighting fixtures shall be specified, mounted and aimed so that
their beams fall within the primary playing area and immediate surroundings, and so that no
direct illumination is directed off the site. The following criteria shall be met:
Effective date: January 15, 2015
114
1. All fixtures shall be fully shielded and shall not exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate the lighting meets the guidelines for recreational lighting
established by the IES.
3. Luminaires are to be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from property lines of a
Lot where a residence is the principal use.
4. For sports facilities, Luminaires higher than thirty-five (35) feet may be permitted by
Special Permit after the Commission considers the following:
A. Effects on the existing uses in the area;
B. Preservation of surrounding property values and the character of the neighborhood;
C. Impacts on the capacity of the present and proposed utilities, Streets, drainage
systems, sidewalks, and other elements of the infrastructure;
D. Suitability of the land for the proposed use and any environmental impacts created by
the proposal;
E. Consistency with the goals and objectives of the Town Plan of Conservation and
Development and/or Recreation Master Plan; and
F. The provision of lighting at levels in accordance with IES recommendations.
12.11 LIGHTING OF PUBLIC ROADS AND PUBLIC PARKING AREAS – Luminaires used for public Roads
and public parking area lighting shall be installed in accordance with Section 13a-110a of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. Luminaires may be installed at a maximum height of
twenty-five (25) feet and may be positioned at that height up to the edge of any bordering
property.
12.12 NON-CONFORMING LIGHTING – Non-conforming lighting shall be brought into a conforming or
more nearly conforming condition as soon as practical in accordance with the following:
1. All Luminaires legally in place prior to the date of this Regulation may remain, but once any
non-conforming Luminaire is intentionally re-located or removed for purposes other than
routine maintenance or repair, it shall be deemed permanently removed and shall be
replaced only in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations.
2. Luminaires that direct light toward Streets or parking lots that cause disability Glare to
motorists, cyclists or pedestrians shall be either shielded or redirected within thirty (30)
days of notification by the Town, so that the Luminaires do not cause a potential hazard to
motorists, cyclists or pedestrians.
3. Non-conforming lighting shall be brought into conformance with the Regulations whenever
a new or modified/revised Site Plan is required.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
115
12.13 PROHIBITED LIGHTING – The following lighting types shall be prohibited:
1. Floodlighting
2. Searchlights
3. Bare bulbs
4. The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity light when projected above the
horizontal
5. Lights producing varying intensities and/or changing colors,
6. Any type of lighting directed upward at such an angle that neither Buildings, trees, shrubs
nor site surfaces are lighted, and
7. Flashing and blinking lights except as permitted in Section 11.10.4.
12.14 LIGHTING OF OUTDOOR SIGNS – Illumination of any outdoor Sign shall comply with the
standards set forth in Section 11.10.4 of these Regulations.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
116
13.0 NON-CONFORMITIES
13.1 Within the districts established by these Regulations, there are Lots, Buildings, and uses which
do not conform to the use and dimensional requirements of these Regulations and which are
declared to be incompatible with the permitted uses in said districts. Such uses, to the extent
that they were lawfully permitted and existing prior to the adoption date of these Regulations
and otherwise meet the requirements of Connecticut law for Non-Conforming Lots, Buildings
and uses, shall be considered existing Non-Conforming Uses. No existing Non-Conforming Use
shall be enlarged, expanded or changed unless in compliance with these Regulations. In certain
cases existing Non-Conforming Uses must receive various permit approvals just as conforming
uses might. While lawful, existing non-conformities are permitted to continue, it is the purpose
of this Section that such continuance not be encouraged.
13.2 NON-CONFORMING USES
1. A Non-Conforming Use is a use of any Lot or Building lawfully in existence prior to the
effective date of these Regulations or any amendment thereto and otherwise meeting the
requirements of Connecticut law for Non-Conforming Uses, which violates the use
requirements of the district in which the Lot or Building is located.
2. No Non-Conforming Use may be extended, expanded or changed, except to a conforming
use.
3. No Non-Conforming Use may, if once changed to a conforming use, be changed back into a
non-conforming one.
13.3 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS – A Non-Conforming Building is a Building lawfully in existence
prior to the effective date of these Regulations or any amendments thereto which violates the
Setback, Yard, Lot Coverage, height, Floor Area, or any other dimensional requirements of the
district in which it is located.
1. After the effective date of these Regulations, no Zoning Permit will be issued for
construction of a Non-Conforming Building.
2. Nothing in these Regulations shall prohibit the alteration or expansion of a
Non-Conforming Building lawfully existing prior to the effective date of these Regulations
or any amendments thereto, provided the alteration or expansion does not further violate
the dimensional requirements of the district in which the Building is located. Vertical and
lateral extensions of existing building lines shall be permitted so long as the applicable
Setback is not further reduced.
3. Nothing in these Regulations shall prohibit the maintenance, strengthening or restoring to
a safe condition, any Non-Conforming Building or part thereof, deemed to be unsafe by the
Building Official.
4. A Non-Conforming Use or Building, which is damaged or destroyed by fire or other casualty,
beyond the control of the owner to any extent, may be restored or resumed provided:
Effective date: January 15, 2015
117
A. NOTICE – Written notice of intention to resume or restore is filed with the Zoning
Enforcement Officer within six (6) months after such damage or destruction; and
B. COMPLETION – Such resumption or restoration must be made and completed within
two (2) years after such damage or destruction; and
C. LIMITATION – Such resumption of use shall be confined to the use in existence
immediately prior to such damage or destruction and such restoration shall not
increase the non-conformity of any non-conforming characteristic in existence
immediately prior to such damage or destruction and, if all or any portion of the
Premises are located within the Historic District, such restoration shall be substantially
similar in appearance, including architectural design, arrangements, texture and color,
to the improvement so damaged or destroyed.
13.4 NON-CONFORMING LOTS – A Non-Conforming Lot is a Lot legally existing on the effective date
of these Regulations or any applicable amendment thereto, but which fails by reason of such
adoption or amendment to conform to the present Regulations for any prescribed Lot
requirement.
1. Except as otherwise provided herein, and subject to CGS Section 8-26a(b)(2), as amended,
subsequent to the effective date of these Regulations, no Zoning Permit will be issued or
initial construction on any vacant Non-Conforming Lot, unless such Lot was approved as
part of an unexpired subdivision or re-subdivision plan, or as the result of a Zoning
Enforcement Officer approved Lot Division. Any construction on a vacant Lot shown on such
approved and unexpired subdivision or re-subdivision plan or Lot Division plan shall not be
required to conform to a change in the Regulations or boundaries of the zoning district
adopted after the approval of the subdivision, re-subdivision or Lot Division. For purposes
of this Regulation, a Lot shall be deemed vacant until the date when a Building Permit is
issued with respect thereto and a foundation has been completed in accordance with such
Building Permit, but shall not be deemed vacant if any Buildings were built or placed on
such Lot but subsequently demolished.
A. With respect to any Non-Conforming Lot that was approved as part of an unexpired
subdivision or re-subdivision plan, or as a result of a valid Zoning Enforcement Officer
approved Lot Division, and upon which any improvements have been built, any
construction shall be required to conform to a change in the applicable Regulations
adopted subsequent to said Lot becoming an improved Lot. For purposes of this
Regulation, no Lot shall be deemed improved until a Building Permit has been issued
with respect thereto and a foundation has been completed in accordance with such
Building Permit, and, subject to Section 13.3.4, such Lot will continue to be deemed
improved even if any structures thereon are subsequently demolished.
B. Merger. If two or more contiguous Lots or combinations of Lots in single ownership
that are not part of an unexpired subdivision, re-subdivision or valid Zoning
Enforcement Officer approved Lot Division, and if all or part of such Lots do not meet
the requirements for Lot Frontage, Width, or area as established by these Regulations,
or any amendment thereto, the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided
Lot for the purposes of these Regulations. No portion of said undivided Lot shall be
Effective date: January 15, 2015
118
used or sold as a Building Lot which does not meet the Lot requirements established
within these Regulations; nor shall any division of a Lot or boundary adjustment be
permitted which leaves any remaining Lot non-conforming to the Lot requirements
established within these Regulations.
13.5 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS – See Section 11.7.
13.6 NON-CONFORMING MOBILE HOME PARKS – No new Mobile Home park is permitted in the
Town of Colchester.
1. Expansion of Existing Mobile Home Parks – Expansion of existing Mobile Home parks may
be permitted in accordance with the following:
A. Expansion of twenty-five percent (25%) of the total number of existing and occupied
Lots as of the effective date of these Regulations is permitted.
B. Either public water and/or sewer facilities must be provided. Each site must be
serviced by individual water and sewer facilities.
C. Minimum Lot size must be 20,000 square feet per each Mobile Home site.
D. Must comply with all Public Health Codes.
E. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the Mobile Home park shall be
handled or managed so as not to create health hazards, rodent harborage, insect
breeding areas, accident hazards and/or area pollution.
F. No Additions to Mobile Homes shall be permitted unless a minimum of ten (10) feet
from adjacent Mobile Home is provided or a minimum of ten (10) feet from individual
Lot line is provided.
G. Additional Lots or Mobile Home sites may be added after approval by the Commission
of a Site Plan showing these Lots, in accordance with Section 15 of these Regulations.
Said Site Plan shall show the location of all proposed Mobile Home sites, Mobile Home
parking area, Driveways, sewer and water supplies, etc. The proposed roadway system
must comply with the Road requirements noted in the Subdivision Regulations, with
the exception that such Road may be twenty-four (24) feet in width and curbing is not
required.
H. Any variation from the approved Site Plan for the location of the Mobile Home on
each site shall be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer on a Class 2 Site Plan
submitted in accordance with Section 15.4 of these Regulations
Effective date: January 15, 2015
119
14.0 LAND USE PROCESS
14.1 There are fees assessed for most development applications reviewed by Planning Department
personnel. These charges will change from time to time. A listing of charges for review of a
development application is on file in the Zoning Office and is available on the Town’s web site.
Different activities may require different fees and all fees must be paid prior to commencement
of review.
1. In addition to an application fee, the Commission may impose a project review fee on those
applications which require, in the judgment of the Commission, review by outside
consultants due to the size, scale or complexity of a proposed project, the project’s
potential impacts, or because the Town lacks the necessary expertise to perform the review
work related to the application. The project review fee for such application requiring a
Zoning Permit shall be paid by the Applicant based upon estimates provided by the project
review consultant retained by the Commission.
14.2 ZONING PERMIT
1. Application for a Zoning Permit for all uses shall be made on a form provided for that
purpose and obtainable in the office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. No Building Permit
shall be issued nor any use established or changed in any area of the Town of Colchester
without a Zoning Permit either from the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer
issued in conformance with the provisions of these Regulations. Uses of land or Buildings
not clearly permitted in the various districts are prohibited.
2. A certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer upon
completion of the development in accordance with the Zoning Permit.
3. After the effective date of these Regulations the Zoning Enforcement Officer will issue,
upon the request of the owner or the occupant and the submission of documentation
satisfactory to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, a certificate of zoning compliance for any
legal Non-Conforming Building existing on the effective date of these Regulations or any
amendment thereto. All Zoning Permits shall expire one (1) year after the date of issue or
grant unless Substantial Improvement has been started within the year and has been
diligently prosecuted to completion. Other than for certificates of zoning compliance for
Non-Conforming Buildings as discussed above, a certificate of zoning compliance shall
remain valid only so long as the Building, the use thereof, or the use of the land remains in
full conformity with these Regulations or any amendment thereto.
4. Nothing in any amended Regulations shall require any change in the plans, construction or
designated use of any Building on which actual construction was begun under a Zoning
Permit validly issued prior to the effective date of said amended Regulations. Actual
construction includes any of the conditions described below:
A. Excavation of a basement, cellar or foundation.
B. Actual placing of construction materials in their permanent position fastened in a
permanent manner.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
120
C. Substantial beginning of demolition and removal of an existing Building preparatory to
rebuilding: provided, however, in each circumstance that the actual construction shall
be diligently carried on until the completion of the Building involved.
5. When a new Lot is formed by the division of an existing Lot, a Zoning Permit shall not be
issued for the erection or moving of a Building onto the new Lot thus created nor shall a
certificate of zoning compliance be issued for the new Building (new or moved) unless the
size, Yards, and uses on both Lots comply with these Regulations.
14.3 LAND DISTURBANCE
A preliminary application must be made for any proposed Land Disturbance that effects greater
than 10,000 square feet. The Zoning Enforcement Officer will make a determination whether a
Zoning Permit is necessary based on the application and will issue a formal decision in writing. A
permit may not be necessary but a preliminary application must be made. If a permit is found to
be necessary, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall meet with the applicant to discuss options
which may include the submission of a permit application before final development approval is
granted. In general there is to be no Land Disturbance before review and approval is final. The
decision on whether to require a Zoning Permit will be made in consideration of the natural
condition once the land is cleared.
14.4 INSPECTION AND ACCESS
In order to make meaningful comments on an application and its submission and processing, it
may be necessary to inspect the subject property to observe the physical features. With the
submission of an application for a Zoning Permit or for a certificate of zoning compliance, or any
application to the Commission, the applicant must grant permission to access the subject
property by Planning Staff and or Commission members for inspection and review. Failure to
allow access may be grounds for denying the application.
14.5 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW APPLICATION
Administrative review involves development activities that occur by right in full compliance with
the district in which they are located. The Zoning Enforcement Officer is the primary official
charged with determining whether the applicant’s submission is consistent with various
development Regulations and standards. Upon initial application, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer will decide on whether the application process requires administrative approval or must
be decided by the Commission. If the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines that the proposed
activities are subject to administrative review:
1. An application shall be made using an application form provided by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer. The applicant is encouraged to schedule a predevelopment meeting with Town staff
to determine application requirements, including discussion of the review process and
expected submitted materials.
2. Once submitted, the application will be reviewed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and
other staff professionals for completeness, accuracy and consistency with site and area
development standards. It is the responsibility of the applicant to address all of the
applicable requirements/standards described in the various sections of these Regulations.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
121
3. The Zoning Enforcement Officer will forward the application to the various staff
professionals for review and a review will be conducted based on these Regulations, the
Plan of Conservation and Development (POCD) and other standards and/or official
materials. If the applicant meets the criteria/standards as determined by the Planning
Department staff, a Zoning Permit will be granted. A permit granted under this Section
might contain a list of conditions. If the application is not deemed to meet
criteria/standards as determined by the Planning Department staff then no permit or
approval will be given and the applicant will be given a list of items that must be addressed
in order for the application to gain approval.
14.6 PROCESS – COMMISSION REVIEWED APPLICATION
1. If it is determined that a project or other proposed activity requires review and approval
from the Commission to secure a permit, it is recommended that the applicant meet with
Planning Department staff in a pre-application setting to establish the parameters and
process for the application.
2. It is also recommended that the applicant meet with the Commission on a pre-application
basis. The applicant can describe the plans and gather feedback from the Commission prior
to expending sums for preparation of materials.
3. A public hearing is required for all applications for amendments to the Zoning Map and/or
Regulations, re-subdivisions and subdivisions proposing ten (10) or more Lots, all
applications proposing to create or extend a public Road, and any Special Permit.
4. All applications that require review by the Commission (CAs) shall include required
background documentation which shall be provided to the Planning Department. CAs shall
include all required information and documentation as established by the Planning
Department staff and the Regulations. Requirements for submission may be amended as
conditions change and it is the responsibility of the applicant to meet with the Zoning
Enforcement Officer to receive the most current application details.
5. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall review the initial application submittal for application
submission completeness and shall determine whether all items needed for review and
decision have been provided. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall complete this
sufficiency review in ten (10) business days or less and shall provide a written response
regarding sufficiency to the applicant and shall note any items required but not provided.
6. Once deemed sufficient, the various Planning Department staff shall substantively review
the submitted application and forward their comments to both the applicant and the
Commission. The applicant can provide additional information to respond to a stated staff
comment or may offer additional materials to reflect a change made to address a comment
or may provide any additional information that the applicant deems relevant.
7. Applicant may supplement any application and provide additional materials until a public
hearing on the application has been closed or, in the case of an application without hearing,
a final decision has been made. Materials must be provided in the proper form and number
and must be timely submitted in order to be considered by the Commission.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
122
8. For each application, all staff comments and other application materials shall be forwarded
to the Commission for review. Review will focus on the impacts of the proposal including
traffic, noise, community character, Open Space, environmental quality, (if applicable)
Building design, landscaping, and other factors identified by the staff and/or Commission.
Requirements and guidelines for Site Plans are found in Section 15.
14.7 APPLICATION PROCEDURES – SPECIAL PERMIT
1. Applications for Special Permit shall be made to the Zoning Enforcement Officer in
accordance with Section 14.6. In addition, a Special Permit application must contain:
A. Copy of the assessor’s map showing all properties and zones within 500 feet of the
subject property.
B. A list of the names and addresses of the owners of all properties within 500 feet of the
subject property, all as shown on the latest assessor’s records of the Town of
Colchester. The applicant shall notify, by certificate of mailing or by certified mail, the
owners of all properties within 500 feet of the subject property with a copy of the
staff prepared legal advertisement at least five (5) days prior to the start of a public
hearing. The applicant shall present proof of such notification to the Commission prior
to the day of the public hearing.
2. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for a Special Permit and
shall provide notice and abide by the time limits and by other requirements set forth in
CGS § 8-7d, as amended.
3. Filing – No Special Permit shall become effective until a copy thereof, certified by the
chairman or secretary of the Commission, containing a description of the property to which
it relates and specifying the nature of the Special Permit, including a reference to the
Section of these Regulations under which the Special Permit is granted, and stating the
name of the owner or owners of record, is recorded in the land records of the Town of
Colchester. The applicant must file the Special Permit Notice of Decision within ninety (90)
days of the date of the published approval. The Town Clerk shall index the same in the
grantor’s index under the name of the record owner(s) and record owner(s) shall pay for
the recording.
14.8 GENERAL EVALUATION CRITERIA – In evaluating an application for a Special Permit, the
Commission shall determine that the following general conditions are met:
1. The proposed use is compatible with the Plan of Conservation and Development.
2. The proposed use will not create or substantially aggravate vehicular and pedestrian traffic
safety problems.
3. The proposed use will not have substantial degrading effects on the value of the
surrounding property.
4. The proposed use will not substantially affect environmental quality in an adverse manner.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
123
5. The ability of surrounding property to develop consistent with the prevailing zoning
classification will not be substantially impaired.
6. Public utilities and storm drainage features are adequate to serve the proposed use.
7. The kind, size, location and height of Buildings and other structures, the nature and extent
of landscaping, and the location of Driveways, parking and loading areas will not
substantially hinder or discourage the appropriate use of adjoining property.
14.9 SPECIFIC EVALUATION CRITERIA – In evaluating an application for a Special Permit the
Commission shall also determine whether the application meets the criteria relating to the
specific Special Permit use proposed.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
124
15.0 SITE PLAN REVIEW
15.1 SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS
Most zoning applications include requirements for submission and approval of a Site Plan. No application
is complete without compliance with the submission requirements and standards applicable to the type
of Site Plan required. The type of Site Plan required depends of the complexity and/or nature of the
application (see Site Plan Requirement Chart). It is intended that a Site Plan for each proposed land use
be prepared with due consideration for:
1. The purpose and intent of these Regulations, and protection of the public health, safety,
welfare, property values and the environment;
2. Coordination with public infrastructure and impact including vehicular and pedestrian
access, drainage, water supply, sewage disposal, lighting, landscaping, Wetlands,
Watercourses, Buildings and other features that support the neighborhood including the
provision of Streets; limitations on the location and number of access Driveways and
provisions for traffic management;
3. The Setback, location and bulk of Buildings and structures; the design of Buildings and
structures relating to Streets or highways, or from other Lots;
4. The preservation of natural landform features, Wetlands and water resources;
5. The provision, location and character of landscaping;
6. The location, character and intensity of outside illumination; and
7. The extent, character, purpose and location of Signs.
15.2 TRAFFIC STUDY REQUIREMENT
1. The Commission may require the applicant to submit an analysis of traffic caused by the
proposed project and the actions taken to mitigate any identified impacts. If required, the
following information shall be submitted:
A. Site Plan showing existing land use on-site and on both sides of the site including
across any Streets and intersecting Roads
B. Proposed land use, including size of proposed structures
C. Proposed parking area, curb cuts, and sidewalks
D. Total trip generation and peak hour volumes, including breakdown of anticipated trips
generated by each land use if a Mixed Use Development
E. Generated vehicular trips may be discounted in recognition of other reasonable and
available modes of transportation (transit, pedestrian, bicycle, etc.)
Effective date: January 15, 2015
125
F. Trip distribution at curb cuts and intersection turning movements
G. Direction of approach and projected traffic volumes via area Streets
H. Comparison with existing traffic volume from the project site (or volume generated by
the previous land use on-site).
2. If the Commission finds that that the proposed development will result in a degradation of
traffic conditions, it may recommend one or more of the following actions:
A. Reduce the size, scale, scope or Density of the proposed project
B. Dedicate a right-of-way for Street improvements
C. Construct new Streets
D. Design ingress or egress to the project to reduce traffic conflicts
E. Alter the use and type of the development to reduce peak-hour traffic
F. Integrate design components (e.g., pedestrian and bicycle paths and/or connection to
a proposed rail trail or transit improvements) to reduce vehicular generation
G. Implement traffic demand management strategies (e.g., carpool/vanpool programs,
flex time, telecommuting, etc.) to reduce vehicular trip generation.
3. Where a proposal includes Road configurations as a primary design component
contributing to the character of the development, the Commission, upon the written
recommendation of the Town Engineer, may accept an alternative Road design where the
proposed development can be shown to meet acceptable engineering practice, embraces
low impact or context sensitive flexible design concepts, and does not compromise
pedestrian or vehicular safety or emergency access. The Commission can approve a
alternative design with a ¾ vote of the membership.
15.3 A SITE PLAN CLASS 1 shall be required for Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings and Accessory
Buildings. Site Plans Class 1 are also required for any proposed change in use, Addition or
Accessory Building to any other principal Building, provided that the use is subordinate and
customarily incidental to the principal use and provided that:
1. Such Building does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the Floor Area of the existing
Buildings or fifteen hundred (1500) square feet, whichever is less.
2. Such Building conforms to all requirements of the district in which it is located.
3. No site improvements are intended, required or will result from such Building, including but
not limited to the development of additional parking spaces.
4. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may refer any Site Plan Class 1 application to the
Commission for review and determination of the proper application process.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
126
5. Copies of the Site Plan Class 1 shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer at the
required scale on sheet size prescribed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and shall show
the following:
A. Boundaries, dimensions and area of the property.
B. Locations of all existing and proposed Buildings and uses, including but not limited to
Driveways, parking areas, and abutting Streets, and locations of light and telephone
poles or other utility appurtenances.
C. Dimensions of all Yards, as required by these Regulations
D. Location and description of water supply and sewage disposal facilities.
E. Square footage of proposed structure and number of stories.
F. Wetland and/or Floodplain limits.
15.4 SITE PLANS CLASS 2 shall be required for all land development applications that are not eligible
for Class I approval. All Class 2 Site Plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer, land
surveyor or architect licensed in the State of Connecticut. Such Site Plans shall be submitted to
the Zoning Enforcement Officer for the Commission’s review and be at a scale of at least one (1)
inch equals forty (40) feet and shall be on sheets either 24 inches by 36 inches or 17 inches by 11
inches and shall detail the following. If an item is not applicable, a note on the Site Plan must be
included that describes the rationale for its non-inclusion.
1. A written statement, signed by the applicant, and by the owner if different from the
applicant, describing the following in sufficient detail to determine compliance with these
Regulations and to establish the plan and program basis for review of the Site Plan
submission. The nature and extent of the proposed use or occupancy must be described.
2. Site Plan drawn on one (1) or more sheets 24 inches by 36 inches and at a scale not to
exceed 1” = 40’ including a general location map sheet at 1” = 1000’ scale map showing the
site; north arrow; existing and proposed Roads, Watercourses, Aquifer Protection Zone,
flood zones, zone district lines and Town Overlay Zone lines within 2000 feet of the site
must be provided on the Site Plan, Index Map. If the proposed site does not fit on one
sheet, a 1” = 200’ scale map of the site showing match marks and sheet number references
must be provided on the Site Plan. Other map scales may be approved by Commission.
Additional details and specifications shall be drawn at the same sheet size and scale or such
other size and scale as may be appropriate in accordance with good design practice. The
Site Plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer, architect, land surveyor and/or
landscape architect licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut and as required by law.
3. Provision for water supply, sewage disposal, solid and liquid waste disposal, drainage and
other utilities.
4. The number of persons to occupy or visit the Premises on a daily basis, including the
parking and loading requirements for the use. Shared Parking requirements may be
submitted.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
127
5. An estimate of the amount and type of vehicular traffic to be generated on a daily basis and
at peak hours. A traffic study providing the information set forth in Regulation Section 15.2
and prepared by a licensed professional traffic engineer may be required.
6. The equipment or other methods to be established to comply with the development
standards included in the Regulations.
7. Disclosure of any toxic or other hazardous materials to be used, stored or processed in
connection with the proposed use or occupancy as identified in the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency list of priority pollutants in accordance with Section 3001 of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (42 USC § 6901, et seq. and 40 CFR Part 261) and
Connecticut regulations for Hazardous Wastes.
8. A list of abbreviations and/or symbols used on the map(s) and plans along with their
definitions.
9. A list of all dimensional requirements for the particular zone(s) along with the proposed
dimensions.
10. A list of parking requirements for the proposed use along with proposed parking criteria.
11. Address of property and name of owner of record, including assessor’s map/block
information and Lot number.
12. Property boundaries, dimensions and area.
13. Wetland and Floodplain limits.
14. Locations of all existing and proposed Buildings and uses, including but not limited to Signs,
sidewalks, Driveways, parking and loading areas, and abutting Streets, poles, hydrants and
other utility appurtenances; areas to be used for exterior storage and the type of screening
to be provided.
15. Dimensions of all Yards, categorized as required by these Regulations.
16. Locations and descriptions of water supply and sewage disposal facilities.
17. Contour lines at intervals determined by the Commission to be sufficient to clearly show
natural drainage. If Grading is proposed, the existing and proposed contours shall be
shown. Elevations are to be taken by field survey and referenced to an on-site benchmark
tied to NGVD.
18. Existing and proposed drainage structures on the property and those off the property that
may be affected by the proposed Building or use. Wherever natural drainage is to be
disrupted or extensive Grading is to be done, the applicant shall submit an Erosion and
Sedimentation control plan. Such plan shall be prepared in accordance with standards
prescribed in the U.S. Soil Conservation Service’s Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook,
shall be consistent with the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Erosion and Sediment Control,
Effective date: January 15, 2015
128
as amended, and shall show the measures to be taken during and after construction to
minimize Erosion and sedimentation.
19. Proposed landscaping, including the type, size and location of proposed plantings.
20. All parking areas and Driveways shall be paved with a two (2) inch layer of bituminous
concrete over a suitable gravel base, and provided with adequate storm drainage to ensure
protection from surface runoff over adjacent properties and Roads. The paving
requirement may be modified as accepted by the Town Engineer.
21. Driveways shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide (curb to curb) for one-way traffic and
twenty-four (24) feet wide for two-way traffic. A clear sight distance from an exit Driveway
along a local Street shall be at least 350 feet and 500 feet along a Collector or Arterial
Street, as measured from a point ten (10) feet from the travel way of the Street at an
elevation of three and one-half (3 ½) feet.
22. A–2 Survey certified by a land surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut.
23. If approval from any state, local, or federal departments, offices or agencies is required,
such approval shall be obtained prior to submission of the Site Plan. Approval from
Connecticut Department of Transportation may be preliminary.
24. List of the required and proposed Building Setback lines. Lot width, Lot area and parking
spaces. Structures should be in substantial design conformity with the surrounding area.
Architectural elevations and photographs of the surrounding properties must be submitted
for review and approval.
25. Any additional information required by the Commission.
26. All sidewalks/public trails shall be constructed in accordance with provisions of Sections 7.7
and 6.3.12 respectively of the Subdivision Regulations. Concrete sidewalks shall be required
in areas where expected pedestrian and/or vehicle traffic generated by high residential
Densities, commercial, industrial or institutional activities, as well as access to public
schools make sidewalks necessary for public safety. Where the above conditions are
determined not to exist, the Commission may decide not to require sidewalks in those
areas not planned to be serviced by sidewalks or in circumstances where sidewalks would
not carry appreciable pedestrian traffic.
15.5 SITE PLAN APPROVAL BY THE COMMISSION
The Commission shall use the standards contained in these Regulations for the review of Site Plans
submitted to the Commission for review and action. The construction of any improvements shown on
any such Site Plan shall be in accordance with Form 815, as amended, “Standard Specifications for Road,
Bridges and Incidental Construction”, Town of Colchester Zoning Regulations, Town of Colchester
Subdivision Regulations and Connecticut Landscape Contractors Association’s “Standard Specifications
for Planting Trees, Shrubs. Vines, etc.”
A decision on an application and Site Plan submitted to the Commission shall be rendered within
sixty-five (65) days after receipt of such application and Site Plan or as per CGS Section 8-7d, as
Effective date: January 15, 2015
129
amended. The Commission shall approve, modify and approve, or deny such Site Plan. Reasons shall be
set forth when a Site Plan is denied or modified and approved. Any modifications shall be required to
conform with these Regulations. A copy of any decision shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant
who submitted such plan within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.
15.6 FILING OF APPROVED CLASS 2 SITE PLAN
The applicant shall submit three (3) signed and sealed paper prints, a signed and sealed mylar print(s)
and a digital copy of the final approved Site Plan for endorsement by the chairman or secretary of the
Commission. The endorsed mylar prints are to be filed by the applicant at the applicants expense in the
Town’s Land Records Office within ninety (90) days of the expiration of the appeal period.
15.7 POSTING OF BOND FOR CLASS 2 SITE PLANS
Prior to the issuance of any permits pursuant to said Site Plan the applicant shall file a bond with the
Commission in a form satisfactory to the Board of Selectman and/or the Town Engineer and in an
amount acceptable to the Town Engineer for all Erosion and Sediment control measures shown on the
approved Site Plan.
1. Prior to issuing a certificate of zoning compliance, all site improvements must be
completed. However, in the event that weather conditions are such that it would prohibit
the completion of such improvements, a bond for 110% of the cost of the remaining
improvements or $5,000.00, whichever is greater, may be posted and a certificate of
substantial completion may be issued. Such bond must be in a form acceptable to Town
Counsel and in an amount approved by the Town Engineer. No certificate of substantial
completion will be issued unless a minimum of the binder layer of the pavement for any
proposed parking area or Driveway and all sidewalks and public safety measures are
installed as required on the approved plan. The foregoing bonding requirements do not
apply to municipal projects.
15.8 SIGN PERMIT APPLICATION AND PROCESS FOR APPROVAL – Except for those Signs enumerated
in Section 11 as exempt; no Sign shall be erected, altered, redesigned, relocated, reconstructed or
established within the Town of Colchester until a permit relating to the proposed signs has been issued
by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or approved by the Commission. For any use of land or Buildings
requiring a Special Permit or Class 2 Site Plan pursuant to these Regulations, all required information
relating to the proposed Signs shall be submitted as part of the application for such Special Permit
and/or Site Plan and shall be approved, modified and approved, or disapproved exclusively by the
Commission, as part of its action on the Special Permit and/or Site Plan. Where no application for a
Special Permit and/or Site Plan is required, the application for a Sign permit shall be filed with the Zoning
Enforcement Officer for action. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may refer any Sign application to the
Commission for review and action.
1. Every application for a Sign permit shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
A. Name, address and telephone number of the Sign owner, property owner and of the
Sign installer.
B. All applications for a Sign permit shall be signed by the owner of the Lot on which the
Sign is to be located or in lieu of the signature of the owner, the application is to be
Effective date: January 15, 2015
130
accompanied with a letter from the property owner granting permission to make the
application for the proposed Sign(s).
C. A Site Plan depicting the location and size of the existing and proposed Sign(s) on the
subject site and its relation to adjacent Buildings and structures, and any associated
landscaping, lighting sources, structural components, and the like.
D. An illustration of the proposed Sign(s), including dimensions, text/content, materials,
color, and structural support.
E. A narrative description of the Sign(s), including its purpose, method of illumination,
materials (if not evident from the illustration), the Section of the Regulations under
which the such Sign is permitted, a description of the total area, location, type, size
and other information for all other Signs on the Lot, and any other information not
contained in the Site Plan or illustration.
F. Such other information as the Commission or Zoning Enforcement Officer may require
for determining compliance with these Regulations.
G. An application fee per the schedule of fees.
2. Permit exceptions – The following operations shall not be considered as creating a new Sign
and, therefore, shall not require Sign permit approval.
A. Change in Text/Content – A change in the text or content of an application for a Sign,
with no other change in size, location, color, illumination, or any other aspect of the
Sign, shall not require the issuance of a new Sign permit.
B. Maintenance – Painting, repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance and
repair of a Sign, or a Sign structure, unless a structural change is made.
3. Action – The Zoning Enforcement Officer may only approve or deny an application for a Sign
permit. The Commission may approve, modify and approve, or deny an application for a
Sign permit. Such modifications may include, but are not limited to, requirements for
certain dimensions, illumination, lettering size, location, height, landscaping, and other
characteristics or dimensions of the Sign(s). In determining such requirements, the
Commission shall consider the character of the area where such Sign is located, the use
with which it is associated, the types, sizes, dimensions, and the like of surrounding Signs
(both existing and proposed), and the general compatibility of the Sign(s) with Parcels
located in the general area.
4. Criteria for Review.
A. That the proposed Sign(s) conforms to all applicable requirements of these
Regulations.
B. That the proposed Sign(s) is appropriate in size, location, illumination, and character
for the Building or use with which it is associated, and the area in which it is proposed;
in harmony with the historic, rural character of the Town of Colchester; and will not
Effective date: January 15, 2015
131
adversely impact property values or public safety.
C. In addition to the minimum and maximum dimensions contained in these Regulations,
the Commission may also impose more restrictive requirements where required to
protect the public health, safety, welfare, property values, the natural environment,
the character of historic areas, or the other purposes of these Regulations. The
situations where such additional restriction may be imposed include, but are not
limited to, the following: areas of historic importance; non-conforming non-residential
uses in the SU or RU District; Signs in locations where sight line hazards may be
created or maintained; developments adjacent to significant wildlife habitats;
developments adjacent to uses requiring special protection from light and other
characteristics of Signs, such as hospitals and rest homes, schools, churches, and other
public or community Buildings.
Site Plan Requirement Chart
Administrative
Application
Commission
Application
Site Plan
Required
Accessory Use *
Temporary uses *
Lot Line Adjustment * *
Code Amendment *
Lot Split * *
Map Amendment * *
Land Disturbance not
Excavation or EMPAR * *
Site Plan 1/Amendment *
Site Plan II/Amendment * *
Special Permit * *
Subdivision/Re-subdivision * *
Change of Use Depends on Use
CGS Section 8-24 *
Effective date: January 15, 2015
132
Use Definition Site Plan Required
Accessory Use
Customary uses, clearly incidental and subordinate to a
principal Building or land use and which is located on the same
Lot with the principal Building or land use. Accessory Uses are
permitted as long as the use does not otherwise undercut the
plain intent of the Regulations.
Class 1 Site Plan
Temporary Uses
Any use of a structure or land for a limited period of time
where the site is not to be permanently altered by Grading or
construction of accessory facilities. Events include: art shows;
rodeos; religious revivals; tent camps; outdoor festivals and
concerts.
Class 1 Site Plan
Lot Split Division of one (1) existing Lot into two (2). Class 1 Site Plan
Code Amendment
Any proposed changes in the content contained in the
Regulations. This is independent of specific property rezoning
requests, which are considered map amendments
Lot Line Adjustment Any change to the established Lot dimension of two (2) or
more adjacent Lots that does not create a new Lot. Class 1 Site Plan
Map Amendment Redesignation of a specific property or properties on the
Town’s Zoning Map Class 1 Site Plan
Land Clearing
The cutting and grubbing of trees and stumps or Grading on
any site, Parcel or Lot over 10,000 square feet; provided,
however, it does not include mowing, trimming or pruning, so
as to maintain vegetation in a healthy, viable condition.
Class 1 Site Plan
Site Plan
1/Amendment
A basic Site Plan is required for Single-Family Dwellings and
Accessory Buildings thereto, for any change in use, Addition or
Accessory Building to any other principal Building, provided
that the use is subordinate and customarily incidental to the
principal use . Class I Site Plans are limited to Buildings that do
not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the Floor Area of the
existing Buildings or 1,500 square feet, whichever is less.
Class 1 Site Plan
Site Plan
II/Amendment
Shall be required for all Buildings and uses other than those
described above (Class 1 Site Plans). Class 2 Site Plan
Special Permit
Land uses, which, because of various characteristics, cannot be
distinctly classified or regulated in a particular zone without
giving careful consideration in each case to the impact of such
use upon neighboring uses, public safety, the surrounding area
and the public need for such use in a particular location.
Class 2 Site Plan
Effective date: January 15, 2015
133
Use Definition Site Plan Required
Subdivision/
Re-subdivision See CGS Section 8-25 and Subdivision Regulations Class 2 Site Plan
CGS Section 8-24 Requirements for approval of municipal improvements as per
CGS Section 8-24
Effective date: January 15, 2015
134
16.0 SUBDIVISION
16.1 Any person intending to subdivide land in the Town of Colchester must obtain approval from the
Commission and shall submit a complete application to the Planning Department. The subdivision
application shall be submitted in the form established by the Planning Department. Requirements for
submission of a subdivision application may be amended by Planning Department staff as conditions
change and it is the responsibility of the applicant to meet with staff to receive the most current
application details. Application requirements and fee schedules are available at the Planning
Department office.
16.2 Staff shall review the application and shall render a decision on the sufficiency of the application
within ten (10) days of receipt of the application. This review will not involve review of specific substantive
items but instead will focus on whether each of the required items has been provided. Applicant may
amend items already provided or develop additional items to satisfy the staff’s sufficiency comments.
Applicant is encouraged to submit all materials at one time.
16.3 Staff will review the application based on the standards established in the Subdivision
Regulations and this Land Development Regulation. Staff will develop written comments on the
substantive merits and compliance of the application with the Subdivision Regulations and application
requirements. Staff comments will be forwarded to the applicant. The applicant may amend submitted
material or develop new materials in response to staff comments.
16.4 The Commission shall hold a public hearing regarding any subdivision proposal that proposes
ten (10) or more Lots, or the creation or extension of a new Road. No plan for re-subdivision shall be
approved by the Commission without a public hearing. Such public hearing shall conform to CGS Section
8-7d requirements, as amended, and commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the
application. The public hearing must be completed within thirty-five(35) days after such hearing
commences. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period, provided the total of
all extensions shall not exceed sixty-five (65) days.
16.5 Whenever a subdivision of land is planned, the area of which will abut or include land in another
municipality, the Commission shall, before approving the plan, submit it to the regional planning agency
or agencies of the region or regions within which the other municipality is located. The regional planning
agency or agencies receiving such referral shall, within thirty (30) days, report to the Commission and to
the applicant its findings on the inter-municipal aspects of the proposed subdivision. If such report of
the regional planning agency is not submitted within thirty (30) days after the referral from the
Commission, it shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove of the proposed subdivision.
The regional planning agency’s report shall be purely advisory.
16.6 The Commission shall vote to approve, modify and approve, or disapprove any subdivision.
application and maps and plans submitted therewith within sixty-five (65) days after completion of the
public hearing thereon or, if no public hearing is held, within sixty-five (65) days after the official receipt
thereof. Notice of decision of the Commission shall be published in a newspaper having substantial
circulation in the municipality and sent by certified mail to the applicant by it secretary or agent, under
his signature within fifteen (15) days after such decision has been rendered. The failure of the
Commission to act thereon shall be considered as an approval, and a certificate to that effect shall be
issued by the Commission on demand. The grounds for the action of the Commission shall be stated in
the records of the Commission.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
135
16.7 Prior to commencement of work on the approved subdivision plan, the Commission shall accept
from the applicant a bond in a form acceptable to the Town and approved by the Town Engineer for the
estimated cost of installing the Erosion and Sediment control measures shown on the approved plans.
No Lots may be sold or transferred in a subdivision until all public improvements and utilities are
satisfactorily completed except that the Commission may accept a bond in an amount approved by the
Town Engineer and acceptable to the Town for the all public improvements yet to be completed plus ten
percent (10%).
16.8 If the Commission votes to approve a subdivision plan or modify and approve a subdivision plan,
its approval with the date thereof, together with a statement of any modifications applying to such
approval, shall be endorsed and signed by the chairman or secretary of the Commission in the space
provided for such purpose on 1) fixed line photographic polyester film, 2) original ink drawing on
polyester film or linen or, 3) wash–off photographic polyester film copy of the plan provided by the
applicant or other applicable medium. In addition to the above, the applicant shall provide three (3)
paper copies of the final approved subdivision plan and a digital copy in Auto Cad drawing file format or
other format acceptable to the Town.
16.9 The endorsed copy of the subdivision plan shall be filed by the applicant in the office of the
Town Clerk within ninety (90) days of the expiration of the appeal period, or in the case of an appeal
within ninety (90) days of the termination of such appeal by dismissal, withdrawal, or judgment in favor
of the applicant. Any plan not so filed or recorded within the prescribed time period shall become null
and void; except that the Commission may extend the time for such filing by two (2) additional periods
of ninety (90) days and the plan shall remain valid until the expirations of such extended time.
16.10 Any person, firm or corporation making any subdivision of land shall complete all work in
connection with such subdivision within five (5) years after the approval of the plan for such subdivision
unless extension, as granted by Connecticut General Statutes, occurs.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
136
17.0 ADMINISTRATIVE AND APPEALS PROCEDURE
17.1 PENALTIES
In accordance with CGS Section 8-12 or any amendments thereto, the owner or agent of any Building or
Premises where a violation of any provision of these Regulations has been committed or exists, or the
lessee or tenant of an entire Building or Premises where such violation has been committed or exists, or
the agent, architect, builder, contractor or other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such
violation or who maintains any Building or Premises in which such violation exists, shall be subject to
enforcement action which may include fines and/or legal expenses.
17.2 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals consisting of five (5) regular members and three (3) alternates,
which shall act in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
1. Powers and Duties – The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and
duties, all of which shall be exercised, subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, so
as to be in harmony with the purpose and intent of these Regulations and the Plan of
Conservation and Development of the Town of Colchester and in accordance with the
promotion of the health, safety, welfare and maintenance of property values in the Town
of Colchester:
A. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement or decision made by any official charged with the enforcement and
administration of these Regulations.
B. To hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass by the specific terms
of the Regulations.
C. To determine and vary the application of these Regulations, in harmony with their
general purpose and intent and with due consideration for conserving the public
health, safety, convenience, welfare, and property values solely with respect to a
Parcel of land where, owing to conditions especially affecting such Parcel but not
generally affecting the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of these
Regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship, so that
substantial justice will be done and the public safety and welfare secured.
17.3 VARIANCES
1. Variances may be granted only if in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
these Regulations and with due consideration for conserving the public health, safety,
convenience, welfare and property values, when solely with respect to a Parcel of land
and owing to conditions especially affecting such Parcel, but not affecting generally the
district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of such bylaws, ordinances or
Regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship, so that substantial
justice will be done and the public safety and welfare secured. Before granting a
variance on the basis of exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship, there must be a
Effective date: January 15, 2015
137
written finding by the Board that the following conditions exist:
A. That the difficulties or hardship are peculiar to the property in question, in contrast
with those of other properties in the same district.
B. That the hardship was not the result of the applicant’s own action.
C. That the hardship was not merely financial or pecuniary.
D. That the hardship relates to the real property in question.
2. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have no authority to permit by variance any use in any
district in which such use is not otherwise allowed under the provisions of these
Regulations.
17.4 APPEALS – Any person claiming to be aggrieved by any order, requirement or decision made by
any official charged with the enforcement and administration of these Regulations may appeal to the
Zoning Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be filed within fifteen (15) days from the issuance of notice
of said order, requirement or decision. Said Board shall hear and decide the appeal and may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify any order, requirement or decision appealed from, and shall
have all the power of the authority from whose decisions such appeal is taken, but only in so far as to
enforce these Regulations, where an error has occurred.
17.5 APPLICATIONS
1. Applications and appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be submitted, in writing, by
the owner(s) of the property, or by party(ies) who have a demonstrable interest as a result
of the decision, on a form designated by the Zoning Board of Appeals together with any
required fees. If the applicant is not the owner of the property, a notarized letter of
consent from the property owner must accompany the application. A copy of each
application shall be provided to the Commission for informational use only.
2. Each application or appeal shall clearly set forth the action desired by the Zoning Board of
Appeals, shall state the circumstances creating the need for such action, and where
applicable, shall reasonably illustrate with map(s) and other drawing(s), the location and
nature of the appeal or application. In the case of a requested variance, the application
shall demonstrate how the enforcement of the specific Regulation, ordinance or bylaw
sought to be varied, creates a hardship upon the use of such Parcel of land. Every appeal or
application shall refer to the specific provision of these Regulations involved.
3. All applications for variances shall be accompanied by a list of the names and addresses of
the owners of all property within 150 feet of the boundaries of the property addressed in
the variance, all as shown on the latest tax assessment records of the Town of Colchester,
together with a map showing the property addressed in the variance and showing all other
properties on said list.
4. The date of receipt of an application for a variance or an appeal from a zoning enforcement
order, shall be the earlier of: the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board
Effective date: January 15, 2015
138
immediately following the day the application was submitted to the Board or its agent; or
thirty-five (35) days after such submission.
17.6 NOTICE TO ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS AND TO ADJOINING MUNICIPALITIES OF
APPLICATION OR REQUEST
1. In addition to legal notices otherwise required, the applicant shall mail the text of the
public hearing notice of any variance application, not less than seven (7) days prior to the
hearing to the owner(s) of each property within 150 feet of the boundaries of the property
addressed in the variance application, all as shown on the latest tax assessment records of
the Town of Colchester. Evidence of such mailing shall be submitted prior to the public
hearing in the form of United States Post Office certificate of mailing or certified mail
return receipt requested.
2. The Board shall notify the Clerk of any adjoining municipality by certified mail, return
receipt requested, of any pending application or request regarding any site in which:
A. Any portion of the site affected by the Board’s decision is within 500 feet of the
boundary of the adjoining municipality.
B. A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use Streets
within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site.
C. A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will
flow through or significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the
adjoining municipality.
D. Water runoff from the improved site will impact Streets or other municipal or private
property within the adjoining municipality.
3. Such notice shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the date of receipt of the application or
request.
17.7 HEARINGS AND DECISIONS
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing on all matters wherein a formal petition,
application or appeal has been submitted in accordance with CGS Section 8-7, as amended. Such hearing
shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of such petition, application, request or appeal
and shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences. All decisions on such
matters shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing. The petitioner or
applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified in this subsection, provided
the total of all extensions shall not exceed sixty-five (65) days. Notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be published in accordance with CGS Section 8-7d, as amended, in a newspaper having a
substantial circulation in such municipality.
1. Decisions rendered by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be in writing and said Board shall
state upon its record the reasons for decision.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
139
2. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Zoning Board of Appeals is necessary to
reverse any order, requirement or decision of the officer charged with the enforcement of
these Regulations; to decide in favor of an applicant any matter upon which the Board is
required to pass under any bylaw, ordinance, rule or Regulation; or to vary the application
of these Regulations. In the case of any tie vote, the application shall be considered denied.
3. Notice of the decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be published in a newspaper
with a substantial circulation in the Town of Colchester and a copy of each decision shall be
mailed by certified mail to the applicant, within fifteen (15) days of the date the decision
was rendered.
17.8 FILING – VOIDING OF DECISION
A copy of any variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be filed in the Office of the Town
Clerk within thirty (30) days of the published approval and each variance shall be recorded in the land
records in accordance with the requirements of CGS Section 8-3d, as amended. Failure to file a granted
variance within the time frame referenced above shall render the decision null and void.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
140
18.0 AMENDMENTS – CHANGE OF USE
18.1 These Regulations and the boundaries of zoning districts may be amended by the Commission,
after public notice and hearing, in accordance with CGS Section 8-3, as amended.
1. These Regulations or the Zoning Map may be changed only by a majority vote of all the
members of the Commission, except as otherwise provided in this subsection. If a protest
against a proposed Zoning Map change is filed at or before a hearing with the Commission
signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of the Lots included in
such proposed change or of the Lots within 500 feet in all directions of the property
included in the proposed change, such change shall not be adopted except by a vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the Commission.
2. Any petition for a change of these Regulations or the boundary of a zoning district shall be
on a form prescribed for such purpose and obtainable from the Zoning Enforcement
Officer.
18.2 PROCEDURES FOR CHANGE OF ZONE
1. Submit application, required number of plans, and fee to the Planning Department.
2. The plan showing the property and the proposed change must be certified as a minimum to
Class D map standard.
3. The applicant shall submit a copy of the assessor’s map showing all properties and zones
within 500 feet of the proposed change and shall provide a list of the property owners
within the proposed zone change and within 500 feet of the boundaries of the proposed
zone change per the latest Parcel assessment record of the Town of Colchester.
4. All property owners within the area of the proposed zone change and within 500 feet of
the area of the proposed zone change shall be notified with a copy of the staff prepared
Legal Notice by the applicant by certificate of mailing or certified mail. The applicant shall
bring proof of such notification to the Commission prior to the public hearing.
5. The provisions of Section 18.2.4 shall not apply in the case of amendments to the Town’s
Zoning Regulations and/or Zoning Map initiated by the Commission.
18.3 CHANGE OF USE
1. Any change of use shall be in compliance with these Regulations. The change in use of a
principal activity shall be subject to review by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and/or
Commission and by the Colchester Sewer and Water Commission and allowed only if found
to be in compliance with the intent of these Regulations.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
141
19.0 SEPARABILITY
19.1 Should any section or provision of these Regulations be declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of these
Regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
20.0 DEFINITIONS
20.1 Adoption and Purpose
For the purpose of these Regulations, certain words and terms herein shall be defined as follows:
1. When not inconsistent with the context:
A. Words in the present tense include the future and vice-versa,
B. Words in the singular include the plural and vice-versa, and
C. Words used in the masculine include feminine and neuter and vice-versa.
2. The word “shall” is mandatory and is not discretionary.
3. The word “may” is permissive.
4. The words “zone”, “zoning district”, and “district” have the same meaning.
5. The phrase “used for” shall include the phrases “arranged for”, “intended for”, “maintained
for”, and “occupied for”.
6. The word “person” also includes a partnership, association, trust, corporation, limited
liability company, limited liability partnership, or other legal entity.
7. The phrase “these Regulations” shall refer to the entire Zoning Regulations.
8. The word “Building” includes the word “structure”.
20.2 Meaning of Words – The meaning of words and terms not specifically defined in these
Regulations shall be determined by the Commission after reference to:
1. The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions,
2. The Connecticut General Statutes,
3. Black’s Law Dictionary,
4. A common dictionary, or
Effective date: January 15, 2015
142
5. Such other materials as the Commission may deem appropriate.
20.3 A2 OR A-2 CLASSIFICATION – Shall be as defined in the current STANDARDS FOR SURVEYS AND
MAPS IN THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT, as approved by the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors,
Inc.
20.4 DEFINITIONS
ACCESSORY APARTMENT: A Dwelling Unit which is clearly secondary to the principal use as a
Single-Family Dwelling, which meets the criteria in these Regulations and is intended to provide
affordable housing for young individuals or older persons who no longer can, or wish to, maintain a
traditional Dwelling. Access is provided through the primary Dwelling.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A detached subordinate Building, the use of which is incidental to and customary
in connection with the principal Building or use, and which is located on the same Lot with such principal
Building or use. An Accessory Building shall be one which is not attached to the principal Building by any
covered porch, breezeway, or other roofed structure.
ACCESSORY USE: A customary use, clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal Building or land
use and which is located on the same Lot with the principal Building or land use.
ADDITION: A structure added to the original structure at some time after the completion of the original
that includes an extension or increase in the Floor Area or height of a Building or structure.
ADULT BOOK STORE: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in
books, films, video cassettes, downloaded material, compact discs, or magazines , and other periodicals
that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas, or an establishment with a segment or section
devoted to the same.
ADULT AMUSEMENT MACHINE: Includes any Amusement Machine that is regularly used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas for observation by patrons.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT: Any exhibition of any motion pictures, videotapes, live performances, display
or dance of any type, which has a significant or substantial portion of such performance any actual or
simulated performance of Specified Sexual Activities or exhibition and viewing of Specified Anatomical
Areas.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed Building regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or related to Specified
Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS: Shall include, without limitation, Adult Book Store, Adult Motion Picture
Theater, and commercial establishments containing one or more Adult Amusement Machines. In
addition, Adult Oriented Business means any Premises to which the public, patrons or members are
invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios,
compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the Premises for the purpose of viewing
Adult Entertainment when such establishment is operated or maintained for profit, direct or indirect.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
143
AFFORDABLE HOUSING: Residential or Mixed Use Development that meets the affordability standards
of these Regulations.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING RESTRICTION: Deed restriction, covenant, zoning Regulation, Site Plan approval
condition, subdivision approval condition, or affordability plan constituting an obligation with respect to
the restrictions and standards identified in Colchester’s Affordable Housing Regulations.
AGE RESTRICTED HOUSING: Housing, including Independent Living Developments and Congregate
Housing Developments, designed and used for persons fifty-five (55) years of age and older in
accordance with the Federal Fair Housing Act.
AGRICULTURE: As defined in CGS Section 1-1 (q).
AMUSEMENT MACHINE: Includes any machine which upon the payment of a charge or upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, may be operated by the public for use as a game,
entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score or whether or not electronically
operated.
ANTENNA: A device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to,
whip Antennas, panel Antennas and dish Antennas.
AREA OF FLOOD HAZARD: Land in the Floodplain within a community subject to one percent (1%) or
greater chance of flooding in any given year.
ARTERIAL ROAD/ ARTERIAL STREET: Provides for movement across and between towns and cities
serving predominately “through traffic” with minimum direct service to abutting land uses. This
category includes mainly Roads under the jurisdiction of the State of Connecticut Department of
Transportation.
ARTIFICIAL SKY GLOW: The brightening of the night sky attributable to manmade sources of light.
AQUIFER: A geological unit capable of yielding usable amounts of water to wells.
BASE FLOOD: Flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BED AND BREAKFAST: An Accessory Use of an owner-occupied Single-Family Dwelling that provides
short term accommodation of transients in not more than six (6) guest rooms, and may include the
provision of on-site meals solely to overnight patrons.
BUFFER AREA: Open Spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or any combination thereof used to
physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise,
lights, or other intrusions.
BUILDABLE AREA: Land area on a Parcel exclusive of:
Wetlands or Watercourses,
100-year Floodplains,
Effective date: January 15, 2015
144
Slopes in excess of twenty-five percent (25%),
Rock or exposed ledge outcrops > = 200 square feet, or
Pre-existing conservation, access or utility easements.
BUILDABLE SQUARE: Dimensional requirement of Buildable Area on a Lot.
BUILDING: Structure of walls, post, columns or other devices which may or may not support a roof, and
which is used for the housing, shelter, enclosure or support of persons, animals or property of any kind.
Any other structure more than six (6) feet high shall be considered as a Building, including a solid fence
or wall, but excluding an electric transmission line or an electric light, telephone or telegraph pole, radio
or TV Antenna, highway bridge or flagpole.
BUILDING COVERAGE: The ratio of the area covered by Buildings or other structures on the Lot to the
Buildable Area expressed as a percent.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average finished grade within ten (10) feet of the
walls to the highest roof line.
BUILDING PERMIT: Permit required for the construction or alteration of any structure, as required by
CGS Section 29-263, as amended.
BULKY WASTE: Land clearing debris and waste resulting from demolition activities other than Clean Fill.
BUSINESS OFFICE: Location principally used as an office for a business or company which supplies a
service or product to be delivered to or used for a site other than the Business Office. Types of uses
include real estate, insurance, travel agents, and contractors’ offices. The following are not Business
Offices: Retail Sales, Professional Offices, medical testing laboratories and Personal Service
establishments.
BUSINESS SERVICES: Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to business establishments
on a fee or contract basis, such as advertising and mailing; building maintenance; employment services;
management and consulting services; protective services; equipment rental and leasing; commercial
research; development and testing; photo finishing; and personal supply services.
CANOPY: A roof-like covering over an area, in or under which a lighting fixture may be mounted.
CERTIFICATION: A signed, written approval by the Commission and/or its Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan Designated Agent that a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan complies with the
applicable requirements of these Regulations.
CLASS D CLASSIFICATION: Shall be as defined in the current STANDARDS FOR SURVEYS AND MAPS IN
THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT, as approved by the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors, Inc.
CLASS 1 SITE PLANS: Shall be the Site Plan submitted for all Single-Family Dwellings, Two-Family
Dwellings and Accessory Buildings thereto, and any other change in use, Additions or Accessory
Buildings to any other principal Building provided that the use is subordinate and customarily incidental
to the principal use and in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.3 of these Regulations.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
145
CLASS 2 SITE PLANS: Shall be the Site Plan submitted for all other uses not noted under Class 1 Site Plans
and in accordance with Section 15.4 of these Regulations.
CLEAN FILL: Means (1) natural Soil (2) rock, brick, ceramics, concrete, and asphalt paving fragments
which are virtually inert and pose neither a pollution threat to Ground Water or surface waters, nor a fire
hazard and (3) polluted Soil as defined in subdivision 50 of subsection (a) of Section 22a-133k-1 of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies which Soil has been treated to reduce the concentration of
pollutants to levels which do not exceed the applicable pollutant mobility criteria and direct exposure
criteria established in Sections 22a-133k-1 through 22a-133k–3 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies, as amended, and the Appendices thereto and in cases in which Soil is reused in accordance
with Section 22a-133k-2(h)(3).
CLEARING: The large scale, indiscriminate removal of trees, shrubs and undergrowth with the intention
of preparing real property for non-agricultural development purposes.
CLUB: An association of persons which is the owner or occupant of an establishment operated solely for
a recreational, social, fraternal, religious, or political purpose and not operated for profit or gain and
usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings,
and a constitution and bylaws.
COLLECTOR ROAD/COLLECTOR STREET: Provides for movement between neighborhoods. Collector
Roads/Collector Streets serve limited amounts of “through traffic” and service a high proportion of local
traffic requiring direct access to abutting properties. Collector Roads/Collector Streets provide the link
between local neighborhood streets and larger Arterial Roads.
CO–LOCATION: Locating wireless telecommunication facilities of more than one Licensed Wireless
Telecommunication Service Provider on a single Wireless Telecommunication Site.
COMMERCIAL USE: Activity involving the sale of goods or services carried out for profit.
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Colchester.
COMMISSION REVIEWED APPLICATIONS (“CA”): Zoning applications that may be considered for
approval without public hearings if they do not include uses requiring a Special Permit, propose less than
ten (10) Lots and do not create or extend public Roads. Commission Reviewed Applications (CA) are for
more complex land uses/Buildings than administrative applications and require policy decisions made by
the Commission.
CONGREGATE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT: A housing development complex designed and used
exclusively for disabled persons or persons age 55 and over, wherein independent living is assisted by
the provision of congregate meals, housekeeping, and Personal Services.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE: Waste building materials and packaging resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on houses, commercial Buildings and other
structures, excluding asbestos; Clean Fill, as defined in regulations adopted under CGS Section 22a-209;
or Solid Waste containing greater than de minimis quantities, as determined by the Commissioner of
DEEP, of (A) radioactive material regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-148, (B) Hazardous Waste as
defined in CGS Section 22a-115, and (C) liquid and semi liquid materials, including but not limited to,
adhesives, paints, coatings, sealants, preservatives, strippers, cleaning agents, oils and tars.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
146
CONSTRUCTION SERVICES: Establishments primarily engaged in providing services for Building
construction, utility installation, and landscaping installation and maintenance.
COUNTY SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT: The New London County Soil and Water
Conservation District established under CGS Section 22a-315(a).
COUNTRY CLUB: Land area and Buildings containing golf courses, Recreational Facilities, a club house,
and Accessory Uses, open only to members and their guests.
CUL DE SAC: A closed Street with a single common ingress and egress, which commonly ends with a
bulbous turnaround area.
DECIDUOUS: A plant with foliage that loses or sheds it leaves annually.
DENSITY: The number of Dwelling Units or Lots permitted on a Parcel of land expressed as units or Lots
per acre or per square foot of Buildable Area.
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not
limited to, Buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, Filling, Grading, paving, Excavation, drilling
operations, or permanent storage of materials. Because of its frequent use, this word is not capitalized
in the Regulations.
DESIGNATED AGENT: An agent of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (dbh): The outside bark diameter of a tree measured at 4.5 feet above
existing grade on the uphill side of the tree.
DISTURBED AREA: Area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to
accelerated Erosion.
DRIPLINE: An area encircling the base of a tree which is delineated by a vertical line extending from the
outer limit of a tree’s branch tips down to the ground.
DRIVEWAY: A private Road providing access to a Street or highway.
DUPLEX: Residential Building containing two (2) Dwelling Units.
DWELLING UNIT OR “DWELLING”: Any Building or portion thereof, which is designed and used
exclusively for residential purposes. Such Dwelling shall contain living, sleeping, and sanitary facilities.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A Building which is designed and used exclusively for residential
purposes and which contains separate living, sleeping and sanitary facilities for occupancy by one (1)
Family.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING: A Building which is designed and used exclusively for residential purposes
and contains two (2) independent Dwelling Units, each with independent outside access by common
hallway, stairs and/or outside door and separate facilities that are used, or intended to be used, for
living, sleeping and cooking and sanitary facilities.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
147
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: A Building which is designed and used exclusively for residential
purposes and which contains separate living, sleeping, housekeeping and sanitary facilities for three
(3) or more Families.
EARTH MATERIALS: Earth Materials shall include only the following: topsoil; manure; compost; leaves;
brush; sand; gravel; stone; rock; used concrete and brick; used bituminous paving materials (asphalt),
and Clean Fill. Construction and Demolition Waste is not included within the definition of Earth
Materials.
EARTH MATERIALS PROCESSING AND RECYCLING (“EMPAR”): Materials processing and aggregate
recycling. Recycling, for the purpose of Section 8.8.6 of these Regulations, shall mean the processing of
Earth Materials including the processing of Solid Waste, as defined by CGS Section 22a-207(7), to reclaim
material therefrom.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: A Connecticut licensed facility or school providing educational services for
which a degree/certification is awarded.
EROSION: Means the detachment and movement of Soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or
gravity.
EVERGREEN: A plant with foliage that is retained and remains green throughout the year.
EXCAVATION: The removal from any land Premises within the Town of Colchester of earth, sand, gravel,
clay, quarry stone or other natural earth products in excess of 100 cubic yards in a single calendar year,
for commercial purposes, except as surplus material resulting from a bona fide construction.
FACADE: The exterior wall of a Building.
FAMILY: One (1) or more related persons or a group of not more than six (6) persons who need not be
so related plus domestic servants, who are living together as a single housekeeping unit maintaining a
common household. A roomer or boarder shall not be considered a member of a Family for the purpose
of this definition.
FALL ZONE: The area or location within which a Tower, Antenna or any other material (such as ice)
would drop, slide or settle in the event the Tower or Antenna is blown from its support structure,
collapses, or otherwise is dislodged from its foundation or mounting.
FILLING: The depositing of Earth Materials on a site to change the grades. The Filling of land with 500
cubic yards or more of Earth Materials requires the submission of a Class 2 Site Plan to the Commission
for review and approval.
FLAG LOT: A Parcel of land having access to, but less than the required frontage on a Town or State Road
and having typically a major portion of its area located to the rear of the abutting Lots fronting on the
Town or State Road.
FLOODPLAIN: Areas of special flood hazard in Colchester as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in their most recent Flood Insurance Study or as otherwise mapped on their most
recent Floodway Flood Boundary and Floodway Map.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
148
FLOODPLAIN, 100-YEAR: Floodplain areas which fall below the 100-year flood frequency profile as
determined by the most recent information from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other Watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the Base Flood without cumulatively increasing the Water Surface
Elevation more than one (1) foot.
FLOOR AREA: Any enclosed portion of a structure or Building with a finished ceiling to floor height of not
less than seven (7) feet, excluding any area above the first floor stairway, and excluding cellar,
basement, porch, garage and utility areas and areas in an Accessory Building.
FOOT–CANDLE: A unit of measure of luminance; a unit of luminance on a surface that is everywhere one
(1) foot from a uniform point source of light of one (1) candle and equal to one (1) Lumen per square
foot.
FOUNDATION FOOTING: The supporting base or groundwork of a structure that supports and
distributes the weight of the foundation.
FULL CUT–OFF TYPE FIXTURE: A Luminaire or Light Fixture that by design of the housing, does not allow
any light dispersion or direct Glare to shine above a ninety (90) degree horizontal plane from the base.
FULLY SHIELDED LIGHTS: Fully shielded Luminaire Light Fixtures, which allow control of the Glare in any
direction.
GLARE: Light that causes visual discomfort or disability, or a loss of visual performance and in extreme
cases causes momentary blindness.
GRADING: Any stripping, cutting, Filling, or stockpiling of earth or land, including the land in its cut or
filled condition, to create new grades. The Grading of 20,000 square feet or more of land requires the
submission of a Class 2 Site Plan to the Commission for review and approval.
GROSS RESIDENTIAL DENSITY: Number of Dwelling Units divided by the total site area, usually
expressed in units/acre.
GROUND WATER: Water below the land surface, often between saturated Soil and rock.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any virgin or waste material, which, because of its physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics, may pose an actual or potential hazard to human health or the environment when
improperly disposed of, treated, stored, transported, or otherwise managed, in accordance with Section
3001 of the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 USC 6901, et seq.) and 40 CFR
Part 261.
HEAT ISLAND EFFECT: An area of elevated temperatures in developed environments caused by
structural and pavement heat fluxes and pollutant emissions.
HEIGHT OF LUMINAIRES: The Height of Luminaires is the vertical distance from the ground directly
below the centerline of the Luminaire to the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the Luminaire.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
149
HOME OCCUPATION: An Accessory Use of a portion of a Single-Family Dwelling Unit or accessory
structure to a Single-Family Dwelling Unit for business purposes by the resident occupants when clearly
incidental and customary to the residential use of the Dwelling Unit and subject to Regulation
requirements. A Home Occupation is a component of the residential use and shall not be deemed to be
a separate non-residential use.
HORTICULTURE: The cultivation of a garden, orchard, or nursery products.
HOTEL: A facility offering transient daily lodging accommodations to the general public and providing
additional services, such as Restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, Personal Services, and
Recreational Facilities in a Building so designed that normal access and egress are controlled from a
central point.
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY UNIT: A housing unit that meets the criteria of the Town’s affordable housing
Regulations.
HYDROLOGIC CYCLE: Continual flow of water between land, surface water, Ground Water and
atmosphere, through evaporation, transpiration, recharge, runoff, condensation, and precipitation.
ILLUMINATION RATIO: Uniformity ratio, describing the average level of illumination in relation to the
lowest level of illumination for a given area. Example: U. ratio = 4:1 for the given area, the lowest level
of illumination (1) should be no less than ¼ or four (4) times less than the average (4) level of
illumination.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE: The amount of area on a site covered by hard–surfaced materials that do not
readily absorb or retain water including, but not limited to, Building roofs, paved parking and Driveway
areas, sidewalks, swimming pools, paved recreation areas and other areas as determined by the Town
Engineer, expressed as a percentage of impervious area over Buildable Area.
INDEPENDENT LIVING DEVELOPMENT: Residential development designed and used exclusively as Age
Restricted Housing for handicapped persons, consisting of Single-Family, Two-Family, Multi-Family, or
Townhouse Dwelling Units or groups of Dwelling Units.
INDIRECT RECHARGE AREA: The area contributing water to surface Watercourses upgradient of the
Aquifer or Wellfield Area of Contribution.
INDOOR RIDING STABLES: Indoor riding facilities which provide for maintaining, training and exercise
for horses and riders.
INN: A Building of essentially residential character, designed and used for the short term
accommodation of transient guests in not more than eight (8) guest rooms having normal access/egress
from a centralized point. An Inn may have an associated Restaurant where food and drink is prepared,
served and consumed primarily within the principal Building.
INSTITUTIONAL LAND USE: Public or private health, recreational or educational uses such as parks,
schools, libraries, hospitals and camps.
ISODIAGRAM: Graphical representation of points of equal illuminance drawn as single line circular
pattern or computer generated spot readings in a grid pattern on a Site Plan or lighting plan. Lighting
Effective date: January 15, 2015
150
designers and manufacturers generate these diagrams to show the level and evenness of a lighting
design and to show how Light Fixtures will perform on a given site.
JUNK: Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris including but not limited to tires, vehicle parts,
equipment, paper, rags, metal, glass, Building materials, household appliances, machinery, and lumber.
JUNK VEHICLE: A motor vehicle not displaying valid current registration plates and/or a motor vehicle that
is worn out, discarded, inoperative, or which is ready for dismantling or destruction. No more than one (1)
such vehicle shall be stored or parked on any Lot except where automotive repairs are permitted. This
definition shall not apply to vehicles used for agricultural purposes.
JUNK YARD: Any Premises in or on which Junk materials, or other waste products, and discarded items not
used for their original purposes are stored or deposited on any Lot so as to be unsightly or detrimental to
nearby property .Specific reference to CGS Sections 21-9 and 14-67g is herein cited.
KENNEL, PRIVATE: A facility where more than five (5) adult dogs (six (6) months old or older) are kept on
one (1) Lot.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: A facility maintained and properly licensed for boarding or grooming of (5) five
or more dogs or cats not owned by the owner of the facility.
LANDSCAPE:
(1) An expanse of natural scenery;
(2) Lawns, trees, plants, and other natural materials, such as rock and wood chips, and decorative
features, including sculpture, patterned walks, fountains, rain gardens, and ponds.
LAND DISTURBANCE: Any activity involving the Clearing, or cutting of trees and vegetation, Excavation,
Filling or Grading of land, or any other activity that alters the existing topography or vegetative cover of
the site.
LAWN: Any area on a site where pre-development vegetation or other features have been or will be
replaced with turf, which is or shall be periodically mowed and regularly maintained as an ornamental
feature or as an open area to create usable space for residents or visitors to that site. Areas where turf is
installed for the purposes of providing utilities, such as easements, swales, leaching fields, etc., shall be
exempt from this definition.
LICENSED WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE PROVIDER: A company or other legal entity
authorized by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to build and/or operate a Wireless
Telecommunication Site.
LIGHT TRESPASS: Light from an artificial light source that is intruding into an area where it is not wanted
or does not belong.
LOCAL STREET: The majority of Colchester Streets are Local Streets. These Local Streets provide
access to individual land uses.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
151
LOCALLY IMPORTANT FARMLAND SOILS: Soils identified in the Locally Important Farmland Soils Map
for Colchester as determined by the Connecticut Department of Agriculture.
LOT: A single tract, Parcel or piece of land including the Open Spaces required by these Regulations
which, at the time of filing for a Zoning Permit, is designated as a unit and is under common ownership
and control.
LOT, CORNER: A Lot or Parcel of land abutting upon two (2) or more Streets at their intersection or upon
two (2) parts of the same Street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees or where the
intersection is rounded by a curve having a radius of less than 100 feet.
LOT COVERAGE: The ratio of the area covered by Buildings or enclosures on a Lot to the total Buildable
Area on a Lot; not including outside parking and loading areas.
LOT DIVISION: The division of a Lot that existed prior to the implementation of zoning in the Town of
Colchester (1/1/1959) into two (2) building Lots. No Lot shall be established for building purposes unless
it is demonstrated that the Lot is capable of meeting all of the Lot design standards for the underlying
zoning district and the criteria set forth in these Regulations. The Lot Division shall require the approval
of the Zoning Enforcement Officer based on a determination of compliance with these Regulations.
LOT, FLAG: See Flag Lot definition.
LOT FRONTAGE: The continuous lineal measurement of the boundary of a Lot that abuts the Street.
LOT, NON-CONFORMING: See NON-CONFORMING LOT.
LOT, THROUGH: A Lot that fronts upon two (2) parallel Streets or that fronts upon two (2) Streets that do
not intersect at the boundaries of the Lot
LOT, WIDTH: The linear distance between the side Lot lines as measured at the required Setback.
LOWEST FLOOR: The Lowest Floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or
flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, Building access or storage, in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a Building’s Lowest Floor.
LUMEN: The unit of luminous flux: a measure of the amount of light emitted by a lamp. One-foot candle
is one (1) Lumen per square foot. For the purposes of this Regulation, these Lumen-output values shall
be the initial Lumen output ratings of a lamp.
LUMINAIRE (“LIGHT FIXTURE”):A complete lighting unit consisting of one (1) or more electric lamps, the
lamp holder, reflector, lens, diffuser, ballast, and/or other components and accessories.
MANUFACTURING: The act of converting raw materials into a finished product using machinery or other
methods. For the purposes of these Regulations, the Manufacturing process must be conducted within a
Building specifically designated on the Site Plan for this use.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected
Effective date: January 15, 2015
152
to the required utilities. The term includes all Mobile Homes and also includes park trailers, travel
trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer.
MEADOW: A field vegetated primarily by grass and other non-woody plants (grassland)
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which Base Flood elevations shown on a community’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MEDIAN INCOME: After adjustments for Family size, the area Median Income as determined by the U. S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development for the Town.
MEMBERSHIP CLUBS: Premises owned or occupied by a corporation or association of persons which is
operated solely for a recreational, social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic purpose, but not
primarily for profit and whose use is open to a limited membership and their guests.
MINI STORAGE FACILITIES: One (1) story multi-unit public service facility. Units rented for cold storage
of household goods, recreational equipment, business inventory, fixtures, and other similar personal
property. No servicing or repair of any type shall be conducted in the storage Building or on the
property. Individual units shall not be serviced by water, sewer, or electricity.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT: Development containing one or more Multi-Family or Single-Family
Dwelling units and one or more commercial, public, institutional, retail, office, or industrial uses.
MOBILE HOME: A structure originally designed and constructed or redesigned and reconstructed for
year-round occupancy for one (1) or more persons and equipped with or designed to be equipped with
wheels for movement of the structure from place to place.
MOTEL: A Building or group of detached, semi-detached or attached Buildings containing guest rooms
or Dwelling Units each of which, or each pair of which, has a separate entrance leading directly from the
outside of the Building with garage or parking space conveniently located to each unit, and which is
designed, used or intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of motor vehicle transients.
Motels do not include Hotels, Inns, Bed and Breakfasts, boarding houses, Mobile Home parks or
recreation campgrounds. Each Motel unit shall contain inside hot and cold running water, shower or
bath and toilet.
MOUNTING HEIGHT: The vertical distance between the lowest part of the Luminaire and the ground
surface directly below the Luminaire.
MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING: Building that contains or will contain three (3) of more residential Dwelling
Units.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE: Solid Waste from residential, commercial and industrial sources, excluding
Solid Waste consisting of significant quantities of Hazardous Waste as defined in CGS Section 22a-115,
land Clearing debris, demolition debris, biomedical waste, sewage sludge and scrap metal.
NON-CONFORMING BUILDING – A Non-Conforming Building is a Building lawfully in existence prior to
the effective date of these Regulations or any amendments thereto which violates the Setback, Yard, Lot
Coverage, height, Floor Area, or any other dimensional requirements of the district in which it is located.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
153
NON-CONFORMING LOT – A Non-Conforming Lot is a Lot legally existing on the effective date of these
Regulations or any applicable amendment thereto, but which fails by reason of such adoption or
amendment to conform to the present Regulations for any prescribed Lot requirement.
NON-CONFORMING USE is a use of any Lot or Building lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of
these Regulations or any amendment thereto and otherwise meeting the requirements of Connecticut
law for Non-Conforming Uses, which violates the use requirements of the district in which the Lot or
Building is located.
OBTRUSIVE LIGHT: Glare and Light Trespass.
OPEN SPACE: Land permanently preserved for Agriculture, forestry, passive recreation, wildlife habitat,
natural resource conservation, maintenance of community character, or as undeveloped land.
ORNAMENTAL OR ACCENT LIGHTING: Outdoor Lighting that is installed mainly or entirely for its
decorative effect or to accent an object or a feature, rather than as an aid to visibility.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING: The nighttime illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made device
located outdoors that produces light be any means.
OVERLAY ZONE: A zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying zones and that imposes
additional or other requirements than those required by the underlying zone.
PARCEL: A contiguous piece of land owned or controlled by the same person(s) or entity(ies) and to be
developed or used as a unit.
PERSONAL SERVICES: Provision of recurrently needed services of a personal nature. This classification
includes barber and beauty/nail salons, seamstresses, tailors, dry cleaners (excluding large-scale bulk
cleaning plants), shoe repair shops, self-service laundries, photocopying and photo finishing services,
health clubs and travel agencies.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment primarily engaged in providing Personal
Services.
PHOTOMETRIC TEST REPORT: A report by an independent testing laboratory or one certified by the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) describing the candela distribution, shielding type,
luminance, and other optical characteristics of a specific Luminaire.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A development under unified control planned as a single continuous project,
to allow single or multi-use projects within its boundaries and provide greater design flexibility.
Features in a Planned Development include common access, Driveways, parking, and Open
Space/recreation areas, in which multiple principal Buildings are located on the same Lot or Lots. A
Planned Residential Development may consist of a mixture or combination of Single-Family, Two-Family,
and Multi-Family Dwellings. Use of a Planned Development should result in development superior to
that which would occur using conventional zoning regulations
PREMISES: Land and Buildings together considered as a property.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
154
PRIMARY RECHARGE AREA: (for Stratified Drift Aquifers) The area overlying the Aquifer and adjacent
Stratified Drift in which Ground Water flows directly into the Aquifer. (The contact line between the
Stratified Drift and adjacent till or bedrock is the boundary line).
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: Office for person or persons whose vocation or occupation requires advanced
training in a liberal arts or science, a State license or certification, and whose work usually involves
non-manual work and where services are rendered rather than goods offered for sale on the Premises,
including doctors, dentists, other medical professionals, lawyers, engineers, and architects. The
following similar uses are not Professional Offices: contractor, beauty parlor, insurance agent, medical
testing laboratory, pest control, pharmacy, real estate agent, and financial institutions.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: A business that offers any type of service to the public which requires as a
condition precedent to the rendering of such service the obtaining of a license or other legal
authorization. By way of example, and without limiting the generality of this definition, Professional
Services include services rendered by certified public accountants, public accountants, engineers,
chiropractors, dentists, osteopaths, physicians and surgeons, podiatrists, chiropodists, architects,
veterinarians, attorneys at law, physical therapists and life insurance agents.
PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT: Any change in the location of an existing property line provided it does
not create an additional Lot, does not result in a Lot or condition that violates these Regulations, and
does not increase any existing Lot non-conformities with the dimensional requirements of these
Regulations. Such Property Line Adjustment is also not considered a subdivision or re-subdivision so long
as it does not create a Lot or affect a Street layout shown on an approved subdivision map, and it does
not affect any area reserved for public use or established as Open Space under these Regulations or the
Subdivision Regulations.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND LANDSCAPING: The incidental Excavation, removal, Grading or Filling in
conjunction with Property Maintenance and Landscaping provided that no more than 500 cubic yards of
material is deposited or removed from a Lot, or 20,000 square feet of Disturbed Area results from the
activity on a Lot shall be permitted, subject to the issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer. No Zoning Permit shall be issued pursuant to these Regulations if the proposed
Excavation, removal, Grading or Filling will alter the natural character and drainage or affect an inland
Wetland or Watercourse as defined by the Connecticut General Statutes.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular-type portable structure without permanent foundation that can be
towed, hauled, or driven and primarily designed as a temporary living accommodation for recreational,
camping, and travel use and including but not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers,
and self-propelled motor homes. For the purposes of these Regulations, no more than one (1) such unit
shall be parked or stored on a Lot except in an authorized recreation campground.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY: A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports and leisure-time
activities.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, COMMERCIAL: A Recreational Facility operated as a business and open to the
public for a fee.
RESTAURANT: An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed primarily
within the principal Building at tables, counters or bars.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
155
RESTAURANT, TAKE-OUT: An establishment where food and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for
consumption, where all or a significant portion of the consumption takes place or is designed to take
place outside the confines of the Restaurant, and where ordering and pickup of food may take place
from an automobile with drive-thru service.
RETAIL PACKAGE STORE: A store for the sale for use off the Premises, of beer, wine and liquors which
store has such products as its major stock for sale. It does not include Restaurants, cafes, stores engaged
chiefly in the sale of groceries or drug stores.
RETAIL SALES: Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for
personal or household consumption or use and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
ROAD: An improved public right-of-way accepted for public use by lawful procedure or a proposed
Street in an approved subdivision plan. The functional classification of Streets (Arterial, Collector, local
and dead end) used in these Regulations is in accordance with the classification used in the Subdivision
Regulations of the Town of Colchester. A Street centerline shall be presumed to be in the center of the
Street right-of-way.
ROCK CRUSHING EQUIPMENT: Specialized equipment, such as rock crushers or screeners, used to
process excavated material. Rock Crushing Equipment may be used only on the actual site of an
authorized Excavation project under the requirements of Section 8.11.12 of these Regulations.
RURAL TOURISM: Activities related and marketed to visitors that utilize the natural character and
Landscape. Activities such as Bed and Breakfasts, vineyards, Restaurants and farm stores are examples.
SECONDARY RECHARGE AREA: Till and bedrock areas which provide direct Ground Water inflow to a
Primary Recharge Area.
SEDIMENT: Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been
moved from its site of origin by Erosion.
SERVICE DEVELOPMENT: An industry of technical or unique functions performed by trained personnel.
Examples of services include accountants, actuaries, appraisers, architects, attorneys, business
consultants, business development managers, copywriters, engineers, funeral directors, hair styling,
insurance brokers, law firms, public relations researchers and real estate brokers.
SETBACK: The required distance from the property line to any portion of a Building as established by the
provisions of these Regulations applicable to the district in which the Lot is situated.
SHADE OR CANOPY TREE: A tree that is selected in order to provide shading by way of an extensive
canopy. Such trees generally grow to heights in excess of thirty-five (35) feet and provide for easy
pedestrian and vehicular passage beneath the Dripline. These trees are generally best suited for use as
Street trees.
SHARED PARKING: Parking spaces shared by more than one (1) user, which allow parking facilities to be
used more efficiently. Shared Parking takes advantage of the fact that most parking spaces are only used
part time by a particular motorist or group, and many parking facilities have a significant portion of
unused spaces, with utilization patterns that follow predictable daily, weekly and annual cycles.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
156
SIGN: Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is
used for visual communication to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object,
person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including
letters, words, symbols, figures, fixtures, colors, trademarks, illustrations, images, or other graphic
representations for purpose of advertisement, identification, publicity or notice.
SIGN TYPES ARE AS FOLLOWS:
SIGN, ANIMATED OR MOVING: Any Sign or part of a Sign that changes physical position or light
intensity by any movement or rotation or that gives the visual impression of such movement or
rotation.
SIGN, AWNING, CANOPY, MARQUEE: A Sign attached to or hung from a marquee, Canopy or other
covered structure, projecting from and supported by the Building and extending beyond the Building
wall, building line or Street lot line.
SIGN, BANNER: A temporary Sign of cloth or similar material that celebrates an event, season,
community, neighborhood, or district and is sponsored by a recognized community agency or
organization.
SIGN, BENCH: A Sign painted, located on, or attached to any part of the surface of a bench, seat, or
chair placed on or adjacent to a public place or Road.
SIGN, BILLBOARD: A commercial Sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or
entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the Premises on which the Sign is
located.
SIGN, BLADE: A vertically oriented wall Sign.
SIGN, BULLETIN BOARD: A Sign that identifies an institution or organization on the Premises of
which it is located and that contains the name of the institution or organization, the names of
individuals connected with it, and general announcements of events or activities occurring at the
institution or similar messages.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A Sign that directs attention to a business or profession conducted, or to a
commodity or service sold, offered, or manufactured, or to an entertainment offered on the
Premises where the Sign is located.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION: A temporary Sign erected on the Premises on which construction is taking
place, during the period of such construction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers,
landscape architects, contractors or similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors,
and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the structure or project.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: Signs limited to directional messages, principally for pedestrians or vehicular
traffic, such as “one-way,” “entrance,” and “exit.”
SIGN, DIRECTORY: Signs listing the tenants or occupants of a Building or group of Buildings and that
may indicate their respective professions or business activities.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
157
SIGN, FACADE: See SIGN, WALL
SIGN, FACE: The area or display surface used for the message.
SIGN, FLASHING: Any directly illuminated Sign that exhibits changing natural or artificial light or
color effects by any means whatsoever.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: Any non-movable Sign not affixed to a Building.
SIGN, GROUND: A Sign supported by a pole, uprights, or braces in or upon the ground surface.
SIGN, GOVERNMENTAL: A Sign erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any
governmental functions or required by law, ordinance, or other governmental regulation.
SIGN, HANGING: A Freestanding Sign supported by the extended arm of a single post, with the top
edge of the Sign Face not exceeding eight (8) feet above grade level.
SIGN, HOLIDAY DECORATION: Temporary Signs, in the nature of decorations, clearly incidental to
and customarily and commonly associated with any national, local, or religious holiday.
SIGN, HOME OCCUPATION: A Sign containing only the name and occupation of a permitted Home
Occupation.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A Sign giving the nature, logo, trademark, or other identifying symbol;
address; or any combination of the name, symbol, and address of a Building, business, development,
or establishment on the Premises where it is located.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: A Sign lighted by, or exposed to, artificial lighting either by lights on or in the
Sign or directed toward the Sign.
SIGN, INFLATABLE: Any display capable of being expanded by air or other gas and used on a
permanent or temporary basis to advertise a product or event.
SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED: A Sign erected on the ground or attached to a Building, which is
illuminated by the presence of a light source from within the Sign.
SIGN, LANDMARK: Any Sign of artistic or historic merit, uniqueness, or of extraordinary significance
to the community as may be identified by the local historical commission or other official agency.
SIGN, MEMORIAL: A Sign, tablet, or plaque memorializing a person, event, structure or site.
SIGN, MONUMENT: A Sign engraved, carved, or sculpted on a finished or polished stone.
SIGN, NAKED LIGHT DISPLAY: A string of lights or any unshielded light used to attract attention.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE: A Sign, located on the Premises, giving the name or address, or both, of the
owner or occupant of a Building or Premises.
SIGN, NEON: A Sign consisting of glass tubing, bent to form letters, symbols, or other shapes and
illuminated by neon or a similar gas through which an electric voltage is discharged.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
158
SIGN, NON-CONFORMING: A Sign lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of the
current Regulations that does not conform with the requirements of the current Regulations.
SIGN, OPEN HOUSE: Temporary off-Premises Signs used to direct prospective purchasers to a house
for sale.
SIGN, ON-SITE INFORMATIONAL: A Sign commonly associated with, and not limited to, information
and directions necessary or convenient for visitors coming on to the property, including Signs
marking entrances and exits, parking areas, circulation direction, rest rooms, and pickup and
delivery areas.
SIGN, PEDESTAL: SEE SIGN, GROUND.
SIGN, POLE: SEE SIGN, GROUND.
SIGN, POLITICAL: A temporary Sign announcing or supporting political candidates or issues in
connection with any national, state, or local election.
SIGN, PORTABLE: A Sign, usually of a temporary nature, not securely anchored to the ground or to a
Building or structure and which obtains some or all of its structural stability with respect to wind or
other normally applied forces by means of its geometry or character.
SIGN, PRIVATE SALE OR EVENT: A temporary Sign advertising private sales of personal property,
such as “house sales,” “garage sales,” “rummage sales,” and the like, or private not-for-profit
events, such as picnics, carnivals, bazaars, game nights, art fairs, craft shows, and Christmas tree
sales.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A Sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a Building for support and that
projects more than fifteen (15) inches (381mm) from the face of the wall or such Building.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE: A Sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the Premises, or a portion of the
Premises, on which the Sign is located.
SIGN, RESIDENCE DESIGNATION: A Sign or nameplate indicating the name and/or address of the
occupants of a residential property.
SIGN, ROOF: A Sign that is mounted on the roof of a Building or that is wholly dependent upon a
Building for support and that projects above the top walk or edge of a Building with a flat roof, the
eave line of a Building with a gambrel, gable, or hip roof, or the deck line of a Building with a
mansard roof.
SIGN, SEARCHLIGHT DISPLAY: Any use of lighting intended to attract the general public by the
waving or moving of light beams.
SIGN, SIDEWALK: Any temporary freestanding display located on the sidewalk or sidewalk area
adjacent to a public Road or storefront.
SIGN, SUSPENDED: A Sign hanging down from a marquee, awning, or porch that would exist without
the Sign.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
159
SIGN, TEMPORARY: A Sign or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plywood, or
other light material, with or without a structural frame and designed or intended to be displayed for
a short period of time; including decoration displays for holidays or public demonstrations.
SIGN, VENDING MACHINE: Any Sign, display, or other graphic attached to or part of a coin-operated
machine dispensing food, beverages, or other products.
SIGN, WALL: A Sign fastened to, painted on, or directly attached to a fence, the surface of masonry
or concrete, a frame or the wall of a Building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes
the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of, the Sign and that does not extend
more than fifteen (15) inches from such Building, structure, face of the fence or wall.
SIGN, WINDOW: Signs displayed within the window of a non-residential use establishment
announcing an event or advertising merchandise sold within such establishment. Window Signs will
also be interpreted to include a display of merchandise within the window of the establishment in
which it is sold. See Section 11.5.12.
SIGN KIOSK: A freestanding structure upon which Signs, information and/or posters, notices,
announcements, are posted.
SITE PLAN: The development plan for one or more Lots on which is shown the existing and proposed
conditions of the Lot, including topography, vegetation, drainage, Floodplains, Wetlands and
Watercourses; landscaping and Open Space; walkways; means of ingress and egress; circulation; utility
services; structures and Buildings; Signs and lighting; berms, buffers and screening devices; surrounding
development; and any other information that reasonably may be required in order that an informed
decision can be made by the approving authority.
SITE PLAN CLASS 1: A Site Plan that would pertain to permitted Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings
and Accessory Buildings or expansions or Additions to such Buildings and may be approved by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer provided such Site Plan meets the requirements of these Regulations.
SITE PLAN CLASS 2: A Site Plan that portrays information that involves more complex development that
will be reviewed and acted on by either the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer for a Class 1
Site Plan.
SLOPE: The incline of land as measured between contour lines, typically expressed as a percentage (as in
twenty-five percent (25%), signifying ten (10) feet vertical in forty (40) feet horizontal) or as a ratio (as in
a 2:1 Slope, signifying two (2) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical).
SMALL OR MINOR SHADE TREE: A tree that is selected to provide shade primarily by blocking sunlight at
various angles and casting shadows. These trees generally do not grow in excess of thirty-five (35) feet
and may not provide convenient passage for pedestrians and motorists beneath the Dripline. These
trees are generally best suited for transitional landscaping, parking islands and other isolated or strictly
ornamental areas.
SOIL: Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin. Manure is not considered Soil.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN: Scheme that minimizes Soil Erosion and sedimentation
resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
160
SOLID WASTE: Unwanted or discarded solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, including,
but not limited to, demolition debris, material burned or otherwise processed at a resources recovery
facility or incinerator, material processed at a recycling facility and sludges or other residue from a water
pollution abatement facility, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility.
SPECIAL PERMIT: Form of zoning approval required for those uses, which, because of various special
characteristics, cannot be distinctly classified or regulated in a particular zone without giving careful
consideration in each case to the impact of such use upon neighboring uses, public safety, the
surrounding area and the public need for such use in a particular location.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals and pubic region; buttocks; and
female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Means:
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
2. Acts of human masturbation; sexual intercourse or sodomy;
3. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts.
SPILL LIGHT: Lighting from a lighting installation that falls outside of the boundaries of the property on
which the installation is sited.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The date the Building Permit was issued, provided the actual Start of
Construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the dated that the permit
was issued. The actual start means the first placement or permanent construction of a structure
(including a Manufactured Home) on a site, such as the pouring slabs or footings, installation of piles,
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of Excavation or placement of a Manufactured
Home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as Clearing,
Grading and Filling, nor does it include the installation of Streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
Excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of Accessory Buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as Dwelling Units or not part of the main structure.
STRATIFIED DRIFT: Predominantly sorted Sediment deposited by glacial meltwater consisting of gravel,
sand, silt or clay in layers of similar grain size.
STREET: An improved public right-of-way accepted for public use by lawful procedure or a proposed
Street in an approved subdivision plan. The functional classification of Streets (Arterial, Collector, Local
and dead end) used in these Regulations is in accordance with the classification used in the Subdivision
Regulations of the Town of Colchester. A Street centerline shall be presumed to be in the center of the
Street right-of-way.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
161
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements
to a structure, taking place during a one (1) year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should be
(1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement or, (2) in
the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purpose of this
definition, “Substantial Improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the Building commences, whether or not that alteration affects
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary code specifications which are solely necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
TEMPORARY AGRICULTURALLY RELATED USES: Events of limited duration on a farm, which are
accessory to agricultural uses.
TEMPORARY LIGHTING: Lighting installed with temporary wiring and operated for less than sixty (60)
days in any calendar year.
TEMPORARY SEASONAL SIGNAGE: Short term (six (6) months or shorter) Agriculture Signs that are
taken down and stored once the growing season is ended.
TEMPORARY USE: Any use of a structure or land for a limited period of time where the site is not to be
permanently altered by Grading or construction of accessory facilities. Events include: art shows; rodeos;
religious revivals; tent camps; outdoor festivals and concerts.
THEATER: A Building or part of a Building devoted to showing motion pictures or for dramatic, dance,
musical or other live performances.
TOWER: A structure that is intended to support equipment used to receive and/or transmit
electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to (a) self-supporting lattice, (b) guyed, and
(c) monopole.
TOWN ENGINEER: Shall be a professional engineer, certified in the State of Connecticut who will review
applications as requested by the Commission.
TOWNHOUSE: Residential Building consisting of a Single-Family Dwelling Unit constructed in a group of
three (3) or more attached units, in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and has Open
Space on at least two (2) sides.
TRUCKING TERMINAL/WAREHOUSE: An area and Building where trucks load and unload cargo and
freight and where the cargo and freight may be broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger loads
for transfer to other vehicles or modes of transportation
UPLIGHTING: Any light source that distributes illumination above a ninety (90) degree horizontal plane.
USE: The purpose or activity for which land or Buildings are designed, arranged, or intended or for which
land or Buildings are occupied or maintained. Because of its frequency, this term is not capitalized in the
Regulations.
WAREHOUSE: A Building used primarily for the long or short term storage of goods and materials.
Effective date: January 15, 2015
162
WALLPACK LIGHTING FIXTURE: A surface type lighting fixture normally mounted on a Building with a
regulated light source not shielded or cut off.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of
1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the
Floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
WATERCOURSES: As defined in CGS Section 22a-38, as amended.
WELLFIELD: An area containing one (1) or more pumping water supply wells in close proximity.
WELLFIELD AREA OF CONTRIBUTION: Area of the Aquifer where Ground Water flow is diverted to a
pumping well due to a lowering of the water table.
WELLFIELD RECHARGE AREA: The area from which Ground Water flows directly to the Wellfield Area Of
Contribution.
WETLANDS: As defined in CGS Section 22a-38, as amended.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES: Licensed Wireless Telecommunication Services including,
but not limited to, cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR),
enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that are marketed to the
general public.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SITE: A facility that consists of the equipment and structures involved
in receiving or transmitting electromagnetic waves associated with Wireless Telecommunication
Services. Such facility may be maintained by others for operation by a Licensed Wireless
Telecommunication Service provider(s).
YARD: An Open Space unobstructed from the ground upward along the full length of a Lot or Street line
and between that line and the nearest point of any Building or portion thereof as may be specifically
provided in these Regulations.
YARD, FRONT: An Open Space unobstructed from the ground upward along the full length of a Lot or
Street line, and between that line and the nearest point of any Building or portion thereof. On a corner
Lot, Front Yard requirements shall be met for both Street frontages.
ZONING PERMIT: Permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or Commission stating that the
proposed Building is in compliance with the Zoning Regulations.
3469323v4
1 Appendix 1
Appendix 1 – site plan requirements (January 15, 2015)
1. Site Plan Contents. The site plan, including details and specifications, shall show all of
the following information, both existing on the premises and proposed to be
established, to the extent applicable to the particular Application:
1. Property lines. All exterior boundary lines and interior property lines or lot
lines shall be shown with a length and bearing for each line. Bearings shall
be for traverse in a clockwise direction. (Class A-2, Transit survey.) The map
shall be certified by a Connecticut registered Land Surveyor. All abutting
properties shall be shown with distances and names of current ownership as
shown in the Office of the Town Assessor. A north arrow shall be shown on
each sheet of the plan and referenced as True, Magnetic, or Grid. Front and
rear property lines shall be marked using metal pins.
2. Street Lines. All street lines, either existing or new streets, must be shown on
maps with lengths and bearings for a traverse in a clockwise direction. All
curve data shall be shown. At all principal points on street lines, such as
block corners, PC'S and PT's of curves shall be permanently monumented
using concrete survey monuments with brass or bronze discs permanently
marked or punched. Minimum monument size is 4"x 6"x 36". All front setback
building lines shall be shown with reference to the street lines. Indicate
whether this setback line is a standard in accordance with the Zoning
Regulations or if such line has been established by the commission.
3. Right-of-Way and Easements (existing and/or proposed). Lengths and
bearings of the centerline and each sideline are required together with the
established widths. Bearings shall be shown for a traverse in a clockwise
direction. The use of the reserved space must be noted on the plan such as:
sanitary. gas, water, etc. Applicant shall submit documentation of easement
holder for proposed uses of the right-of-way (R.O.W.) Where a R.O.W. or
easement crosses street or property lines, the location of the centerline and
sidelines must be shown together with tied distances from property comers
or street monuments. In all areas where roads or street or any other type
structure is in cut or fill, show slope easement rights to provide for a minimum
2:1 slope outside of standard right- of-way widths.
4. Driveway and Parking. All new driveways and parking areas shall be
constructed of bituminous concrete pavement. Driveways shall conform to
Town of Colchester Zoning Regulations and Standard Construction Details in
Section 7.1a of the Subdivision Regulations. Each parking space shall be
shown. Two way traffic driveways shall be at least 24' in width from the face
of the curb while one way traffic driveway shall be at least 15' in width.
2 Appendix 1
Maximum grade for a parking area is 5%. Cross pitch on any driveway shall
not exceed 3/8" per foot. No parking will be allowed within a street right-of--
way. Horizontal and vertical control for driveways shall conform to
Residential Street requirements. Where driveways intersect with street or
other driveways the radius of the gutter shall be a minimum of 25 feet. With
the intent of promoting on-site ground water recharge where applicable,
alternative surface treatments for driveways and parking areas may be
approved by the Zoning and Planning Commission if it is documented to be
technically adequate, represents sound engineering principals, and is
satisfactory to the Commission and the Town Engineer.
5. Elevations, Grades, Existing and Proposed. All elevations are to be National
Geodetic Vertical Datum unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer.
6. Contour Lines. Contour Lines are required on all plans or maps. Both the
existing ground and the proposed finish grading must be shown and clearly
labeled as to each type. Contour lines shall be shown at an interval of 2 feet,
except where area is almost level (less than 1%). Contour lines must extend
at least 50 feet into adjacent properties to depict actual conditions. A
Topography certification signed by a licensed land surveyor shall be provided
on each Topography map. Minimum continuous slope across grass shall be
1%; minimum slope across pavement shall be 0.6%; and maximum slope
across parking lot shall be 5%. Show existing and proposed ground
elevations for finishing grading at all corners of buildings and structures
except for individual residences. At least one Bench Mark elevation must be
provided on the Topography map.
7. Walls and Slopes. Maximum earth slopes shall not exceed 2:1 (2 feet
horizontal to 1 foot vertical). Where steeper slopes are needed, retaining
walls or other slope stabilization methods as approved by the Town Engineer
are required. If the difference in grade at the property line exceeds 3 feet,
then a retaining wall with fence at the top is required. Retaining walls shall be
designed to provide footings below the frost line in the ground. Where the
total height of the retaining wall exceeds 6 feet, design calculations by a
Registered Professional Engineer must be provided for approval of such
walls.
8. Sidewalks and Curbs. All sidewalks and curbs in public streets shall be
constructed to the standards of the Town of Colchester Subdivision
Regulation Sections 7.6 (Curbs) and 7.7 (Sidewalks). A 6" continuous
bituminous curbing is required on the perimeter of all private parking lots.
Curbing is not required for parking space adjacent to driveway for individual
residences. Portland cement concrete or slope face granite curb is required
on radii, or on the face of island in commercial and industrial parking areas or
driveways.
9. Street Lines and Grades. The minimum right-of-way width for any proposed
street is as indicated within Subdivision Regulation Sec. 6.3.3. Other rightsof-
way may be greater in width when required by the commission. For
3 Appendix 1
existing streets, the adopted street line grade shall be used. For new streets,
the street line grade shall be designed in such a manner as to avoid the
formation of deep cuts or high fills. A plan and profile shall be submitted to
the Commission to a scale of l" = 40' horizontal. and 1" = 4' vertical, for
approval of new streets and main private driveways. Adequate horizontal and
vertical sight distance shall be provided.
10. Water. The water supply system of any building used for human occupancy
shall be noted on the plans.
11. Sewer. The sanitary system of any building used for human occupancy shall
be connected to the public utility system, if available. A public sanitary sewer
system shall be considered available to a building when the property line is
located within 200 feet of an existing public sewer or when a new sewer line
within 200 feet of the property line will be operational prior to the issuance of
a Certificate of Occupancy. The Commission may waive this requirement.
12. Storm Drainage. Show all roof drains - type, size, location and point of
connection to storm sewer or other discharge point. Specify invert elevation
at point of connection discharge, This requirement applies to all building
structures except single-family housing. Roof leaders shall be piped
(underground) into the on-site drainage system. Where the proposed storm
system is to be connected to an existing State of Connecticut drainage
system, computations shall meet State design standards and all necessary
permits shall be obtained from the State of Connecticut. Drainage agreement
must be signed where private connection is made into Town of Colchester.
13. Utilities. All existing utilities in the street and in right-of-way shall be clearly
shown. This includes both the horizontal plan and the vertical profile.
Included within this group are electrical and telephone underground wires or
ducts. All proposed utilities shall be located underground but the Commission
may permit some modifications of this requirement due to adverse field
conditions. All exterior mechanical equipment shall be shown whether on the
roof or ground mounted.
14. Lighting. Lighting for parking areas, drives and general use shall be in
fixtures with shielding or cut-offs which direct the light to its intended location.
No light shall be directed off the premises. Lighting attached to commercial or
industrial buildings to illuminate service bays, loading docks or similar
purposes, shall be in fixtures which direct the light toward the intended area,
Spotlights and bare bulbs are not permitted. Lighting for multi-family
residential uses shall be located in decorative fixtures. Poles for lighting shall
not exceed 18 feet in height. Lighting attached to buildings shall be
decorative and intended primarily for safety. No bare bulbs or spotlights are
permitted. Hi-pressure sodium type fixtures are preferred. Poles for the
lighting of publicly owned recreation areas may be approved at heights
greater than 18 feet if all five of the following conditions are met:
4 Appendix 1
A. The publicly owned recreation area is the primary use of the
property.
B. The poles are included on a Class 2 Site Plan approved by the
Commission.
C. The increased height of the poles is determined by the Commission
to be necessary to safely and adequately light the recreation use.
D. All reasonable precautions have been taken to minimize the spillage
of light onto neighboring properties.
E. Illumination levels shall not exceed applicable national standards for
the intended recreational uses.
15. Cultural Features. Show location and type of trees 3" diameter and larger,
either existing or proposed, and all evergreens including shrubs, For area of
solid woods, show outline of forest land parts on the property and street
frontage. Include location of all existing fences and structures, existing or
proposed, in the site plan. Show in detail any low areas that will not self-drain
(swales) and locations of all swamp areas.
16. Snow Removal. Provisions shall be made for the storage of snow from
parking areas within the site, in a location which is both appropriate and not
required for other purposes. The area shall be shown on the plan as "Snow
Storage Area".
17. Building or Structure Elevations. On all site plans, the finished first floor and
top of foundations elevation together with basement floor elevation, must be
shown.
18. Fencing. Substantial fencing (chain link not less than 4' high) shall be
required in all areas close to pedestrian or vehicular traffic where hazardous
conditions exist. This includes the top of high retaining walls, headwalls, top
of steep embankments, or near vertical embankment into water courses. The
determination of any fencing requirement will be made by the Commission
based upon the particular situation or location Fencing in non-residential
uses shall not exceed 4' in height in the front yard, nor 8' in height in the side
and rear yards. Fencing in residential uses shall not exceed 4' in height in the
front yard nor 6' in height in the side and rear yards or elsewhere on the site.
Fencing in all areas shall be constructed with the finished side facing the
exterior of the lot on all sides.
19. Building Locations. Buildings shall be located by showing the required front
setback distance from the front property line and the closest distance from
the building to each side of the lot or area, Locating one building from
another is not acceptable when two or more buildings are included. Overall
dimensions of each building must be shown including any irregular areas or
jogs.
20. Erosion and Sedimentation Control. The "Guidelines for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control", Connecticut DEP, January, 1985 or revised, will be used
5 Appendix 1
as the minimum standard for the design of erosion and sediment control
measures.
21. Certification for Residential, Commercial and Industrial Site Plans. The seals
of a Professional Engineer, Land Surveyor and Landscape Architect,
licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, must be stamped or
embossed on each sheet where each shall have responsibility in the
development of the site plan as outlined in the Rules and Regulations of the
associated Board of Registration.
22. Map Title. There shall be a Title Block which shall contain the following
information:
A. Location of property
B. Owner(s) of property, develops
C. Date prepared.
D. Scale
E. Name(s) and phone numbers of person(s) making map
23. Wetlands Information. Aquifer Protection Zones, water courses. water
bodies, inland wetlands, State regulated tidal wetlands and the boundaries of
U.S. Soil Conservation Service soil types.
24. Drainage Requirements. Storm drainage, sewage disposal and water supply
facilities, and the soil tests locations, results and engineering computations
therefore, refer to Appendix 1 of these Regulations
25. Flood Plain Information. Information regarding Flood Plain District shall
include the flood plain boundary and the base flood and floor elevation data
as specified in Section 9.3 of these regulations.
26. Zoning Information. A schedule specifying the area of the lot, the amount of
floor area, building ground coverage and total coverage by building and
paving in square feet and as a percent of the lot, and the basis for
computation of required off-street parking and loading spaces.
A. Location Map. A location map showing the lot in relation to streets and
properties in the neighborhood; to a north arrow, the Assessor's Map and
Lot Number, the Zoning Map District in which the lot is located and the
zoning classification of any abutting lots, any zoning boundary within or
near the lot; and The words "Approved by the Colchester Zoning and
Planning Commission" with a place for the signature of the Chairman
and date of signing. When more than one sheet is used to show the
layout features of a site plan, a master or composite sheet shall be
6 Appendix 1
provided at an appropriate scale showing the principal features of the
Site Plan, such as but not limited to lot lines, buildings, parking and
loading, driveways, systems for drainage, sewage disposal and water
supply, wetlands and water courses, soil types and the Flood Plain
District.
27. Field Conditions. Actual field conditions may be different or changed from
those conditions assumed in the preparation of this plan, and in such
circumstances, the Town Engineer may direct that certain modifications or
amendments be effected and constructed to ameliorate such changed
conditions.
28. Additional Requirements. Additional requirements may be stipulated by the
Commission (sidewalks, curbing retaining walls, pavement construction,
etc.) if it finds unusual or special conditions warrant such requirements.
29. Complete Application. No application for site plan approval shall be deemed
to be, complete and ready for Commission action until the plan submitted
meets these standards and is deemed complete by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer.
30. Completion of Work. All work in connection with such site plan shall be
started within one (1) year and must be completed within five (5) years after
the approval of the site plan. The Certificate of Approval of such site plan
shall state the date on which such five-year period shall result in automatic
expiration of the approval of such site plan. " Work " for purposes of this
Subsection means all physical improvements required by the approved site
plan.
31. Architectural Plans. Architectural plans, which shall include all proposed
buildings, structures and signs and all existing buildings, structure, and
signs proposed to be reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or
structurally altered. Architectural plans may be in preliminary form but shall
include exterior elevation drawings, exterior materials, generalized floor
plans and perspective drawings, prepared, except for drawings for signs, as
may be required by law by an architect or professional engineer licensed to
practice in the State of Connecticut. Three (3) copies of architectural plans
shall be submitted.
32 Reports. Written reports concerning the following:
A. Shopping Centers. For shopping centers or other multiple tenancy
commercial or industrial complexes, a statement indicating the
provisions to be made or actions to be taken by the owner or lessor to
prevent supplies, merchandise, equipment or refuse from being stored,
located or placed on sidewalks, pedestrian ways, buffer strips,
landscaped areas, driveways or paved areas reserved for off-street
parking and loading, except for approved sidewalk sales.
7 Appendix 1
B. Larger Parking Requirements. For Site Plans involving 50 or more
parking spaces or uses projected to generate either more than 200
vehicle trips per day or more than 100 vehicle trips per day per 1,000
square feet of floor area, a traffic impact analysis, prepared by a
recognized traffic engineer, indicating the expected average daily
vehicular trips, peak hour volumes, access conditions at the lot,
distribution of traffic, types of vehicles expected and effect upon the
level of service of the street giving access to the lot.
2. DRAINAGE DESIGN & CALCULATIONS.
1. General. All drainage must be designed and certified by a Professional
Engineer registered in the State of Connecticut. Stormwater flows may be
computed by use of the Rational Method or by use of the methods
described in the most current edition of the U.S. Soil Conservation Service
Technical Release No.55. Other methods of computing stormwater flows
may be utilized provided they conform to sound engineering practice. When
the Rational Method is used, rainfall intensity-duration-frequency curves for
the Hartford Area and runoff coefficients contained in the Connecticut
Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control shall be used. In general,
the use of the Rational Method shall not be used in computing flows from
watershed drainage areas in excess of 200 acres.
2. Storm Design Criteria. All storm drainage facilities shall be designed based
on the following storm return frequency criteria:
A. On-site storm drainage system and minor channels (10 years).
B. Discharge pipes at low points including minor-cross culverts (25 years).
C. Minor Streams (Upstream drainage area less than 1000 acres) (50
years).
D. Major Streams (Upstream drainage area greater than 1000 acres) (100
years).
3. Submission of Drainage Information. The following data shall be submitted
for review by the Town Engineer:
A. Topographic contour map(s) with sufficient detail to adequately show the
existing and proposed drainage characteristics of the watershed.
Drainage area(s) shall be delineated on the map(s).
8 Appendix 1
B. Narrative and calculations addressing at least the following:
1. Method used to calculate stormwater runoff.
2. Stormwater runoff characteristics of the Property before and after
development.
3. Maximum velocity and peak flow at point(s) of discharge from the
system(s) for all drainage piping, structures.
4. Design calculations for all drainage piping, structures and
appurtenances. The design engineer shall submit a system summary
sheet, similar to that shown in the Conn. DOT "Drainage Manual". A
plan-identifying the tributary watershed associated with each
structure shall also be submitted. A gutter flow analysis sheet, also
shown in the Conn. DOT "Drainage Manual", shall be required by the
Town Engineer for roadway designs.
5. Calculations addressing the adequacy of off-site drainage features,
as applicable.
6. Investigation of the effect a large magnitude storm, will have on a
drainage system designed for a smaller return storm (i.e., what
happens to a system sized for a 10 year storm during a 100 year
storm event).
4. Hydraulic Design. Except where substantiated by special design
studies, storm drain pipes and culverts shall be designed to flow full for
the "design storm(s)". Total allowable headwater depths on pipes and
culverts should normally be restricted to less than 1.2 times the clear
height of the pipe or culvert provided flooding or damage does not occur
to the roadway, adjacent buildings, sewage disposal systems, water
supply systems or other significant features.
5. Drainage at Intersections. Necessary drainage structures shall be
installed to Properly drain all intersections of new streets, and of new
streets with existing roads. Intersection grading plans shall be submitted
to demonstrate adequate grading at intersections. Intersection grading
plans shall be at a scale of 1"=10' with grading contour intervals of 0.2
feet (max.). Improvements to surface drainage at existing intersections
shall be as required to adequately drain the intersection(s).
6. Diversion. The diversion of stormwater runoff from one watershed or
watercourse to another shall be avoided whenever possible. Where it is
absolutely necessary to create such a diversion, special provisions shall
be made to minimize the potential damages which may occur as a
result of such diversion and perpetual rights for such, diversion, running
with the land and in favor of the owner of the road, shall be secured by
the developer when required by the Town Engineer.
9 Appendix 1
7. Pipe. All pipe for storm drains shall be reinforced concrete pipe (RCP),
Class 4, conforming to DOT Form 815 or latest edition, or an equivalent
type of pipe and shall be approved for use by the Town Engineer. The
minimum pipe size shall be 15 inches. In the event that groundwater or
wet conditions are encountered during construction, slotted pipe may be
required by the Town Engineer.
8. Minimum Pipe Slope. All stormwater piping shall be designed to provide
a self-cleansing velocity of at least 2.5 feet per second when flowing full.
Generally stormwater piping shall have a minimum pitch of one half
(0.5%) percent. Lesser pitch may be approved by the Town Engineer
provided the self-cleansing velocity is maintained.
9. Pipe Cover. The minimum clear cover over all pipes shall be three (3')
feet.
10. Outlet Structures. All storm drain systems shall be terminated with a
flared end section or other approved structure. Special energy
dissipators may be required to prevent erosion.
11. Placement of Drainage Structures. For roadways within proposed
developments, the first set of catch basins shall be generally located
within 350 feet of the roadway high point. Spacing between sets of
catch basins shall be located as necessary to collect runoff and at a
maximum of 300 feet. When outfall pipes exceed 400 feet, drainage
manholes shall be placed to give a maximum length of pipe between
structures of 400 feet. Drainage structures shall be placed at each
grade change along a storm drain and at each junction point of two or
more storm drains. Inlet structures shall also be located and connected
to the drainage system to pick up low spots in areas of the right-of-way
or in adjacent lots.
12. Underdrains. The installation of underdrains will be required along the
edge(s) of pavement of a proposed street wherever the high
groundwater level is known to be less than three (3') feet below the
proposed finished grade of the street. The Town Engineer may require
underdrains to be installed where localized seeps, springs, or high
groundwater less than three (3') feet below the proposed grade of the
street are observed within the proposed Town right-of-way lines. The
Town Engineer may require test holes to be dug within the proposed
Town right-of-way lines of sufficient number to determine the existing
groundwater elevation. Underdrains shall be not less than six (6")
inches in diameter and shall be perforated PVC. Outlets for underdrains
shall be connected directly to drainage structures or shall be terminated
with an approved outlet. Underdrains shall be placed in a 2' wide (min.)
trench, filled with 3/4 inch stone. The underdrain pipe shall be wrapped
with a filter fabric pipe sock along its entire length. The pipe sock shall
be 'ADS' polyester sock drain envelope or equivalent.
10 Appendix 1
13. Channels. The use of channels to carry stormwater to natural
watercourses will not be allowed except in special case, and then only
with the approval of the Town Engineer.
14. Special Structures. Bridges, box culverts, deep manholes, non-standard
endwalls, and other special structures shall be designed in accordance
with good engineering practice and shall be subject to the approval of
the Town Engineer.
15. Drainage to Off-Site Properties.
A. No increase in stormwater peak flows or volume of runoff from 2,
10, 25, 50 and 100 year design storms shall be allowed unless
downstream increases are compatible with the overall
downstream drainage system. The following items shall be
investigated in determining whether increased peak flows or
runoff volumes are compatible with the overall downstream
drainage system:
1. The timing of peak flows from sub-watersheds.
2. The increased duration of high flow rates.
3. The adequacy of downstream drainage features.
4. The distance downstream that the Peak discharges are
increased.
B. When it is determined that stormwater detention structures are
required, they shall be designed so that the peak flow(s) or
volume of runoff after development shall not exceed nor be
substantially less than the peak flow(s) or volume of runoff prior to
development for each of the design storm events specified in 15.a
of Appendix 1.
16. Detention Basins. Detention basins, surface or subsurface, shall be
constructed for the purpose of limiting peak discharge from the storm
drainage system of the developed area where such discharge would
adversely effect receiving streams and/or storm systems. The
developer shall be responsible for establishing short and long term
maintenance of detention structure(s) and appurtenances. The
following information, as a minimum, shall be submitted for detention
structures:
A. Inflow and outflow hydrography for detention area.
B. Maximum storage volume.
C. Design of emergency spillway or other measures for the release
of excess flows beyond that of the design capacity of the
structure.
11 Appendix 1
D. Flood routing of all runoff greater than the design capacity of the
detention structure.
E. Time which is required for the structure to drain completely.
F. Outlet structure detail.
G. Materials used in construction of the structure.
H. Methods used in construction of the structure.
I Methods employed to avoid clogging of the discharge outlet.
J. Safety features.
K. Proposed landscaping and vegetative measures used to stabilize
slopes and bottom surfaces.
17, Storm Return Frequency. Detention basins shall be designed and
stormwaters regulated for storm return frequencies of 2, 10, 25, 50 and
100 years.
18, Design Procedure. The procedure for computing the outflow from the
detention areas shall consist of the development of an inflow
hydrography and the routing of the inflow through the detention basin
to develop an outflow hydrography.
19. Inflow Hydrography. The inflow hydrography may be developed by
appropriate Soil Conservation Service or other acceptable methods.
Routing through the detention basin shall be by application of the
standard storage equation.
20. Detention Structure Design. Types and requirements for the detention
structure design shall be as appropriate for the site and be in general
accordance with the SCS Field Engineering Handbook, Connecticut
DOT Drainage Manual, or the CT Guidelines for Erosion and
Sedimentation Control. All designs shall be approved by the Town
Engineer.
21 Maintenance Roads. Maintenance roads and easements shall be
provided for all detention facilities. The road shall be a minimum of
twelve (12) feet wide capable of providing access for maintenance and
emergency vehicles. Grades shall not exceed 10%.
22 Fire Protection. Where the proposed detention basins involve
permanently ponded water and where deemed practical by the Town
Engineer, access to storm detention basins should be provided for fire
fighting equipment. The addition of dry hydrants and related fire
fighting appurtenances within the detention basins shall be coordinated
with the Colchester Fire Marshal.
12 Appendix 1
23 Fencing. Safety fencing shall be provided as prescribed by the Town
Engineer.
3. EASEMENTS AND RIGHTS-TO-DRAIN.
1. General. All applications proposing easements as a part of the development
shall submit properly executed written easements and deeds describing the land
involved and privileges of the Town and/or property owner(s) in a form
eliminating any Town liability for installation and maintenance, and satisfactory
to the Town. Said easements shall be submitted to the Town prior to final
approval.
2. Easements Dedicated to the Town. Drainage easements for drainage systems
located outside of the street right-of-way lines shall be a minimum of 20 feet
wide centered on the pipe and shall be adequate to provide access and
maintenance to all drainage features. Easements for outlet pipes shall extend to
a adequate existing storm drainage system or natural water course. Easements
shall be provided for channels and shall be of minimum width to include a ten
(10) foot access strip in addition to the width of the channel from top of bank to
top of bank.
3. Easements Not Dedicated to the Town. The location and size of these
easements shall be established in the same manner as easements to be
dedicated to the Town. The developer shall be responsible for establishing short
and long term maintenance for the drainage system within said easements. The
Town shall be granted the right to enter such easements to maintain, repair
and/or modify the installations.
4. Rights-To-Drain. Where the downstream drainage features are not adequate to
handle the increase in flows, the applicant shall secure drainage rights from the
affected property owners, in writing. Such rights shall be noted on the final plans
and shall be secured prior to final approval. Rights-to-Drain shall include the
right for the Town to enter and maintain existing and proposed facilities if the
drainage system is to be owned by the Town and shall be in a form satisfactory
to the Town.
5. State Highway Department (DOT) Permit. Where a Proposed storm drainage
system connects with a State Highway or its appurtenances, the developer shall
obtain a permit for the connection from the Connecticut Department of
Transportation and shall present a copy of said permit to the Town prior to final
approval.
6. Other Permits. Where access to the lot is provided from a State Highway,
evidence that application has been made for a State Highway Encroachment
Permit must be submitted to the Town.
4. CONDITIONS. Site Plan approvals may be granted subject to appropriate conditions and
safeguards deemed necessary by the Commission to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the community, to protect property values in the neighborhood or zoning district
and to preserve the purpose and intent of these Regulations.
13 Appendix 1
5. APPEAL OF A ZONING COMMISSION DECISION REGARDING SITE PLANS. Any appeal
of a site plan shall be to the Superior Court pursuant to Section 8-9, Connecticut General
Statutes.
6. IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PLANS. Improvement Location Plans, signed, sealed and
certified to be accurate by a registered land surveyor, shall be presented to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer who shall check consistency of the Improvement Location Plans with
the approved site plan. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until such certificate of
Zoning Compliance by the Zoning Enforcement Officer is made. Any alterations from the
original approved plan without authorization are the responsibility of the developer or
homeowner and may be refused by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Zoning and
Planning Commission. Where engineered design is required, plans shall also be signed and
sealed by a professional engineer. Improvement Location Plans for all developments
(except single family) shall be filed in the Towns land records. After footing is installed, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall inspect the site and may, where distance from any
boundary line is in question, require that the location of the footings be certified by a
licensed land surveyor to be in accordance with the approved site plan and these
Regulations.
ZONING REGULATION AMENDMENTS
EFFECTIVE DATE: OCTOBER 2, 2015
Addition of Section 1.2:
Where a district boundary divided a lot of record at the same time such boundary line is adopted, the
regulations for the less restricted portion of such lot may extend not more than 50 foot into the more
restricted portion provided that the lot has frontage on a street in the less restricted district. The
provision shall not impact any buffering required by these regulations.
Addition of Section 4.3.3:
In addition, multi-family uses shall be not permitted once the total amount of multi-family units permitted
in this zone is 200 units. No more than 100 units will be permitted on any multi-family site in the
suburban district.
Replace text of Section 4.6.5
Side and Rear setbacks shall be 35 feet. Front yards shall be a minimum of 10 feet.
Amendment to Section 8.8(1):
Religious or Entertainment Gathering - Zoning Permits for short term temporary events may be granted
for an event up to 10 days. One extension of no more than 10 days may be granted by the
Commission in any district provided the event will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
the permit during the permit period. Permanent or annual events may be permitted by the Commission
initially and then renewed annually by the ZEO. Adequate provisions shall be made for safe access
and traffic control, off street parking, water supply, sewage disposal and emergency medical treatment
for those attending the activity.

SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS
Town of Colchester
Zoning and Planning Commission
127 Norwich Avenue
Colchester, CT 06415
AMENDED THROUGH:
JUNE 1, 2010
COLCHESTER SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 1
TABLE CONTENTS
Section 1- Purpose and Authority 3
Section 2 - Definitions 4
Section 3 - Pre-Application Sketch Plan
3.1 Purpose 5
3.2 Procedure 5
3.3 Contents 5
3.4 Test Pit Logs
Section 4 - Plan Submission and Review Procedures
4.1 Submission 7
4.2 Hearing 7
4.3 Referral 7
4.4 Vote by the Commission 7
4.5 Posting of Bond 8
4.6 Endorsement of the Plan 8
4.7 Filing the Plan 8
4.8 Time limits on Completion 8
Section 5 - Plan Requirements
5.1 General Requirements 9
5.2 Boundary Survey Map
9
5.3 Construction Plan 11
5.4 Supporting Documents 12
Section 6 - Design Requirements
6.1 Purpose 13
6.2 Lots 12
6.3 Streets 13
6.4 Drainage 18
6.5 Open Space 19
6.6 Standards for Flood Plain District 23
6.7 Driveways 24
6.8 Street Trees 24
Section 7 - Improvements
7.1 Special Definitions Relating to Improvements 25
7.1a Standard Details for Construction of Public Improvements 27
7.2 General 51
7.3 Inspection and Approval of Work 51
7.4 Streets 51
7.5 Storm Drainage 52
7.6 Curbs 52
7.7 Sidewalks 53
7.8 Monuments and Markers 53
7.9 Street Signs 54
7.10 Utilities 54
7.11 SECTION DELETED
7.12 Clean-up 55
7.13 Bonding 55
Section 8 - General
8.1 Amendments 57
8.2 Applicability 57
8.3 Validity 57
8.4 Effective Date 57
Appendix A - Check List 58
RECORD OF TEXT AMENDMENTS
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 2
Amd
No. Appl. No. Approval
Date
Effective
Date
Section
Amended Summary of Amendment
001 RC#05-168 11/16/05 12/01/05 6.3.14 Amendment to text regarding Road Names
002 RC#05-170 2/15/06 2/15/06 7.1a Update Construction Details
003 RC#10-204 5/19/10 6/1/10 6.3, 7.7 Pedestrian Access Requirements
004
005
006
007
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 3
SECTION I - PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
1.1. The purposes of these Regulations are to provide for orderly growth and to establish
standards for the design and construction of streets and other improvements in new
subdivisions in the Town of Colchester. Under the authority granted by the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut, Chapter 126, as amended the Zoning & Planning
Commission of the Town of Colchester, Connecticut, hereby adopts these Regulations for
the subdivision of land. No subdivision of land shall be made until a plan for such
subdivision has been approved by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of
these Regulations.
1.2. In accordance with Section 8.26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Commission
may waive certain requirements under the regulations by a three-quarters vote of all the
members of the Commission in cases where conditions exist which affect the subject land
and are not generally applicable to other land in the area, provided that the regulations
shall specify the conditions under which a waiver may be considered and shall provide
that no waiver shall be granted that would have a significant adverse effect on adjacent
property or on public health and safety. The Commission shall state upon its records the
reasons for which a waiver is granted in each case.
1.3. Penalty For Failure To Comply:
In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-25, any person, firm,
corporation, partnership or association making the subdivision or resubdivision of land
without approval of the Commission shall be liable to a fine of Five Hundred ($500.00)
Dollars for each lot sold or offered for sale.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 4
SECTION 2 - DEFINITIONS
2.1 Applicant shall mean the owner of the parcel to be subdivided or any person authorized
to act for the owner by a written and signed statement from the owner to the Commission
accompanying this application.
2.2 Commission shall mean the Zoning and Planning Commission of the Town of
Colchester, Connecticut.
2.3 Town of Colchester shall mean all of the area within the boundary of the Town of
Colchester and including the Borough of Colchester.
2.4 First Selectman shall mean the First Selectman of the Town of Colchester or his
designee.
2.5 Regulations shall mean the subdivision regulations of the Town of Colchester,
Connecticut.
2.6 Subdivision shall mean the division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more parcels
or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease or building
development, expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation or
agricultural purposes, and includes re-subdivision.
2.7 Re-subdivision shall mean a change in the map of an approved or recorded subdivision or
re-subdivision if such change:
a. Affects any street layout shown on such map.
b. Affects any area reserved thereon for public use.
c. Diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building
lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or
recording of such a map.
2.8 Plan shall mean the plan of the subdivision, including maps, profiles and other
supporting documents as required in Section 5 of these Regulations.
2.9 Plan Approval shall mean all of the following:
a. Vote of the Commission to approve or modify and approve the plan of
subdivision. (see Section 4.4)
b. Posting of a bond to cover the cost of subdivision improvements unless such
improvements have been completed by the applicant, (see Section 4.5) and
c. Endorsement of approval by the Chairman of the Commission (Section 4.6)
2.10 Street, Dead-end – A street closed at one end with an intersection with a through street at
the other end, and also includes the term cul-de-sac street.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 5
SECTION 3 - PRE-APPLICATION SKETCH PLAN
3.1 Purpose - Any person intending to subdivide land in the Town of Colchester is urged to
present a sketch plan to the Commission for informal review prior to preparing the
official subdivision plan. Presentation of the sketch plan is at the discretion of the
applicant and is intended to insure that basic requirements can be met prior to incurring
engineering, application and legal costs in connection with the proposed subdivision.
The sketch plan provides both the Commission and the subdivider with an opportunity to
raise questions and receive answers about the proposed subdivision and local regulations.
The sketch plan enjoys no official status, and consent of the Commission with regard to
its feasibility in no way implies approval of the official subdivision plan. No fee or
application form is required for presentation and review of a sketch plan.
3.2 Procedure - Presentation and discussion of the pre-application sketch plan to the
Commission may be arranged by contacting the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the
Chairman or Secretary of the Commission at least seven days prior to a scheduled
meeting of the Commission and requesting that discussion of the sketch plan be placed
on the meeting agenda.
3.3 Contents - The sketch plan should be drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals
100 feet and show the following:
3.3.1 The property boundary and adjacent property owners' names.
3.3.2 Contour lines at intervals of at least 10 feet. These may be simple enlargements
of or approximations from U.S.G.S. topographic maps.
3.3.3 Locations of existing roads, structures, wetlands and water courses, rock outcrops
and utility rights-of-way and easements, and any existing drainage structures and
utilities.
3.3.4 Locations of proposed roads, building lots and open space.
3.3.5 A written statement indicating the proposed method of providing for water supply
and sewage disposal.
3.3.6 An indication of the total acreage of the tract to be subdivided and the
approximate area of each lot.
3.3.7 In the case of a major subdivision, the Commission urges that the sketch plan and
its supporting data should be submitted in triplicate to facilitate the review
process.
3.4 Test Pit Logs - Soil information is essential to the evaluation of land for subdivision. The
Commission therefore urges that test pit logs be presented along with the sketch plan.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 6
Locations of test pits should be shown on the sketch plan and should be provided on the
basis of at least one every five acres, distributed evenly over the entire tract. Data for
each test pit should be shown in a manner compatible with the form shown in Appendix
A of these Regulations and shall be signed by a registered professional engineer. Data
should include the soil types to a depth of 8 feet and the depth to groundwater table
and/or bedrock. The classification of soils should be in accordance with the National
Cooperative Soils Survey of the Soil Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 7
SECTION 4 - PLAN SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
4.1 Submission - Any person intending to make application for a subdivision of land in the
Town of Colchester shall submit an application to the Code Administration office at least
seven days prior to a scheduled meeting of the Commission. The plan shall be submitted
with an application in the form prescribed in Appendix B of these Regulations and with
the application fee and shall include five copies of all plans, profiles, maps and reports as
required by these Regulations. The application fee is seventy-five dollars ($75.00) plus
twenty-five dollars per lot within the proposed subdivision. In the case of a resubdivision
the fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus twenty-five dollars
($25.00) per lot, applying the number of new lots being created.
4.2 Hearing - The Commission may hold a Public Hearing regarding any subdivision
proposal if, in its judgment, the specific circumstances require such action. No plan of
re-subdivision shall be approved by the Commission without a Public Hearing. Such
Public Hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the
application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of this period,
provided the total extension shall not exceed sixty-five (65) days. Notice of a hearing
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least twice at
intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days, nor less than ten
days, and the last not less than two days prior to the date of such hearing, and by sending
a copy thereof by registered or certified mail to the applicant. The Public Hearing must
be completed within thirty (30) days after such hearing commences. The applicant may
consent to one or more extensions of this period, the total extension not to exceed an
additional thirty (30) days.
4.3 Referral - Whenever a subdivision of land is planned, the area of which will abut or
include land in another municipality, the Commission shall, before approving the plan,
submit it to the Regional Planning Agency or Agencies of the region or regions within
which the other municipality is located. The Regional Planning Agency or Agencies
receiving such referral shall, within thirty days, report to the Commission and to the
applicant its findings on the inter-municipal aspects of the proposed subdivision. If such
report of the Regional Planning Agency is not submitted within thirty days after the
referral from the Commission, it shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove
of the proposed subdivision. The Regional Planning Agency's report shall be purely
advisory.
4.4 Vote by the Commission - The Commission shall vote to approve, modify and approve,
or disapprove any subdivision application or maps and plans submitted therewith within
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 8
sixty-five days after completion of the Public Hearing thereon or, if no Public Hearing is
held, within sixty-five days after the official receipt thereof. Notice of the decision of the
Commission shall be published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the
municipality and addressed by certified mail to the applicant by its Secretary or Agent,
under his signature within fifteen days after such decision has been rendered. The failure
of the Commission to act thereon, shall be considered as an approval, and a certificate to
that effect shall be issued by the Commission on demand. The grounds for the action of
the Commission shall be stated in the records of the Commission. The applicant may
consent to one or more extensions of the time periods specified in this section, the total
extension not to exceed the original period specified.
4.5 Posting of Bonds - Prior to endorsement of the plan, the Commission shall accept from
the applicant performance bonds in an amount and with surety, or without surety with a
cash bond, and conditions satisfactory to its securing to the municipality the actual
construction and installation of all improvements as required in Section 7 of the these
regulations which have not been completed by the applicant. The amount of the
performance bond shall be determined by the Commission after consultation with the
Town Engineer and Public Works Director as appropriate. The form of the bond, as
required by the Town of Colchester shall be satisfactory to the Treasurer of the Town of
Colchester.
4.6 Endorsement of the Plan- If the Commission votes to approve a plan or modify and
approve a plan, its approval with the date thereof, together with a statement of any
modifications applying to such approval, shall be endorsed and signed by the Chairman
or Secretary of the Commission in the space provided for such purpose on 1) fixed line
photographic polyester film, 2) original ink drawing on polyester film or linen or, 3)
wash-off photographic polyester film copy of the plan provided by the applicant. In
addition to the above, the applicant shall provide three paper copies of the final approved
plan and a digital copy in an AutoCadd drawing file format, or other format acceptable to
the Town. The Commission can waive this requirement, upon a written request from the
applicant, if the applicant’s plans are not digitally prepared. (effective 4/1/08)
4.7 Filing the Plan - The endorsed copy of the plan shall be filed by the applicant in
accordance with Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes in the office of the
Town Clerk and any plan not so filed within ninety days of the expiration of the appeal
period, or in the case of an appeal within 90 days of the termination of such appeal by
dismissal, withdrawal, or judgment in favor of the applicant. Any plan not so filed or
recorded within the prescribed time period shall become null and void, except that the
Commission may extend the time for such filing two additional periods of ninety days
and the plan shall remain valid until the expiration of such extended time.
4.8 Time Limit on Completion - Any person, firm or corporation making any subdivision of
land shall complete all work in connection with such subdivision within five years after
the approval of the plan for such subdivision.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 9
SECTION 5 - PLAN REQUIREMENTS
5.1 General Requirements. All plans, maps and profiles submitted with the application for a
subdivision shall conform to Class A-2 standards for accuracy of the Code of the
Connecticut Technical Council, Incorporated. All such documents shall be in the form of
good quality white prints and shall be not more than thirty-six inches long and twentyfour
inches wide. Each print shall have a one-half inch border on three sides and a twoinch
border on the left side. Where more than one sheet is presented, they shall be bound
at the left edge. All prints shall bear the following information.
5.1.1 The name or title of the subdivision.
5.1.2 The name of the property owner.
5.1.3 The name of the applicant.
5.1.4 Names, registration numbers and seals of the land surveyor and/or engineer that
prepared the drawing.
5.1.5 Date, north point and scale of the drawing.
5.1.6 A key map, drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet showing
the location of the subdivision in relation to all existing roads within at least 2,500
feet thereof. Where only a part of the subdivision is shown on the sheet, a key
map shall show its location in relation to the whole subdivision.
5.1.7 The following statement: In accordance with Section 8.26.c.of the Connecticut
General Statutes, failure to complete all work by ______________ (five years
from date of approval of this map) shall result in expiration of the Subdivision
Plan.
5.2 Boundary Survey Map. The boundary survey map shall be drawn at a scale no greater
than one inch equals 100 feet and shall show the following:
5.2.1 Boundaries, dimensions and acreage of the property to be subdivided.
5.2.2 Boundaries of properties and names of property owners within 100 feet of the
proposed subdivision.
5.2.3 Locations and designations of all wetlands, water courses rock outcroppings, and
slopes greater than 25%.
5.2.4 Boundaries, dimensions, bearings, area and lot numbers of all proposed lots. (Lot
areas may be shown in tabular form).
5.2.5 All existing buildings, stone walls, and trees in excess of two feet in diameter.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 10
5.2.6 All existing monuments, pipe markers and any other physical evidence
concerning property boundaries. Where new markers are established, they shall
be referenced to established points of the Connecticut Coordinate System, unless
the applicant can show, in writing and to the satisfaction of the Commission, that
such reference would be an unreasonable hardship because of distance or
topographic problems.
5.2.7 Locations of all existing and proposed easements, rights-of-way and drainage
rights and open spaces.
5.2.8 Locations of street rights-of-way, bearings, curve data, including arc length, radii,
and central angles, street names, pavement widths, stations along center lines at
100-foot intervals, and locations of sidewalks and street pavement within the
rights-of-way, for existing and proposed streets.
5.2.9 Contour lines at two-foot intervals, obtained by actual field survey or aerial
topography. Elevations shall be referenced to U.S. Geological Survey datum.
U.S.G.S. contour mapping is not acceptable when the proposed subdivision
includes a new road or improvements to existing road.
5.2.10 Location of percolation test holes and deep soil test pits. All test holes and
pits shall be numbered and data may be presented on separate sheets.
Data should be accompanied by a written statement signed by the Health Officer,
Building Official or a Sanitarian that percolation tests and examination of deep
test holes were conducted in the presence of one of the above three officials or
their designees. A percolation test and at least two deep test holes shall be
conducted on each lot in the proposed subdivision in the proposed area of the
leaching field when on-lot subsurface sewage disposal is to be used. In order to
assure that test holes will have to be dug only once, they should be done in
accordance with Sections 3.4 of these Regulations.
5.2.11 The words "Approved by the Colchester Zoning and Planning Commission" and a
designated space for the date and signature of the Chairman.
5.2.12 Where applicable, the applicant shall present a written statement indicating his
intentions for the use of other lands owned by him adjacent to the proposed
subdivision.
5.2.13 On-site soil classification and limits, as per the New London County Soil Survey.
5.2.14 Zoning district boundary lines.
5.2.15 Location of flood zone(s) as per the FEMA (Federal Emergency Management
Agency) Floodway Map.
5.2.16 At least one benchmark elevation with corresponding vertical datum.
5.2.17 Roadway intersection sight distances and limits of clearing required to achieve
such distance.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 11
5.2.18 Footing drain location and outlet with flow-line information for each dwelling.
5.3 Construction Plan - A construction plan, drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals forty
(40) feet, shall be submitted when any type of construction, such as roads, drainage,
water supply or sewer systems, retaining walls, etc., is to be carried out in connection
with the subdivision. The construction plan, prepared by a Connecticut registered
professional engineer, and subsequent construction shall be in accordance with Form 814
of the Connecticut Department of Transportation, Bureau of Highways "Standard
Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction" and any supplements and
amendments thereof, unless otherwise specifically provided by these Regulations. The
construction plan shall include the following, where applicable:
5.3.1 Plan and profile for all proposed streets, showing:
a) Existing surface elevation along the center line.
b) Locations, proposed grades, vertical curves with center-line elevations every
fifty feet, except that such information shall be provided at ten foot intervals
within eighty feet of the center-line cross point of an intersection.
c) Location, size and invert elevations of existing and proposed storm rains, catch
basins, manholes, bridges, culverts, and outfalls.
d) Location, size and invert elevations of proposed sewers, if any.
e) Location and size of all water supply and distribution facilities and hydrants.
f) Cross sections at 100-foot intervals where existing terrain slopes more than ten
percent.
g) Sidewalk locations.
h) Trees and other special landscape features to be installed by the applicant.
5.3.2 Where drainage systems are to be constructed, one copy of the construction plan
shall be suitably marked to show watershed data used in the design of such
systems and shall be accompanied by all calculations used in the drainage design,
and include easements, rights-of-way, and rights to drain.
5.3.3 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan - In order to minimize the erosion of top soil
and the depositing of sediments in drainage structures and water courses in the
Town of Colchester, the Commission shall require that all plans for the
subdivision of land include a plan showing the measures the applicant intends to
take to control erosion and sedimentation during construction of the subdivision
and to prevent its occurrence after completion of the subdivision. Erosion and
sediment control plans shall conform to standards prescribed in the "Erosion and
Sediment Control Handbook" of the Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department
of Agriculture. Copies of the Handbook are available from the office of the New
London County Soil and Water Conservation District.
5.3.4 In the case of retaining walls or other special features, a drawing to a scale of onequarter
(1/4) inch equals one foot of all such details shall be furnished, along with
design computations.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 12
5.4 Supporting Documents - Before approval of any subdivision the Commission shall
require the following:
5.4.1 Evidence of permits for activities that might be controlled by the Colchester
Conservation Commission.
5.4.2 Where applicable, written statements attesting to the suitability of (1) water and
sewer systems from the Utilities Commissions and/or the Director of Health
and/or the Southeastern Connecticut Water Authority under provisions of Section
13 of Special Act 381 (1967), as amended, and (2) all other improvements, such
as roads, drainage and monuments, from the First Selectman.
5.4.3 Offers of cession, in a form satisfactory to the Commission, of all land, including
streets, recreation areas, drainage and utility easements and other public uses not
specifically reserved by the subdivider for the use of the future owners of the lots
and retained under deed by same.
5.4.4 For any subdivision with five (5) or more lots, the following materials prepared
by a licensed Landscape Architect:
• a site inventory/analysis plan,
• an overall lot/roadway layout, and
• a written report identifying significant features on the site and identifying
which of such features are to be preserved.
5.4.5 For any subdivision with twenty (20) or more lots, a traffic impact analysis
prepared by a traffic engineer indicating:
• the expected average daily vehicular trips, peak hour volumes, and
distribution of traffic,
• access conditions at the intersections, and
• the effect of the traffic upon the level of service of the streets and
intersections providing access to the development.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 13
SECTION 6 - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
6.1 Purpose - The requirements of this section are intended to produce a safe, functional and
attractive living environment in residential developments in Colchester. The basic intent
is to provide a means for fitting the subdivision into the pre-existing natural setting with a
minimum disturbance to the landscape. Due consideration shall be given to the Town
Plan of Development, especially in the location and function of roads, public facilities
and open space.
6.2 Lots - Proposed building lots shall be arranged and designed to make the best use of the
natural terrain, to avoid unnecessary regrading, to protect the natural environment, and to
preserve natural features. All lots shall conform to the following:
6.2.1 Lot area and dimensional standards shall be determined by the Zoning
Regulations or as otherwise determined by the Commission in accordance with
the Zoning Regulations, except that the Commission may require larger lots
where needed to comply with the state or local health codes.
6.2.2 Each lot shall be capable of containing a minimum square whose side dimensions
shall be equal to the dimension required by the Zoning Regulations. The
minimum square shall be contiguous buildable area as defined in the Zoning
Regulations of the Town of Colchester, and shall contain the principal building.
6.2.3 Wherever possible, without detriment to or destruction of natural and/or historical
features, side lot lines shall be at right angles to the street and radial to curves.
6.2.4 All proposed lots shall show the location of the proposed principal building,
driveway, sewerage leaching fields (primary and reserve), and well.
6.2.5 All lots in a proposed subdivision shall front on an existing street or on one
proposed by the subdivision plan. If subdivision is to be phased, all lots within
each phase shall front on an existing street, or on one proposed within that phase.
6.2.6 All lots in a proposed subdivision shall require certification by the Town Director
of Public Health that a functioning septic system with adequate reserve area can
be provided in accordance with the requirements of the State Health Code, as
amended.
6.2.7 Flag lots in any subdivision shall:
6.2.7.1 Conform to the requirements of Section 13.21 of the Zoning Regulations.
6.2.7.2 Not be accessed from collector or arterial streets.
6.2.7.3 Not exceed more than ten percent (10%) of the total number of lots in the
subdivision or one (1) flag lot per subdivision, whichever is greater.
6.3 Streets - Proposed streets shall be in harmony with existing or proposed principal
thoroughfares, as shown on the Town Plan of Development, especially in regard to safe
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 14
intersections with such thoroughfares. The design of each street shall reflect
considerations of its function, vehicular and pedestrian safety, and its use by maintenance
and emergency vehicles.
6.3.1 The classification of streets shall be as designated in the Town Plan of
Development. Proposed streets not shown on such Plan shall be classified by the
Commission.
6.3.2 Streets are defined and classified as follows:
a) Arterials - streets whose main function is the movement of vehicles from
place to place or town to town. Access to properties is a secondary function
of these streets. As identified in the Town Plan of Development, the
following existing streets are classified as arterials:
Arterial Roads:
Route 16 Middletown Road, Linwood Avenue, Lebanon Avenue
Route 85 New London Road, South Main Street, Broadway, and Amston Road
Route 615 Old Hartford Road to exit 17 of Route 2
Route 149 Westchester Road
Route 354 Parum Road, Deep River Road
Route 616 Norwich Avenue
b) Collectors - streets whose main function is to collect traffic from abutting
properties or from local streets and provide access to other roads or properties
in the community. A collector is often a connecting road between two
arteries. The following existing streets are classified as collectors:
Collector Roads:
Bulkeley Hill Road Miller Road (from Hartford Road to Old Hebron Road)
Bull Hill Road Nelkin Road
Cabin Road Old Hartford Road (from Exit 17 of Route 2 north to Town line)
Cato Corner Road Old Hebron Road
Cemetery Road Pleasant Street
Chestnut Hill Road (to Stanavage Road) Prospect Hill Road
Clark Road River Road (from Westchester Road to South Road)
Comstock Bridge Road School Road
Doctor Foote Road Scofield Road
Elm Street South Road
Gillette’s Lane Stanavage Road
Halls Hill Road Standish Road (from Cato Corner Road to Clark Road)
Hayward Avenue Stollman Road
Lake Hayward Road Taylor Road
Linwood Cemetery Road (to Wall Street) Van Cedarfield Road
Marvin Road Wall Street
McDonald Road Waterhole Road
Mill Hill Road (from Old Hartford Road to Van Cedarfield Road West Road
Mill Street Williams Road
Windham Avenue
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 15
c) Local and Dead End - streets whose primary function is to provide access to
abutting properties without serving major through traffic. All existing streets
in Colchester not listed above as arterials or collectors are classified as local
or dead-end streets.
6.3.3 Streets shall conform to the following standards for right-of-way and paving:
6.3.3.1 Arterial streets as defined in Section 6.3.2 shall have an 80' right of way
and a 40' curb to curb paved width.
6.3.3.2 Collector streets as defined in Section 6.3.2 shall have a 60' right of way
and a 30' curb to curb paved width.
6.3.3.3 Local and dead-end streets meeting the following criteria shall have a 50'
right-of-way and a 26' curb-to-curb paved width:
a) The street length plus all feeders to it is less than 2800 feet.
b) Geologic features, wetlands, and/or existing development precludes the
reasonable likelihood of street network expansion beyond 2800 feet.
c) The number of lots potentially served by the maximum projected street
network is less than forty (40) under present regulations.
6.3.3.4 Dead end streets meeting the following criteria shall have a 50' right-ofway
and a 24' curb-to-curb paved width:
a) The street length is less than 800 feet.
b) Geologic features, wetlands, and/or existing development precludes the
reasonable likelihood of street extension beyond 800' .
c) The number of lots potentially served by the maximum projected street
is less than ten (10) under present regulations.
6.3.3.5 All other local/dead end streets shall have a 50' right-of-way and 30' curbto-
curb paved width.
6.3.3.6 The Commission may reduce the requirements of Sections 6.3.3.1 through
6.3.3.5 for public supply watershed protection, groundwater protection,
aquifer protection, and for wetlands and other environmental protection
purposes.
6.3.4 All proposed streets shall connect with one or more approved town roads or state
highways, except that any part of a subdivision containing more than thirty lots
shall be accessible from at least two directions.
6.3.5 Streets shall be laid out to provide connections with existing streets on adjacent
properties, where appropriate. Consideration shall be given to connecting with
future streets on adjacent property where future subdivision appears probable.
6.3.6 A dead-end street shall be provided with a circular turn-around area at the closed
end having a minimum outside paved radius of fifty (50) feet and a minimum
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 16
right-of-way radius of sixty (60) feet. On permanent dead-end streets, the
Commission may permit a landscaped center island provided that the outside
paved radius of the travelway is at least fifty (50) feet and the landscaped center
island is designed in terms of landscaping to accommodate the turning radius of a
WB-40 vehicle. Such streets will be permitted only when an alternative street
layout is deemed by the Commission to be impractical because of geologic
features, wetlands, and/or existing development. A dead-end street shall not
exceed eighteen hundred (1,800) feet in length unless it is of a temporary nature
and is planned for extension and can reasonably be expected to connect with an
existing or proposed road on adjoining land. Any dead end street shall be built to
the standards and dimensions identified in Section 6.3.3.
Permanent Dead End Street Temporary Dead End Street
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 17
6.3.7 Street grades shall not exceed eight percent (8%) or be less than one percent
(1%), except that the Commission may permit grades up to ten percent for short
distances where, in its judgment, existing topographic conditions or the
preservation of natural features indicated that such modification will achieve the
best subdivision design. Grades shall not be greater than three percent (3%)
within fifty (50) feet of an intersection.
6.3.8 Streets shall be designed with a cross pitch or crown of three-eighths (3/8) inch
per foot distance measured from the edge of the pavement to the center line of the
street.
6.3.9 Cut or fill areas beyond the area of improvements of the right-of-way shall not
exceed a Horizontal:Vertical slope of 2 to 1, except that rock cuts may not exceed
a 1 to 6 Horizontal:Vertical slope. All earth slope surfaces and areas disturbed by
grading and construction of streets shall be covered with a minimum of four
inches of topsoil and suitably seeded or planted or otherwise treated to prevent
erosion.
6.3.10 The tangent distance between reverse curves shall not be less than one hundred
feet on arterial and collector streets, and fifty feet on dead-end and local streets.
Except for intersections and turn-arounds on dead-end streets, no local or deadend
street curves shall have a radius of less than one hundred feet and no collector
or arterial street curve shall have a radius of less than one hundred fifty feet, as
measured radial to the center line. Curves greater than 2 degrees 30 minutes on
collector and arterial streets shall be super elevated. Horizontal and vertical sight
distances, horizontal and vertical rates of curvature and super elevation shall
satisfy the requirements of the Connecticut Department of Transportation
Geometric Highway Design Standards.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 18
6.3.11 Except where impractical because of topography or other conditions, dead-end
and local streets shall be perpendicular to intersections for a distance of at least
one hundred (100) feet and collector and arterial streets shall be perpendicular to
intersections for at least one hundred fifty (150) feet. All corners shall be
rounded, with a radius of not less than twenty-five feet. Center lines of alternate
side streets shall not be closer than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet, measured
along the center line. Wherever a dead-end or local street intersects with a
collector or arterial street, a minimum sight distance of three hundred fifty feet
shall be required in each direction along the major road. The sight distance shall
be measured at a point ten (10) feet back from the edge of the paved portion of the
collector or arterial street.
Policy (Adopted 6/1/10)
Preserving open space and increasing pedestrian access are primary goals of the Colchester Plan
of Conservation and Development. Colchester is a semi rural town whose community character
is illustrated by significant environmental assets and the preservation of open space. As such the
consideration of publicly utilized open space areas is always important. The town’s downtown is
also redeveloping and the areas outside the downtown are experiencing suburban scale
residential growth. These areas offer different but similar pedestrian challenges. Specific Plan of
Conservation and Development goals relating to pedestrian and bicycle access are identified
below:
• Tie both existing and new open space and recreation areas together into an integrated
greenbelt or buffer system
• Establish a series of trails as a key element in connecting open space and recreation areas
into an integrated system
• Expand and maintain sidewalks in the town center and the adjacent areas
• Establish pedestrian trails and bicycle trails in open space areas of Colchester and on
open space greenways
It is Planning and Zoning Commission policy that all developed parcels offer some form of
pedestrian access and that flexibility be given to applicants in meeting the requirement.
6.3.12 - Public pedestrian access is required by the Commission as established in this section. All
forms of public pedestrian access shall be constructed per Section 7.7 of the Subdivision
Regulations.
6.3.12.1 Sidewalks and trails: Every subdivision shall make provision for pedestrian
accessibility and circulation. This requirement shall be met through one of the
following options:
6.3.12.1.1 Provision for sidewalks on one side of the street on the land being subdivided.
This requirement includes both roads/streets created as part of the subdivision or along
existing Town Roads. The commission may require sidewalks on both sides of a created
road/street should traffic or other conditions warrant as defined in Section 12.2.14 of the
Colchester Zoning Regulation.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 19
6.3.12.1.2 Sidewalks and or public trails unrelated to roads where pedestrian access to
schools, shopping, or employment centers is possible.
6.3.12.1.3 Public trails constructed of material acceptable to the Commission within
open space areas on the land being subdivided or, with the approval of the landowner and
the Commission, on other open space areas in Colchester.
6.3.12.1.4 The payment of a fee for the development of sidewalk/public trail
construction on other locations in Colchester as per Section 12.3.14 of the Zoning
Regulations.
6.3.12.1.5 The Commission may waive the requirements of Section 6.12.1, per Section
1.2 of these Regulations, after finding that:
the applicant is requesting to subdivide a parcel for distribution to family member(s)
per CGS 8-25. Such eligibility shall be evidenced by covenants, restrictions,
contracts or together legally binding documents as the Commission may approve
which documents shall be filed in the land records.
6.3.12.2 If an applicant chooses to satisfy the pedestrian access requirement with anything
other than the construction of concrete sidewalks along side a public roadway as
constructed consistent with section 7.7.6 of the Colchester Subdivision Regulations; they
shall develop and have approved a regular maintenance plan. The maintenance plan shall
detail the general condition of the proposed public trial and detail the particular
maintenance issues related to the continued use of the facility. Issues expected to be
addressed include brush and debris removal, condition of the pathway and mechanism to
ensure that the maintenance is continually completed.
6.3.13 Street paving shall generally be centered within the right-of-way and sidewalks located
one foot from the outer edge of the right-of-way. However, the Commission may permit
alternate locations of the sidewalk and street paving within the required right-of-way
when such locations would facilitate the preservation of significant natural features.
6.3.14 Street Names shall be approved by the Planning Commission and shall not duplicate or
cause confusion with the names of existing streets in the Town or adjoining the Town.
Applicants are encouraged to select names having a historical connection with the Town,
and the Planning Commission shall maintain a list for this purpose. Streets which are
extensions of or in alignment with existing named streets shall bear the name of existing
streets.
(Effective Date: December 1, 2005)
6.3.15 Where the proposed subdivision contains lots fronting on an existing street that does not
meet the dimensional and improvement requirements of these Regulations, the applicant
may be required to deed sufficient land to the Town of Colchester to permit widening of
the street and may be required to make such improvements within the right-of-way of
the street as deemed appropriate by the Commission.
6.4 Drainage - An adequate system of storm water drainage shall be provided and no natural
watercourse shall be altered or obstructed in such a way as to reduce the natural runoff
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 20
capacity unless substitute means of runoff are provided. All existing and proposed
drainage systems shall be indicated as to size and location on plans and profile sheets.
Drainage rights-of-way through lots shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide, and follow
property lines wherever possible. All necessary easements for drainage shall be provided
prior to plan approval. All drainage design shall meet the requirements of Section 12.5.4
of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Colchester.
6.5 Open Space - The Commission shall require provision for open spaces, parks and
playgrounds as deemed proper by the Commission to protect natural resources and
preserve rural character.
6.5.1 Dedication of Land - Where the open space requirement shall be met through the
dedication of land, at least ten (10) percent of the total area of the subdivision
shall be set aside for open space (see Section 4K of the Zoning Regulations for
flexibility for additional open space preservation).
6.5.1.a Functional Criteria - In considering areas proposed for preservation as open
space, the Commission shall determine that the proposed open space meets
one or more of the following functional criteria:
i. Contributes to an existing or potential overall greenway or trail system in
ii. the neighborhood or the community.
ii. Enhances or expands existing open space or recreation areas.
iii. Conserves and protects natural resources including lakes, ponds, rivers
streams, streambelts, inland wetlands, aquifers, significant woodlands,
ridges, ravines, ledge outcroppings and other unusual physical features.
iv. Provides a buffer between incompatible land uses.
v. Conserves areas for scenic preservation.
vi Provides for active recreation.
vii. Preserves agricultural land.
viii. Conserves and protects important wildlife habitat.
ix Provides areas for groundwater recharge.
x. Protects historic or archeological sites.
xi. Is in accordance with the Plan of Conservation & Development.
6.5.1.b Location and Configuration –
i. To satisfy all or part of the open space requirement of a subdivision, the
Commission may consider lands located elsewhere in Colchester provided
the subdivider dedicates an area of land equal to, or greater than, the open
space requirement of the subdivision.
ii. When the subdivision is a part of a larger tract of land, the Commission
may consider dedication of an area of land in the undeveloped portion of
the tract equal to, or greater than, the open space requirement of the
developed portion.
iii. In determining whether the location of open space is acceptable, the
Commission may consider the potential for combination with existing or
proposed open space on adjoining properties owned by any public or
private institution.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 21
iv.When a subdivision abuts an existing preserved open space or land
identified as desirable open space in the Plan of Conservation and
Development, the Commission may require the proposed open space be
configured to form a single, unified open space area with the existing
preserved open space or the desirable open space on adjacent land.
v. Unless waived by the Commission in accordance with Section 1.2 of these
Regulations, the percentage of wetlands on the land to be set aside for
open space shall be no greater than the percentage of wetlands on the
entire tract for:
(1) the minimum open space requirement of ten percent (10%), and.
(2) for any open space dedication that is utilized to result in
development flexibility under Section 4K of the Zoning
Regulations.
vi.The Commission may require that any open space land:
(1) abut or have direct access to a public road through a right-ofway
at least fifteen (15’) wide dedicated to public use;
(2) be graded and improved to allow for foot traffic or for access
by maintenance vehicles, with a maximum grade of twelve
percent (12%);
(3) be located in areas of the subdivision that promote the functional
criteria in Section 6.5.1.
vii. Land provided as open space shall be left in a natural state by the
subdivider except for improvement or maintenance as may be expressly
permitted or required by the Commission. Open space areas shall not be
graded, cleared, or used as a depository for brush, stumps, earth, building
materials, or debris except as expressly permitted by the Commission.
6.5.1.c Flexibility of Open Space Dedication –
1. If a subdivider proposes recreational improvements with public access
(such as trails, playscapes, playing fields, etc.) , the Commission may,
in accordance with Section 1.2 of these Regulations, waive some
portion of the open space dedication requirements provided the
improvements shall be:
a. clearly shown on the approved plan, and
b. included in the calculation of the bonding requirements for the
subdivision approved by the Commission prior to the filing of the
subdivision plan.
6.5.1d Protection Methods - Proper provision for the permanent protection,
disposition, and management of such land shall be made by the subdivider
and approved by the Commission. Suitable options, in order of priority,
may include:
i. conveyance of a fee interest to the Town of Colchester or to the State of
Connecticut,
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 22
ii.conveyance of a fee interest to a non-profit conservation organization,
such as the Colchester Land Trust, with provision for public access,
iii.conveyance of a fee interest to a homeowners' association meeting the
criteria established by the Commission in Section 6.5.4,
iv.utilization of conservation easement(s), with public access, as may be
required by the Commission provided that no such area shall be used to
meet the minimum lot area requirement for any lot,
i. establishment of conservation easement(s) or other appropriate restrictive
covenants provided that no such area shall be used to meet the minimum lot
area requirement for any lot, or
ii. any combination of the above or any suitable alternative approved by the
Commission which accomplishes permanent preservation of land as open
space.
6.5.1.e Additional Provisions -
i. The Commission may request or accept comment regarding the proposed
open space from the Conservation Commission or any other Town board
or commission, Town official, land trust, or qualified consultant.
ii. Such open space shall be shown on the subdivision plan or on another
suitable map if located elsewhere in Colchester.
6.5.2 Fee In Lieu Of Open Space - Where dedication of open space will not meet the
purposes of this section, the subdivider may, with approval by the Commission,
pay a fee to the Town or pay a fee to the Town and transfer land to the Town in
lieu of the requirement to provide open space.
6.5.2.a If payment of such a fee is proposed, the Commission may refuse such fee
if it determines, in its sole discretion, that there are acceptable areas on the
subdivision which merit preservation by one of the methods set forth in
these Regulations.
6.5.2.b Any fee in lieu of open space payment shall be placed in a fund
established by the Town to be used for the purpose of preserving open
space or acquiring additional land for open space or for recreational or
agricultural purposes.
6.5.2.c The fee in lieu of open space procedures shall be as follows:
i. Such payment or combination of payment and the fair market value of
land transferred shall be equal to not more than ten percent (10%) of
the fair market value of the land to be subdivided prior to the approval
of the subdivision.
ii. The fair market value shall be determined by a licensed appraiser
jointly selected by the subdivider and the Commission and paid for by
the subdivider.
6.5.2.d Payment may be made as a lump sum or as fractional payments where the
numerator of the fraction is one and the denominator shall not be greater
than the number of approved lots in the subdivision.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 23
6.5.3 Exemption From Open Space Requirement –
6.5.3.a Family subdivision/Affordable housing: In accordance with CGS Section
8-25, the Commission shall exempt certain types of subdivisions from the
open space requirements provided such eligibility shall be evidenced by
covenants, restrictions, contracts, or other legally binding documents as
the Commission may approve, which documents shall be filed in the Land
Records.
6.5.3.b Open space requirements shall not apply to the subdivision or resubdivision
of any parcel of land that is smaller than 10 acres and one or
more of the following apply:
(a) The entire parcel is located within the Historic Preservation Overlay
Zone.
(b) The parcel is used or approved for use by the Commission as of the
received date of the subdivision or resubdivision application
primarily as a residential use of more than four units or a nonresidential
use which requires significant site development.
6.5.4 Requirements For Open Space Ownership By Homeowner Associations-
The Commission may permit the ownership and maintenance of the open space
and/or recreation area to be transferred to an association of property owners
provided:
6.5.4.a The Commission is assured that:
i. the association will be perpetual;
ii. the association will be binding upon and require mandatory
participation by future property owners in the association;
iii. the association will have the non-cancelable power to assess all
members for all necessary property maintenance costs;
iv. the association will assume the responsibility to adequately maintain
the land reservation for open space, park or playground purposes;
v. the association documents specify that if maintenance or preservation
of the dedication no longer comply with the provisions of the
document, the Town may take all necessary action to assure
compliance and assess against the association all costs incurred by the
Town for such purposes, including attorney’s fees.
6.5.4.b After approval by the Town Attorney and Commission, said document
shall be filed on the Land Records.
6.5.5 Documentation –
6.5.5.a Properly executed legal documents, including warranty deeds for any title
transferals, conservation easements, other open space covenants or
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 24
restrictions, or homeowner association documents shall be prepared in
accordance with the provision of this section and shall be submitted in
triplicate with the final subdivision map to be filed.
6.5.5.b All documents must be acceptable to the Commission and/or its staff and
the Town Attorney in form and content and shall refer to the subdivision
maps by title.
6.5.5.c All warranty deeds for dedication of land to the Town shall be held in
escrow by the Commission to be recorded on the Town Land Records
upon acceptance in accordance with the Town Charter. In the event that
acceptance is rejected, the deed shall be returned and the subdivider shall
return to the Commission for determination of an alternative means of
preserving the open space and/or recreation areas. In no case, shall the
acceptance of any deed by the Commission or an employee of the Town
be deemed as acceptance of the open space and/or recreation area by the
Town.
6.6 Subdivision standards for the Flood Plain District The Flood Plain District includes all
special flood hazard areas designated as Zone A, A1-30 on the Town and Borough of
Colchester Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and the Flood Boundary and Floodway
Maps, dated July 15, 1992 on file with the Colchester Town Clerk. These maps as well
as the accompanying Town and Borough Flood Insurance Studies are incorporated herein
by reference. In all special flood hazard areas the following shall apply:
6.6.1 All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
6.6.2 All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood
damage;
6.6.3 All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards; and
6.6.4 In Zone A base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
which are five acres or fifty lots, whichever occurs first.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 25
6.7 Driveways –
6.7.1 Driveways shall be shown on the proposed subdivision plan for each proposed
lot, and shall be in conformance with Section 3.7.3.D of the Zoning Regulations
of the Town of Colchester.
6.7.2 The Commission may require shared driveways and/or curb cuts for any lots in a
subdivision in order to reduce vehicular conflict points and enhance sight lines
and visibility, especially for:
• a residential flag lot, or
• any lot accessed from a collector or arterial street.
6.7.3 Unless waived by the Commission in accordance with the requirements of Section
1.2, the number of curb cuts for lots in a subdivision accessing a collector or an
arterial street shall be limited to a maximum of one (1) curb cut per 500 feet of
frontage.
6.8 Street Trees
6.8.1 Significant efforts shall be devoted to preserving substantial existing vegetation in
each subdivision.
6.8.2 When substantial existing vegetation does not exist on the site or has not been
saved during development, the Commission shall require that:
• street trees consisting of 2-1/2 to 3 inch caliper, measured dBH or larger
nursery stock with the tree species subject to approval by the Commission
be planted by the developer,
• such street trees be planted within the public right-of-way at the edge of
the street line or other suitable location approved by the Commission,
• such street trees be planted forty (40) to fifty (50) feet on center on both
sides of any street, subject to variations made necessary by driveways,
street corners, and walks, and
• such trees shall be planted, protected and maintained using good
horticultural practices.
6.8.3 All street tree plantings shall be selected to eliminate any requirement for
mowing, weeding or other forms of maintenance by the Town.
6.8.4 The Commission shall require the subdivider to post satisfactory surety to
sufficiently cover the estimated costs, as determined by the Town Engineer, of
planting and maintaining such trees through to the end of the period of the
maintenance bond required by Section 7.13 of the Regulations.
6.8.5 Center islands of turnarounds and median strips, where permitted by the
Commission, shall be planted with low growing shrubs and plants that will allow
full vision at all points, except within five (5) feet of the center of the island of a
turnaround.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 26
SECTION 7 - IMPROVEMENTS
7.1 Special Definitions Relating To Improvements
7.1.1 Gravel or Bank Run Gravel - Material found in natural deposits consisting of
sound, tough, durable particles free from soft, thin, elongated or laminated
pieces and vegetable, organic or other deleterious substances. The general
gradation of the material shall be in conformance with Conn DOT form 814
Section M.02.06 Grade B.
7.1.2 Broken or Crushed Stone - The product resulting from the artificial crushing of
rocks, boulders or large cobblestones substantially all faces of which have
resulted from the crushing operation.
7.1.3 Crushed Gravel - A manufactured product resulting from the deliberate
mechanical crushing of gravel with at least 50% of the product being 1/4" or
greater in its least dimension and having at least one fractured face.
7.1.4 Cobbles or Cobblestones - Rounded particles from 3 to 12 inches in size.
7.1.5 Boulders - Rounded particles greater than 12 inches in size.
7.1.6 Rock Fragments - Angular particles greater than 3 inches in size.
7.1.7 Ledge Rock - Rock in its natural formation; also boulders whose volume exceeds
1/2 cubic yard.
7.1.8 Processed Gravel - Gravel and sand combined and mixed by standard commercial
methods so that the resulting material shall conform to Conn. DOT Form
814 Section M.05.01.
7.1.9 Sub-base - Specified or selected material placed upon the floor of cuts or upon
embankments the top surface of which supports components of pavements,
shoulder and related appurtenances.
7.1.10 Subgrade - The top surface of the roadbed upon which the pavement structure and
shoulders are constructed.
7.1.11 Base Course(s) - One or more courses constructed of specified or selected
material on the prepared sub-base.
7.1.12 Wearing Surface - The top or final course of the roadway construction.
7.1.13 Bituminous Concrete - A mixture consisting of course aggregate, fine aggregate,
mineral filler, if necessary, and designated bitumen combined to meet the
composition limits by weight and other characteristics, as shown in Conn. DOT
Form 814 Section M.04.03 Class I and II Bituminous Concrete Mixtures,
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 27
7.1.14 Portland Cement Concrete - A concrete mix that shall conform to Section
M.03.01, Class "C", Conn. DOT, Form 814 and shall have a minimum
compressive strength of 4,000 psi.
7.1.15 Where questions arise as to the definition or suitability of construction materials,
equipment or methods, final decisions shall be made by the First Selectman or his
designee.
7.1a - Standard Details for Construction of Public Improvements
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 28
SECTION 7.1a
TOWN OF COLCHESTER
STANDARD DETAILS
FOR
CONSTRUCTION OF
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 29
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 30
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 31
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 32
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 33
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 34
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 35
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 36
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 37
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 38
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 39
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 40
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 41
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 42
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 43
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 44
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 45
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 46
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 47
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 48
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 49
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 50
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 51
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 52
7.2 General - All improvements shall be made in accordance with Standard Specifications for
Road, Bridges and Incidental Construction, Form 814 of the Connecticut Department of
Transportation, except as otherwise provided by these Regulations or any applicable ordinances
of the Town of Colchester.
7.3 Inspection and Approval of Work - All subdivision improvements shall be inspected and
approved by the First Selectman or his designee who shall decide on all questions
regarding the interpretation of plans and specifications. He may require additional
working drawings from the applicant to facilitate inspection at any time during
construction of improvements. As-built plans for all streets, drainage features and
underground utilities shall be presented to the First Selectman or his designee prior to the
acceptance of any street or easement by the Town of Colchester and prior to the release
of any applicable performance bond.
7.4 Streets - The applicant will place easily identifiable stakes at even hundred-foot stations
along the center lines of proposed streets prior to submission of the subdivision plan to
facilitate evaluation of the plan by the Commission. The First Selectman or his designee
shall be notified in writing at least 48 hours in advance of the following stages of
construction:
(a) Completion of the preparation of the subgrade.
(b) Completion of, but before covering, drainage structures and pipe.
(c) Completion of gravel sub-base.
(d) Beginning of construction of stone base course.
(e) Beginning of construction of wearing surface.
Streets shall be constructed as follows:
7.4.1 Subgrade - All soft and yielding material and other portions of the subgrade
which will not compact readily when rolled or which contain organic or manmade
material shall be removed and all loose rock or boulders over 5 inches in
size shall be removed or broken to a depth of one foot below the subgrade. All
holes or depressions made by the removal of unsuitable material shall be filled
and rolled uniformly with a roller weighing at least ten tons. If the surface of an
existing road is 2 feet or less below the proposed subgrade surface, it shall be
scarified for the full width of the roadbed. All ledge rock and boulders shall be
removed to a depth of 12 inches below grade of the existing road. The subgrade
shall be constructed the full width of the paved surface as indicated in Section
6.3.3, above, plus 12 inches beyond the curb face on each side of the street.
7.4.2 Sub-base - The sub-base shall consist of bank run gravel. Where ledge rock is
encountered, it shall be excavated to a depth of 24 inches below sub-base, and the
sub-base shall be at least 12 inches thick. Where ledge rock is not encountered,
the sub-base thickness shall be as follows:
Local Streets 8" Collector Streets 12"
Dead-End Streets 8" Arterial Streets 12"
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 53
7.4.3 On completion of the subgrade and on completion of the sub-base, each shall be
compacted by a roller weighing at least ten tons.
7.4.4 Base Course - The base course shall consist of processed gravel, except that
where finished grades in excess of 6% occur, crushed stone shall be substituted
for processed gravel. The base course thickness shall be six (6) inches for all
streets.
7.4.5 Wearing Surface - The wearing surface shall be of bituminous concrete pavement
constructed in two courses over the base course. The compacted thickness of
the finished wearing surface shall be three and one-half (31/2) inches for all
streets.
Placement of wearing surface shall be accomplished in two lifts, as follows:
Binder Course - 2" of Class I Bituminous Concrete
Surface Course - 1-1/2" of Class II Bituminous Concrete
7.4.6 Where Portland Cement concrete or granite curbing is used, the base course and
wearing surface shall be constructed to the full paved width as required in Section
6.3.3 above. Where Bituminous concrete curbing is used, the base course and
wearing surface shall be constructed the full paved width as required in 6.3.3
above plus one foot beyond the curb face on each side of the street.
7.5 Storm Drainage - A storm water drainage system shall contain, where necessary,
sufficient culverts, catch basins, head-walls, storm sewers and other structures or
facilities suitable to provide the streets and adjacent lots proper drainage. All such
appurtenances shall be in accordance with Town of Colchester Standard Construction
Details and Specifications included as Section 7.1.a of these Subdivision Regulations.
All storm drainage design shall be in accordance with Section 12.5.4 of the Zoning
Regulations of the Town of Colchester.
7.6 Curbs - Curbs shall be constructed of either granite, Portland Cement concrete or
bituminous concrete and shall be installed on all streets; curbing on the side of existing
streets shall be as recommended by the Town Engineer. Curbs shall conform to the
Town of Colchester Standard Construction Details and Specifications.
7.6.1 Depressed curbing shall be provided in the area of the expected driveway location
for each lot but for no more than a fifteen (15) feet for each residential driveway.
7.6.2 All curbs shall be backed up full height with solidly packed earth, a sidewalk or a
driveway.
7.6.3 Bituminous concrete curbing shall be machine laid by a standard curbing
machine.
7.7 Sidewalks - Sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with Section 6.3.12 above and
shall have at least 4 feet of width unobstructed by utility poles, fire hydrants, trees, etc.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 54
7.7.1 Sidewalks, where required, shall be Class "C" (4000 lb.) Portland Cement
concrete, 5 inches in thickness, and laid over 8 inches of thoroughly compacted
processed gravel approved by the First Selectman or his designee. There shall be
3/4" wide bituminous expansion joints across the sidewalk width every 15 feet
apart longitudinally. Surfaces shall be "broom-finished".
7.7.2 Sidewalks shall be laid in the street right-of-way parallel to the existing street
pavement where such exists and one foot from the street right-of-way line unless
a different location is approved by the Commission and First Selectman.
Sidewalks shall be extended to the curb at intersections and shall be continuous
across driveways.
7.7.3 Sidewalks shall pitch one-fourth inch per foot towards the street; ground between
the sidewalk and street shall pitch not less than one-half inch nor more than 2
inches per foot towards the street, and the curb at the street pavement shall be not
more than 6 inches above the wearing surface of the road unless physical
conditions indicate that a greater height is desirable and such height is approved
by the Commission and/or the First Selectman.
7.7.4 Where a sidewalk crosses a private driveway, the concrete shall be reinforced
with 6" x 6" mesh #10 over #10 reinforcing, 8 inches thick and laid over 12
inches of processed gravel, thoroughly compacted. Where it is necessary for
water to cross the sidewalk at the driveway, the sidewalk shall pitch to a low point
at the center (width) so storm water will drain across the driveway to the street
and not along the sidewalks parallel to the street.
7.7.5 Cement for sidewalks shall be poured after inspection by the First Selectman or
his designee of the gravel base. No less than a complete section between
expansion joints shall be poured at one time.
7.7.6 Public Trails along private roadways shall be installed to the required line and
grade to a minimum width of five (5) feet. A minimum cross section of three (3)
inches of compacted ”stone dust (or other material acceptable to the Commission)
over a minimum of six (6) inches of bank run gravel with a weed blocker fabric
on the sub-grade shall be provided. See detail below.
7.8 Monuments and Markers - Stone or reinforced concrete monuments shall be placed at all
points of curvature or tangency, at all angle points on the street lines and at one front
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 55
corner of each lot. Iron pipes or pins shall be placed at all other lot corners or angle
points.
7.8.1 Monuments shall be not less than 4 inches square and 30 inches long with a brass
or copper plug, drill hole or cross marking the center of the monument. They
shall be set flush with or slightly above finished grade. Iron pipes shall be at least
one-half inch nominal inside diameter, 36 inches long. The top of pipes or pins
shall normally be at least 2 inches above finished grade.
7.8.2 The cost of placing such monuments, pipes or pins shall be borne by the
developer. Before final acceptance of the road or roads by the Town, the
developer shall submit an "as-built" plan, certified by a registered Land Surveyor
of the State of
Connecticut, showing final placement of all monuments, iron pipes or pins which
were on the map approved by the Commission.
7.9 Street Signs - Flexibility in design of street signs is permitted provided the name of the
street is clearly readable from a distance of 50 feet and is constructed of a weatherproof
reflective material all satisfactory to the Commission. All street signs shall conform to
the following:
7.9.1 The street sign shall be mounted on a galvanized metal pipe 2 inches inside
diameter and capped on the top.
7.9.2 The bottom of the sign shall be approximately 8 feet above the ground surface.
7.9.3 The pipe shall be set at least 3 feet below the ground surface and anchored by a
concrete weight.
7.9.4 The sign and the post shall be constructed in a manner that will prevent turning.
7.9.5 Four-way intersections shall have two sign posts located on diagonally opposite
corners. T-intersections shall have one sign post. Each sign post shall identify
both intersecting streets.
7.10 Utilities - All utility lines shall be located underground in subdivisions involving new
road construction except where physical conditions make underground installation
impractical.
7.10.1 Underground locations shall generally comply with the following, where
practical:
(a) Sanitary sewers - along center line of streets.
(b) Storm sewers - beneath street paving surface, along edge of street opposite
water line.
(c) Water line - beneath planting strip or sidewalk but above and at least 10 feet
from any existing or possible future sewer line.
(d) Electric and telephone - beneath sidewalk or planting strip, opposite the water
line.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 56
7.10.2 Water supply and distribution systems shall be installed in accordance with the
specifications of the Colchester Utilities Commission, the Southeastern
Connecticut Water Authority or the Connecticut Department of Health, whichever
has jurisdiction.
7.10.3 All sewage shall be disposed of by connection to public sewers or if such are not
available within 500 feet of the proposed subdivision, by subsurface sewage
disposal systems or by other methods approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection or the State Department of Health, all in accordance
with the provisions of Section 19-13-B20 of the Connecticut Public Health Code.
Any public sewer system shall be approved by the Colchester Utilities
Commission. The Commission may require that capped sewers be installed in a
subdivision which is located within or above the area that can reasonably be
expected to be served by public sewers within five years of the submission of the
subdivision plan. All open ends of the system shall be capped and as-built plans
provided showing exact locations and elevations so that capped ends can be
readily located.
7.11 SECTION DELETED.
7.12 Clean-up - Upon suspension or completion of the work or any portion thereof, the
developer or contractor shall remove from all public or private property all temporary
structures, tools and equipment, rubbish or waste materials resulting from his operations.
Tree stumps and boulders shall be buried along property lines with a minimum two-foot
cover. Cut-down trees and brush shall be removed from the property. All ditches shall
be filled; all sewers, drains, catch basins and manholes cleaned and flushed; streets,
walks, curbs and other structures cleaned and repaired and the whole work left in a neat
condition. All unpaved areas within the street lines and excavated or filled areas on
private property shall be graded, covered with suitable topsoil or loam, rolled, fertilized
and seeded with a mixture conforming to Section M.13.04 of the State Highway
Department Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction,
Form 814.
7.13 Bonding - Upon completion of improvements and upon acceptance of such
improvements by the Town, the performance [and payment] bonds as required under
Section 4.5 of these Regulations shall be released by the Selectman upon the substitution
thereof of a maintenance bond in the amount of twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
or one-tenth (1/10) of the cost of improvements, whichever is greater, to continue for a
period of one (1) year from the date of Town acceptance, guaranteeing to remedy
construction or to indemnify the Town for repairing such defects.
Application by written communication to the Board of Selectmen for approval of
portions of the total improvements may be made upon completion of such portions. If
such portions are accepted, the one-year period for the maintenance bond for the portions
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 57
accepted will commence as of the date of acceptance and a pro-rated reduction in the
performance bond may be approved by the Selectmen.
The contractor or developer shall, when notified by the First Selectman, promptly and at
his own expense, repair all failures in the construction and operation of structures and
appurtenances which may occur during the maintenance period; and he shall similarly
repair all defects, settlements and irregularities of the structures and appurtenances or
drains, pipes, mains or conduits, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, road surfacing, land turfing,
catch basins, retaining walls or any other structures or improvements on the line of the
work or adjacent thereto occurring during the maintenance period which are caused by or
affected by his work.
If the contractor or developer fails to remedy such defects within a reasonable time, not
to exceed 60 days after the notice, the First Selectman may, without prejudice to any
other remedy and upon written notice to the contractor or developer and surety company,
cause the required repairs to be made and bill the contractor or developer or the surety
company for the cost of the work then involved.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 58
SECTION 8 - GENERAL
8.1 Amendments - These Regulations may be amended from time to time in accordance with
the procedures specified in Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes, 1958
Revision, as amended.
8.2 Applicability - Nothing herein is intended to modify the requirements of law with
reference to the acceptance of streets by the Town of Colchester. Nothing herein is
intended to modify or control the construction, reconstruction, or extension of roads by
the Town of Colchester. Any regulations pertaining to developers' roads or subdivisions
which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. When the authority of any official
or agency referred to in these Regulations, whose inspection or approval of any
improvements or procedures is required by these Regulations, is by law superseded by
another official or agency, the title and names of the replacement official or agency are
deemed to be interchangeable with the applicable titles and names used in these
Regulations.
8.3 Validity - If any section, subsection or phase of these Regulations is found for any reason
to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portion of these Regulations.
8.4 Effective Date - These Regulations amend and supersede previously adopted regulations
for the subdivision of land in Colchester and shall be effective on September 16, 1974,
and revised through December 12, 2003.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 59
APPENDIX A
CHECKLIST - FINAL PLAN OF SUBDIVISION
(see Section 5)
The following items provide the developer and the Commission with a listing of the various
requirements of a Final Subdivision Plan. Check each item, as applicable, to insure that the
required information is completed. PLANS WITH INCOMPLETE INFORMATION WILL
NOT BE ACCEPTED.
______ Subdivision Application Form fully completed.
______ Application Fee (see section 4.1).
______ Five paper prints each of a Boundary Survey Map at a scale of 1 inch to 100 feet, and a
Construction Plan, where applicable, at a scale of 1 inch to 40 feet, all on sheets no
larger than 24 x 26 inches showing the following:
____ Name of subdivision.
____ Boundaries of entire parcel including owned land not to be subdivided.
____ North arrow, scale, date and legend.
____ Designation of zoning district.
____ Location map @ scale of 1" = 1000'.
____ Approval block of Zoning and Planning Commission.
____ Approval block of Board of Selectman for construction proposals where applicable.
____ Approval block of the Conservation Commission.
Names of the following:
____ Record Owner (and address).
____ Applicant for subdivision (and address).
____ Designer/Architect.
____ Licensed Professional Engineer with seal and registration number.
____ Licensed land Surveyor with seal and registration number.
____ Abutting property owners within 100 feet.
Locations of the following existing items:
____ Easements and right-of-way.
____ Natural watercourses and wetlands.
____ Rock outcroppings.
____ Buildings (if any).
____ Stone walls.
____ Trees in excess of two feet in diameter.
____ Monuments, pipes or markers concerning property boundaries.
____ Benchmark elevations.
____ On-site soil types (see Section 5.2.16).
____ Storm drainage.
____ Streets with names.
____ Sidewalks.
____ Flood zone limits (see Section 5.2.18).
____ Aquifer Protection Zone.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Town of Colchester, CT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS Amended Through: June 1, 2010 Page 60
Location of the following proposed items:
____ Streets with names and engineering requirements of Section 5.2.8.
____ Easements and rights-of-way, with Meets and Bounds.
____ Open spaces.
____ Storm drainage.
____ Sidewalks.
____ Work required on existing streets to bring them to Town standards ( see
Section 6.3.15).
____ Location of percolation test holes and deep test data (required on each lot in
area of proposed leaching field).
____ Soil test pit data in tabular form.
____ House, well, drive, septic system for each lot.
____ Footing drain for each proposed dwelling (see Section 5.2.21).
The inclusion of the plans of the following:
____ Legend with description of symbols and abbreviations.
____ Lot lines and numbers, lot dimensions.
____ Area (square footage) of each lot and total acreage.
____ Erosion and sediment control plan (see Section 5.3.3).
____ Construction/general notes.
____ Building set-back lines.
____ Map reference.
____ Construction detail for public improvements.
____ Existing and proposed contour lines at proper intervals (see Section 5.2.9).
The following written statements shall accompany the Application for Subdivision:
____ Statement from Sanitarian or Town Health Officer, or their designees, that
percolation tests and examination of the deep test pits were conducted in his
presence, and that the land is suitable for sub-surface septic disposal.
____ Statement indicating the intention for the use of other land owned by the
applicant adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
____ Two copies of all storm drainage computations and supporting maps and
charts.
Chapter 16
BLIGHTED PREMISES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 24.
Building demolition — See Ch. 27.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 30.
§ 16-1. Declaration; purpose; statutory authority.
§ 16-2. Scope.
§ 16-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLIGHT ENFORCEMENT COMMITTEE — A multidisciplined committee
designated to enforce the provisions of this chapter. It shall be comprised of
the Town's Building Official, Zoning Enforcement Official, Director of Health
or any designee of the aforementioned and any other Town of Colchester
employee designated by the Board of Selectmen.
It is declared that the presence of blighted properties adversely affects
the quality of life of the residents and the economic well-being of the
Town of Colchester.
A.
The purpose of this chapter is to define, prohibit, and abate blights; to
protect, preserve, and promote public health, safety and welfare; and
to preserve and protect property values within the Town of Colchester.
B.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
§ 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv) and is deemed to be a Blight Ordinance.
C.
This chapter shall apply uniformly to the maintenance of all residential,
nonresidential, commercial/industrial, and undeveloped premises now
in existence or hereafter constructed, maintained, modified or
abandoned/vacated. The following shall be excluded: agricultural lands
as defined in Section 22-3(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes; land
dedicated as public or semipublic open space or preserved in its natural
state through conservation easements; and areas designated on Town
of Colchester maps as inland wetlands and watercourses.
A.
No owner of real property located in the Town of Colchester shall
allow, create, maintain, or cause to be created or maintained a blighted
property as detailed in § 16-3 of this chapter. This chapter recognizes
all applicable State of Connecticut statutes and Town of Colchester
codes, such as building codes, zoning codes, fire codes and health
codes.
B.
16:1
BLIGHTED PREMISES — Any building, structure or parcel of land,
including without limitation, single-family or multifamily residential,
industrial or commercial, whether occupied or vacant in which at least one
of the following conditions exists:
It is deemed an unsafe structure or designated as unfit for human
habitation by the Building Official;
A.
It is a fire hazard as determined by the Fire Marshal or as documented
by a Fire Department Officer;
B.
It is determined by the Director of Health or designee that the condition
of the building, structure or parcel of land poses a serious or immediate
danger to the safety, health or general welfare of the community;
C.
It is not being adequately maintained and is visible from either the
street or from an adjacent property. The following factors shall be
considered in determining whether a premises is not being adequately
maintained:
(1) Multiple missing, broken or boarded windows or doors.
Collapsing, seriously damaged, or missing walls, roof, siding or
other exterior features including but not necessarily limited to
stairs, porches, railings, hatchways, chimneys or floors.
(2)
(3) Persistent accumulation of garbage or trash on the premises.
Chronically neglected and/or inoperable motor vehicles, camper
trailers, or boats being stored on the premises, unless garaged, for
a period of time in excess of 60 days; or two or more unregistered
motor vehicles in the public view, pursuant to Section 14-150a of
the Connecticut General Statutes.
(4)
Outside storage, for a period of time in excess of 60 days, of
material or equipment which is incapable of performing the
function for which it is designed, including, but not limited to, parts
of automobiles, furniture, appliances, cans, boxes, scrap metal,
tires, batteries, or containers.
(5)
(6) Rodent harborage and/or infestation.
Dead, decayed, diseased or damaged trees constituting a hazard or
danger to adjacent premises or the occupants thereof or to public
property or persons lawfully therein.
(7)
Chronically overgrown grass, weeds, or similar vegetation that is
allowed to reach and remain at a height of 12 inches or greater;
cultivated gardens and areas maintained in their naturally wooded,
field, or shoreline state are specifically excluded from the height
requirement so stated.
(8)
(9) Commercial parking areas left in a state of disrepair or abandoned.
D.
§ 16-3 COLCHESTER CODE § 16-3
16:2
BUILDING OFFICIAL — An individual who administers the State Building
Code and any applicable ordinances of the Town.
CITATION HEARING OFFICER — An individual appointed by the Board of
Selectmen to conduct official hearings authorized by this chapter, who may
not be a police officer or a Town employee or person who issues citations on
behalf of the Town.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH or HEALTH DISTRICT DESIGNEE — An individual
who administers state health regulations applicable to this chapter.
DESIGNATED BLIGHT ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — The individual who
the Blight Enforcement Committee designates to investigate and to act
upon the complaint.
ISSUANCE OF CITATION — The notification that fines and the penalties are
being assessed against the owner of the premises for the violation of this
chapter.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET — To permit, provide or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant
to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION — The initial notification in writing of a violation to
the owner of the premises.
OCCUPANCY — The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records
of the state or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person
if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PREMISES — A lot or parcel and all buildings, structures, or uses located
thereon.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — An individual who oversees and
enforces the Town's Land Development Regulations\, otherwise known as
"zoning regulations."
§ 16-4. Construal of provisions; conflicting provisions; prior
provisions.
The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other statutes, codes, ordinances or regulations which
prescribe standards other than those that are provided in this chapter.
A.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance,
regulation or other code of the Town or state, the provision which
B.
§ 16-3 BLIGHTED PREMISES § 16-4
16:3
§ 16-5. Responsibility for compliance.
The premises under control of the owner, including the agents thereof, are
subject to this chapter, and shall be jointly and severally obligated to comply
with the provisions of this chapter. Whenever the person, as herein defined,
is a corporation or other legal entity, the officers thereof shall be jointly and
severally responsible with the corporation or other legal entity.
§ 16-6. Report of complaint.
Complaints by residents of the Town of Colchester shall be submitted to
the First Selectman or his/her designee. The First Selectman or a designee
shall forward the complaint to the Blight Enforcement Committee who shall
assign an appropriate designated enforcement official.
§ 16-7. Notice of violation.
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health, safety and property values of the residents of the Town shall
prevail.
This chapter shall not affect violation of any other ordinances, code or
regulation existing prior to the effective date of this chapter, and any
such violations may be governed and continue to be punishable under
the provisions of those ordinances, codes, or regulations in effect at the
time the violation occurred.
C.
Whenever the Blight Enforcement Committee or designated
enforcement official determines that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter, except as to § 16-3, the definition of "blighted
premises," Subsection D(4) pertaining to unregistered motor vehicles,
the designated blight enforcement official shall give notice of the
violation to the owner of the premises responsible therefor, as
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Set forth the violation(s) of this chapter.
Specify a final date which will be at least 30 days and not exceed
60 days for the correction of any violation.
(3)
Be served upon the owner or owner's agent; provided that such
notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner
or agent, or upon such occupant, as by any method authorized or
required under the laws of this state.
(4)
Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will result in
the permanent compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(5)
A.
§ 16-4 COLCHESTER CODE § 16-7
16:4
§ 16-8. Preliminary meeting.
§ 16-9. Issuance of citation.
State the penalties and enforcement provisions of this chapter that
will become effective on the final date set for the correction of any
violation.
(6)
Inform the owner of the opportunity for a preliminary meeting as
set forth in § 16-8.
(7)
Whenever the designated blight enforcement official determines that
there has been a violation of § 16-3, the definition of "blighted
premises," Subsection D(4), the enforcement official shall give notice
of such violation to the person responsible. The notice shall be in
compliance with above Subsection A and any applicable Town of
Colchester Land Development Regulations specific to camper units or
recreational vehicles and junk vehicles as well as include the following:
The notice shall specify that the owner has 30 days to correct the
violation by removing the vehicle or registering it;
(1)
The person notified in accordance with this section who fails to
correct any violation by the date specified in said notice shall
be in violation of this chapter and subject to its penalties and
enforcement procedures.
(2)
B.
Within 10 days of receiving a notice of violation in accordance with
§ 16-7, the owner of the premises may request a preliminary meeting to
discuss the notice of violation with the designated blight enforcement
official who issued the notice of violation or the Blight Enforcement
Committee. The preliminary meeting shall be held within 10 days
following the receipt of a written request by the property owner for
such a preliminary meeting.
A.
At the preliminary meeting, a proposed remedial action plan to fully
correct any violation(s) of this chapter shall be discussed and agreed
upon in writing with the owner.
B.
The purpose of the preliminary meeting is to develop a voluntary
remedial action plan in lieu of the formal enforcement citation and
penalties as set forth in this chapter. Any voluntary remedial action plan
will be subject to the requirements, time limits and other factors as
stated in this chapter.
C.
Nothing contained in this § 16-8 shall be construed as limiting the Town
of Colchester's rights and remedies under this chapter, and the Town
reserves the right to proceed at any time with the enforcement of
penalties against the owner(s) who does not comply with the proposed
voluntary remedial action plan.
D.
§ 16-7 BLIGHTED PREMISES § 16-9
16:5
§ 16-10. Appeals; citation hearing.
§ 16-11. Penalties for offenses; fines; lien.
The designated blight enforcement official is authorized to issue a
citation if a violation remains unabated after the final correction date
as set forth in the notice of violation or in the preliminary meeting
voluntary remedial action plan. The citation shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) State the address of the affected property.
Identify the nature (description) of the violation and the remedial
action that is required to be in compliance.
(3)
State the penalty amounts and enforcement actions of a lien as
outlined in § 16-10 for the continued violation of this chapter.
(4)
Specify a final date of at least 30 days, but not to exceed 60 days,
for correction of the violation.
(5)
(6) State the right to appeal the citation.
A.
The citation must be mailed by either certified mail, with a return
receipt requested, or by electronic mail with a read-receipt sent to the
owner or owner's agent of the property. This notice must also meet the
same standards as the notices to remedy a health, housing, or a safety
code violation.
B.
Within 10 days of receipt of a written citation, the owner may request
an appeal of the blight violation and penalties by filing a written request
with the First Selectman's Office.
A.
Appeals of any action by the Blight Enforcement Committee or any
member of the Committee or any other Town employee or Townappointed
designee shall be heard by a citation hearing officer
appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The Connecticut Uniform
Administrative Procedures Act shall guide the hearing officer.
Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-152c establishes the appeal
and citation hearing process for all appeals under this chapter.
B.
C. The designated blight enforcement official shall attend the hearing.
Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense,
and for each day that any violation continues beyond the final
correction date set in the notice of violation, or voluntary remedial
action plan, it shall constitute a separate offense. Each separate offense
under this chapter shall have a penalty or fine of $50 per day for the
first 30 days of the citation. The fee will increase to an amount of $100
per day for continuation of the violation and any unpaid fine after 31
days.
A.
§ 16-9 COLCHESTER CODE § 16-11
16:6
Chapter 24
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building demolition — See Ch. 27.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 30.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 64.
Trailers — See Ch. 139.
Town Center Strategic Plan — See Ch. A156.
The designated enforcement official or the citation hearing officer is not
permitted to waive any assessed fines.
B.
Penalties or fines may include the recovery of all costs associated with
the violation incurred by the Town of Colchester, including attorney's
fees and/or remediation costs.
C.
Payment of the assessed fine, penalty or the issuance of a lien will
not remove the property owner from the responsibility to correct the
blighted condition(s).
D.
Any fines or penalties unpaid after 60 days may constitute the placing
of a lien upon the real estate in accordance with Connecticut General
Statute Section 7-148aa. Such lien shall be continued, recorded and
released as provided in the aforementioned Connecticut General
Statutes.
E.
All fines are to be made payable to the Town of Colchester at the
Town Clerk's office. A dated receipt will be required as a proof of the
payment. Proof of the correction of the blighted premises will require
a site visit by the designated Town official who issued the notice of
violation and citation. A written statement confirming that the blighted
conditions were corrected will be submitted by the designated Town
official to the First Selectman's office for final approval.
F.
§ 16-11 BLIGHTED PREMISES § 16-11
16:7

ARTICLE I
State Building Code
[Adopted 5-4-1957]
§ 24-1. Adoption.
The Town adopts the State Building Code and licensing of all electricians
and plumbers, and a code, as amended, to cover the Electrical and Plumbing
Codes, and appropriates $500 for the forming of a Public Works
Department. (Adopting as amended Sections 116 and 119 except Section
100.)
§ 24-1 BLIGHTED PREMISES § 24-1
16:9

ARTICLE II
Building Permits in Unapproved Subdivisions
[Adopted 2-11-1960]
§ 24-2. Power of Zoning and Planning Commission.
The Zoning and Planning Commission of the Town of Colchester is
authorized to prohibit or regulate the issuance of building permits for
the erection of buildings or structures in unapproved subdivisions or lots
abutting unaccepted highways or streets. However, the issuance of a
building permit shall not be withheld for the construction of farm or
accessory buildings which are not in violation of any lawful zoning or
building regulation of the Town of Colchester.
§ 24-3. Unlawful structures; action to enjoin.
Any building erected in violation of the provision hereinbefore contained
shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the Town of Colchester, through
an appropriate officer, may bring an action to enjoin the erection of such
structure or cause it to be vacated or removed.
§ 24-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation erecting a building or structure in violation
of the provision herein may be fined not more than $200 for each building
or structure so erected in addition to the relief herein otherwise granted to
the Town of Colchester.
§ 24-2 BLIGHTED PREMISES § 24-4
16:11

ARTICLE III
Building Permit Fees
[Adopted 3-4-1991]
§ 24-5. Maintenance and repairs excepted.
No fee or permit is required for necessary routine maintenance or repairs
to existing buildings as defined in the Basic Building Code of the State of
Connecticut.
§ 24-6. Fees required for certain building operations.
A permit and fee is required for all new construction, alterations, removal,
demolition, plumbing, electrical or other building operations.
§ 24-7. Fee schedule. [Amended 4-16-2009]
The fee schedule shall be as follows:
New Construction Estimated
Building Costs Fees
$1,000 or less $20
$1,000.01 to $60,000 $20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
$60,000 to $120,000 $20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
Over $120,000 $20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
Additional Required Permits
Plumbing, electrical, heating $20
Remodeling Alterations, Repairs
and Miscellaneous
Structural and finish work $20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
Plumbing, heating, electrical $20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
Swimming pool, plus electrical and
plumbing, if required
$20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
Siding, reroofing, chimneys, decks $20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
Wood or coal stoves $20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
Other Fees
House moving permit (plus building
permit to erect on a foundation if
the house is moved within the
Town)
$100, plus septic test-repair and
house moving
Demolition permit $20/$1,000 or fraction thereof
Signs (if permit is required by
Zoning Regulations)
$50 or less No fee
A.
§ 24-5 BLIGHTED PREMISES § 24-7
16:13
§ 24-7.1. Waiver of fees for owners 62 or older. [Added 12-7-2006]
Building permit fees may be waived by the Building Official for owneroccupied,
single-family homes where at least one of the record owners is
aged 62 or over and where the permit is to replace or upgrade the roofing,
siding, windows or electrical or heating systems.
New Construction Estimated
Building Costs Fees
Over $50 $20, plus electrical, if required
Permitted mobile homes and mobile
home parks
$100
Exempt from the above fees are permit applications for the
construction of buildings from public funds, such as schools, churches
and charitable organizations, in which case the fee shall be $5.
B.
§ 24-7 COLCHESTER CODE § 24-7.1
16:14
ARTICLE IV
Disposition of Building Applications Upon Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 8-9-2001]
§ 24-8. Statutory authority.
The Town of Colchester does herewith adopt the provisions of C.G.S.
§ 7-148(c)(2)(B) et seq., relating to the establishment of a procedure for the
withholding of approval of a building application when taxes imposed by
the municipality are delinquent for the property for which an application is
made.
§ 24-9. Certification from Tax Collector required.
The Building Official shall require any applicant for any building application
for undeveloped or vacant property (the "subject property") to obtain
written certification from the Tax Collector verifying that there are no
delinquent taxes owed on the subject property.
§ 24-8 BLIGHTED PREMISES § 24-9
16:15
Chapter 27
BUILDING DEMOLITION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 24.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 30.
Historic districts — See Ch. 74.
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93.
Tax abatement for historic structures — See
Ch. 129, Art. V.
§ 24-9 COLCHESTER CODE § 24-9
27:16
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 7-16-1992]
§ 27-1. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DESIGNATED HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area designated as an Historic
District pursuant to C.G.S.§ 7-147b.
LUSIGNAN HISTORICAL AND ARCHITECTURAL SURVEY — The survey
prepared by Paul R. Lusignan for the Town of Colchester and Connecticut
Historical Commission in 1991, containing on Appendix I, a schedule by
street address of 166 historically significant buildings. A copy of said survey
is available for copying in the office of the Town Clerk.
PERSON — Include an individual, a partnership, a joint venture, a
corporation, an association and any other organization recognized as an
entity by the laws of the State of Connecticut.
§ 27-2. Permit.
No person shall demolish any building, structure or part thereof without
first obtaining a permit for the particular demolition undertaking from the
Building Official, and dismantling a building for removal shall be considered
for the purpose of this section as demolition. Before issuing such a permit,
the Building Official shall:
Publish a legal notice of any application for such permit for the
demolition of said building, structure or part in a newspaper having
substantial circulation in the Town of Colchester.
Notice shall be published at least 60 days before the issuance
of such permit for buildings and structures located within a
designated Historic District or individually listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or nominated for such status, or a
building at the address listed on Appendix I of the Lusignan
Historical and Architectural Survey.
(1)
Notice shall be published at least 30 days before the issuance of
such permit for all other buildings and structures.
(2)
A.
Notify any organization concerned with the preservation of structures
within the Town of Colchester. To be entitled to notification under
this provision, any such organization shall register with the Building
Official and indicate a desire to be notified of the proposed demolition
permit application, and such registration shall be renewed annually
after initial registration.
Notification shall be provided at least 60 days before the issuance
of such permit for all buildings and structures situated in a
designated Historic District or on the National Register of Historic
(1)
B.
§ 27-1 BUILDING DEMOLITION § 27-2
27:17
§ 27-3. Signs.1
No such permit, other than for a building situated in a designated Historic
District or on the National Register of Historic Places or nominated for such
status or a building at the address listed on Appendix I of the Lusignan
Historical and Architectural Survey, shall be issued to any person unless
in connection with the application for such permit the applicant files an
affidavit with the Building Official certifying that the applicant has posted
a sign on the property to be affected by the application in a place visible
from the public street, which sign shall read: "Application for a permit to
demolish this building pending. For information contact the Building Official
of the Town of Colchester." Said sign shall be at least two feet by three feet
in size and will be made available to the applicant by the Building Official
on request and upon assurances made of its return. Said sign shall remain
posted on the property for a least 30 days before issuance of the permit.
§ 27-4. Public health or emergency demolition.
The provisions of § 27-2 concerning public notices, signs and notification of
abutting property owners shall not apply to applications for demolition due
to a threat to the public health or to emergency demolition orders issued by
the Building Official due to a threat to the public safety.
§ 27-5. Exception.
This article shall not apply to buildings containing less than 500 square feet
of floor space, provided that this exception shall not apply to any building
located in a designated Historic District or on the National Register of
Historic Places, or nominated for such status, or a building at the address
listed on Appendix I of the Lusignan Historical and Architectural Survey.
Places, or nominated for such status, or a building at the address
listed on Appendix I of the Lusignan Historical and Architectural
Survey.
There shall be no notification requirement pursuant to this
Subsection B for buildings not in an Historic District or not on the
National Register of Historic Places, or nominated for such status,
or not at the address Appendix I of the Lusignan Historical and
Architectural Survey.
(2)
Verify notifications by United States mail, return receipt requested,
abutting property owners, including condominium associations. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant to furnish to the Building
Official the names and proper mailing addresses of all abutters as
their names appear in the last completed grand list. The applicant
must present return receipts with names and proper mailing
addresses of all abutters.
(3)
1. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 27-2 COLCHESTER CODE § 27-6
27:18
§ 27-6. Period of permit validity.
Any permit issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of
one year from date of issuance, and if the demolition contemplated by said
permit is not completed within said one-year period, then the owner of such
building shall be required to make application pursuant to this article for
a new permit and satisfy all notification requirements of this article should
said owner wish to demolish said building.
§ 27-6 BUILDING DEMOLITION § 27-6
27:19

ARTICLE II
Historic Buildings
[Adopted 7-16-1992; revised 6-30-1994]
§ 27-7. Statutory authority; waiting period.
Pursuant to C.G.S.§ 29-406(b), the following article imposing a waiting
period prior to granting a demolition permit is hereby adopted.
§ 27-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — The owner of the historic building to be demolished.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Town Building Official.
DEMOLITION — The meaning adopted by the Commissioner of Public
Safety pursuant C.G.S.§ 29-401.
HISTORICAL SURVEY — The historical and architectural survey prepared
in 1991 by Paul R. Lusignan for the town and the Connecticut Historical
Commission, which historical survey includes, in its Appendix I, a schedule
by street address of 166 historically or architecturally significant buildings
located in the town. A copy of the historical survey is available in the Town
Clerk's office.
HISTORIC BUILDING — Any building, structure or any part thereof that is:
TOWN — The Town of Colchester.
§ 27-9. Waiting period for permit.
No permit for the demolition of an historic building shall be issued until the
following requirements are satisfied:
Located within an Historic District established pursuant to
C.G.S.§ 7-147a through 7-147k;
A.
An historic property designated pursuant to C.G.S.§ 7-147p through
7-147y;
B.
Listed or nominated for listing on the National Register of Historic
Places;
C.
D. Listed on Appendix I of the historical survey; or
E. More than 75 years old.
Filing of an application for a demolition permit with the Building
Official upon a form provided by the Building Official, which form shall
contain, in addition to such other information as may be required, the
name and address of the applicant and the address of the historic
building to be demolished;
A.
§ 27-7 BUILDING DEMOLITION § 27-9
27:21
§ 27-10. Public health and safety.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the demolition of an historic
building for public health and safety reasons as determined by the Building
Official or the town Director of Health.
Publication by the Building Official of notice of the demolition permit
application in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the town.
The notice shall be published within seven days following the filing of
the demolition permit application;
B.
Notification mailed by the Building Official to the Colchester Historic
District Commission and any organization concerned with the
preservation of structures, provided that such organization has
registered its desire for such notification with the Building Official.
Such notification shall be mailed seven days following the filing of the
demolition permit application;
C.
Notification mailed by the applicant to the owners of all parcels of land
abutting the property on which the historic building to be demolished
is located. Such notification shall be mailed within seven days following
the filing of the demolition permit application. The applicant shall
provide the Building Official with the names and mailing addresses,
as shown on the then-current Town Assessor's Map, of such abutting
owners and Unite States Postal Service return receipts verifying such
notification;
D.
Posting of a sign by the applicant giving notice of the application for
a demolition permit in a conspicuous place on the property on which
the historic building to be demolished is located. The sign shall remain
posted from the date the application is made until the date the permit
is issued. The sign shall be provided by the town upon the posting of a
deposit of $10 with the Building Official; and
E.
A waiting period of 60 days following the filing of the application for the
demolition permit.
F.
§ 27-9 COLCHESTER CODE § 27-10
27:22
Chapter 30
BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 24.
Building demolition — See Ch. 27.
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93.
§ 30-1. Preamble.
Whereas, in the Town of Colchester, there are or may in the future be
buildings or structures which are dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous,
unsanitary, a menace to the health, morals, safety and general welfare of
the public, and which might tend to constitute a fire menace, and which are
a public nuisance.
§ 30-2. Dangerous building defined.
All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects
shall be deemed dangerous buildings:
§ 30-3. Inspection.
Upon receipt of information from the local Fire Marshal or from any other
authentic source that any building in the Town of Colchester has become a
dangerous building as defined in § 30-2 hereof, the Town Building Official
shall immediately make an inspection of said building for the purpose
of determining whether any conditions exist which render such place a
dangerous building as defined in § 30-2 of this chapter.
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to
have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and
welfare of the occupants or the public.
A.
Those which have become or are so deteriorated, dilapidated, decayed,
unsafe, unsanitary or which are likely to cause sickness or disease, so
as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of
those living there or the general public.
B.
Those having parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and
injure members of the public or property.
C.
Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people
of the town.
D.
§ 27-10 BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS § 30-4
30:23
§ 30-4. Order to repair or demolish.
Wherever the Building Official in making an inspection as provided in the
proceeding section shall find that any standards set forth in § 30-1 of this
chapter, he or she shall order said dangerous building to be repaired or
demolished.
§ 30-5. Service of order.
The Building Official shall cause such order to be put in writing and
personally served upon the owner by the Building Official or by any
indifferent person by delivering to such owner a true and attested copy
thereof or by leaving same at his or her usual place of abode; provided,
however, that when such owner or agent by registered mail. If there is any
regular occupant of the building other than the owner, service shall be made
upon such occupant of the building by leaving a true and attested copy of
such order in the hands of said occupant or at the main entrance of said
building. The person serving such order shall certify upon the original order
the date of the service and how and upon whom it was made, and if service
is made by an indifferent person, he or she shall return the original order to
the Building Official.
§ 30-6. Hearing.
The owner or occupant of the premises or the owner's authorized agent in
charge thereof may within 10 days after the service of an order, as provided
in the proceeding section, request a hearing upon such order before the
Board of Selectmen of the Town of Colchester. The Board shall conduct such
hearings, after due notice to such owner and the Building Official of the
time and place thereof, and shall review such order and may affirm, repeal
or modify it. The Board shall render its decision upon such order within
seven days from the date of the hearing.
§ 30-7. Time limit for compliance.
Any person upon whom such an order has been served as provided in § 30-5
hereof shall comply with such order within 10 days after service thereof or
if a hearing is requested within 10 days after the Board of Selectmen has
rendered its decision upon such hearing; provided, however, that for a good
cause shown the Board may extend the time for complying with such order
for a period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 30-8. Failure to comply; repair or demolition by town.
If the owner, the owner's agent in charge of the premises or the occupant
fails to comply with the order provided for in § 30-3 hereof, the Selectmen
shall cause such building or structure to be repaired or demolished as the
facts may warrant.
§ 30-4 COLCHESTER CODE § 30-9
30:24
§ 30-9. Recovery of costs.
The Tax Collector shall collect from the property owner designated by the
Building Official the total amount of the costs of such repair or demolition,
plus a penalty with 6%. Such costs may be recovered in an action at law
against the be a lien upon the premises in connection owner, and sale
with which it was incurred and such lien shall exist from the date of
commencement of the repairs or demolition. Such lien shall expire one year
after the date on which it commences to run unless a certificate thereof
containing a statement of the amount of such lien and a description of the
premises upon which it is claimed shall be signed and lodged for record by
the First Selectman and the town Tax Collector in the office of the Town
Clerk before the expiration of such period.
§ 30-10. Penalties for offenses.
The owner of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with any
order to repair or demolish said building or structure shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $100 for each offense. Each day
during which such failure to comply continues beyond the date fixed for
compliance shall constitute separate offense.
Chapter 39
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
§ 30-9 CONSERVATION COMMISSION § 30-10
39:25

ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 8-24-1972]
§ 39-1. Creation; members. [Amended 11-18-2004]
There is hereby created for the Town of Colchester a Conservation
Commission which shall consist of five regular members, all of whom shall
be electors of such Town. Municipal employees are eligible to serve on this
commission pursuant to CGS § 7-421(e).
§ 39-2. Terms; vacancies. [Amended 11-18-2004]
The number of the Commission shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen of the municipality; each member shall be appointed to serve for
three years. The Board of Selectmen may fill any vacancy and may remove
any member for cause.
§ 39-3. Powers.
The Commission shall have all the power set forth in C.G.S. § 7-13la, and
any other General Statutes applicable to the Conservation Commission.
§ 39-4. Organization; reports. [Amended 11-18-2004]
The Commission shall select a Chair and a Vice-Chair from its members,
may adopt rules for the transaction of its business and shall keep a public
record of its activities. It shall submit a written report for the proceeding
fiscal year.
§ 39-1 CONSERVATION COMMISSION § 39-4
39:27

ARTICLE II
Inland Wetland Regulations
[Adopted 3-12-1973]
§ 39-5. Authority to enact regulations and charge fees.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-36 et seq., the Conservation Commission is
authorized to enact such regulations, in conformity with the regulations
promulgated by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection and with
due consideration to the standards set forth in C.G.S. § 22a-39, as are
necessary to protect the inland wetlands and watercourses within the town,
and to charge a reasonable fee for any application made to it under such
regulations.
§ 39-6. Public hearing on regulations required; publication
requirements.
The Conservation Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to
enactment or amendment of such regulations. Notice of the time and place
of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial
circulation in the town not more than 15 days and not less than five days
prior to the date of such hearing. A copy of the proposed regulations or
amendments shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk not less than five
days prior to the date of such hearing. The regulations and any amendments
thereto become effective at such time as is fixed by the Conservation
Commission, provided that a copy of the regulations and amendments shall
be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and notice of the adoption of the
regulations and amendments shall have been published is a newspaper
having substantial circulation in the town.2
§ 39-7. Referral to Zoning and Planning Commission.
Proposed regulations and amendments shall be referred to the Zoning and
Planning Commission for its recommendations at least 44 days prior to the
date assigned for the public hearing.
§ 39-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of this
article and the regulations enacted by the authority of the article shall be
fined not more than $1,000 for each separate offense.
2. Editor's Note: See C.G.S.§ 22a-42a.
§ 39-5 CONSERVATION COMMISSION § 39-8
39:29

ARTICLE III
Alternate Members
[Adopted 11-24-1986]
§ 39-9. Statutory authority.
Section 22a-42 of the Connecticut General Statutes authorize the Town
of Colchester to determine the number of alternate members of the
Commission which regulates the activities affecting the wetlands and
watercourses within its territorial limits (Conservation Commission).
§ 39-10. Appointment and terms.
§ 39-11. Powers and duties.
Such alternate members shall when seated as herein provided have all
powers and duties of the regular members of the Conservation Commission
of the Town of Colchester.
§ 39-12. Designation of alternates in rotation.
If a regular member of the Conservation Commission is absent or
disqualified, the Chair of the Commission shall designate an alternate to
act, choosing alternates in rotation so that they shall act as nearly equal a
number of times as possible. If any alternate is not available in accordance
with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes of the
meeting.
§ 39-13. Vacancies; removal from office.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Colchester may fill any vacancy of
an alternate member and may remove any alternate member for cause.
The Conservation Commission of the Town of Colchester shall, in
addition to the five regular members, consist of three alternate
members, who shall be electors of the Town of Colchester. Municipal
employees are eligible to sent on this commission pursuant to CGS
§ 7-421(e). [Amended 11-18-20043 ]
A.
The terms of the alternate members of the Commission shall be for
three years, and such members shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen of the town.
B.
3. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C of this section, which
pertained to term lengths.
§ 39-9 CONSERVATION COMMISSION § 39-13
39:31
Chapter 74
HISTORIC DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building demolition — See Ch. 27.
Tax abatement for historic structures — See
Ch. 129, Art. V.
Town Center Neighborhood Strategic
Plan — See Ch. A156.
§ 74-1. Statutory authority.
The Town of Colchester adopts the following Historic District Chapter,
pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S.§ 7-147a.
§ 74-2. Establishment.
To promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of
the public through the preservation and protection of the distinctive
characteristics of buildings and places associated with the history of or
indicative of a period or style of architecture of the Town of Colchester,
State of Connecticut and United States of America and through the
development of appropriate settings for such buildings and places, there
is hereby established an Historic District in the Town of Colchester to be
known as the "Colchester Historic District."
§ 74-3. Boundary description.
The Colchester Historic District shall encompass the following: Beginning at
a point in the southerly highway line of Linwood Avenue (Connecticut Route
16) at its intersection with a line comprising a southeasterly extension
of the easterly highway line of Cragin Court; thence running generally
northwesterly across Linwood avenue and along the easterly highway line
of Cragin Court, a distance of 300 feet more or less to a point; thence
running generally northeasterly a distance of 83 feet more or less, and
generally southeasterly a distance of 200 feet more or less to a point in the
northwesterly highway line of Main Street, the last three courses running
along land now or formerly of the Trustee of the Cragin Memorial Library:
thence running generally northeasterly along said northwesterly highway
line of Main Street, a distance of 412.5 feet more or less to the intersection
of the northwesterly highway line of Main Street and the westerly highway
line of Broadway; thence continuing across said Broadway to the southern
corner of the northern most, triangular portion of the Colchester Green;
thence running generally northwesterly along the southwestern bound of
said Green, a distance of 258 feet to the northwestern corner of said
Green; thence running generally southeasterly a distance of 221 feet more
or less along the northeastern bound of said Green to the eastern corner
of said Green; thence continuing in a generally easterly direction across
§ 39-13 COLCHESTER CODE § 74-3
74:32
the intersection of Broadway, Lebanon Avenue and Hayward Avenue to the
northwestern corner of land now or formerly of Getzoff; thence running
generally northeasterly along the southerly highway line of Lebanon
Avenue, a distance of 315 feet more or less; thence running generally
southeasterly along said land now or formerly of Getzoff, a distance of 398
feet more or less to land now or formerly of Thompson; thence running
generally westerly along said land now or formerly of Thompson; to a
point in the northern property line of said Thompson due north of the
northeastern corner of land now or formerly of Colchester Grange No. 78
Inc.; thence running due south to said northeastern corner of land now
or formerly of Colchester Grange No. 78 Inc.; thence running generally
westerly a distance of 151 feet more or less, to land now or formerly
of Johnston; thence running generally southerly along said land now or
formerly of Johnston; and land now or formerly of Brennen, a distance of
152 feet more or less to land now or formerly of Parsons; thence running
generally easterly a distance of 50 feet more or less, and southerly a
distance of 54 feet more or less to land now or formerly of Turner, the last
two courses running along said land now or formerly of Parsons; thence
running generally easterly a distance of 45 feet more or less generally
southerly a distance of 75 feet more or less, generally westerly a distance
of 72 feet more or less, generally southerly a distance of 134 feet more
or less, and generally westerly a distance of 129 feet more or less to a
point on the easterly highway line of Hayward Avenue, the last five courses
running along land now or formerly of Turner; thence running generally
southerly along said easterly highway line of Hayward Avenue a distance
of 42 feet more or less to the intersection of the easterly highway line of
Hayward Avenue and the northerly highway line of Norwich Avenue; thence
continuing in a generally southerly direction across said Norwich Avenue to
the northeastern corner of land now or formerly of the Trustees of Bacon
Academy (commonly known as the DAR House); thence running along said
land now or formerly of the trustees of Bacon Academy generally southerly
a distance of 81 feet more or less, and generally westerly a distance of
41 feet more or less to land now or formerly of the Town of Colchester;
thence running along said land now or formerly of the Town of Colchester
in a generally southerly and then a generally westerly direction to land
now or formerly of Goldberg; thence running generally southerly along
said land now or formerly of Goldberg to its southeastern corner; thence
continuing along said land now or formerly of Goldberg generally westerly
a distance of 151 feet more or less and generally northerly a distance of
100 feet more or less to the southerly highway line of said Norwich Avenue;
thence running generally westerly along said southerly highway line of
Norwich Avenue a distance of 196 feet more or less to the intersection of
the southerly highway line of Norwich Avenue and the easterly highway
line of Main Street; thence running generally southerly along the easterly
highway line of said Main Street a distance of 1,250 feet more or less to a
point opposite land now or formerly of Green (the Breed Tavern lot); thence
running westerly across said Main Street to a point at the southeastern
corner of land now or formerly of said Green, thence running generally
westerly a distance of 200 feet more or less, generally northerly a distance
§ 74-3 HISTORIC DISTRICTS § 74-3
74:33
of 39 feet more or less, generally westerly a distance of 20 feet more or
less and generally northerly a distance of 247 feet more or less to the
southern boundary of land now or formerly of Solomon, the last four courses
running along said land now or formerly of Green; thence running generally
westerly along the southern boundary of said land now or formerly of
Solomon to its southwestern corner; thence running generally northerly
along the western boundary of said land now or formerly of Solomon and
the western boundary of land now or formerly of Condren, a distance or
238 feet more or less to the southern boundary of land now or formerly of
Brown; thence running in a generally westerly direction along the southern
boundary of said land now or formerly of Brown to its southwestern corner
thence running generally northerly along the western boundary of said land
now or formerly of Brown and the western boundary of land now or formerly
of Sabrowski, a distance of 236 feet more or less; thence running generally
easterly along said land now or formerly of Sabrowski a distance of 173
feet more or less; thence running generally northerly along said land now
or formerly of Sabrowski a distance of 52 feet more or less to land now or
formerly of Collins; thence running generally westerly along the southerly
boundary of said land now or formerly of Collins a distance of 175 feet more
or less; thence running generally northerly along the western boundary of
said land now or formerly of Collins a distance of 238 feet more or less;
thence running generally easterly along said land now or formerly of Collins
a distance of 65 feet more or less; thence running generally northerly along
said land now or formerly of Collins, and land now or formerly of the
Colchester Federated Church, a distance of 373 feet more or less; thence
running generally easterly along the southerly highway land now line of
Stebbins Road and the northern boundary of said land now or formerly of
the Colchester Federated Church, a distance of 230 feet more or less, to a
point in the western boundary of land now or formerly of the Trustees of
Bacon Academy (the Day Hall property); thence running generally northerly
along said land now or formerly of the Trustees of Bacon Academy to its
northwestern corner; thence running generally easterly along the northern
boundary of said land now or formerly of the Trustees of Bacon Academy
a distance of 81 feet, more or less, to a point in the westerly highway line
of Main Street, a distance of 235 feet, more or less, to its intersection with
the southerly highway line of Linwood Avenue; thence running generally
southwesterly along said southerly highway line of Linwood Avenue to the
point and place of beginning.
§ 74-4. Historic District Commission.
An Historic District Commission is hereby established, which shall
consist of five members and three alternate members, all of whom
shall be electors of the Town of Colchester holding no salaried town
office. The members of said Commission shall be appointed by the
Board of Selectmen. The regular members shall be appointed in such
a manner that the term of a least one member shall expire each year,
with their successors to be appointed in like manner for terms of five
years. Alternate members shall be appointed for terms of three years.
The Selectmen are further empowered to make appointments to fill
A.
§ 74-3 COLCHESTER CODE § 74-4
74:34
§ 74-5. Powers and duties of Historic District Commission.
The Historic District Commission shall have powers and perform such
functions and shall be subject to such limitations as shall from time to time
be provided by C.G.S.§ 7-147.
§ 74-6. Enforcement officer designated. [Added 6-24-1999]
The Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town of Colchester shall serve as
enforcement officer for such activities pertaining to the jurisdiction of the
Colchester Historic District Commission.
Chapter 77
HOUSING PARTNERSHIP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing needs of the elderly — See Ch. 18,
Art. V.
§ 77-1. Declaration; purpose.
The Board of Selectmen of the municipality of Colchester hereby declare
that a Local Housing Partnership be formed, in accordance with C.G.S.
§ 8-336f, in order to develop ways to increase the supply and availability of
affordable housing in Colchester.
vacancies, which appointments shall be for the duration of the vacated
unexpired term. At least one member of the Commission shall be a
resident within the Historic District.
Within a period of 30 days after the appointment of the original
members of the Commission, the regular members shall meet and elect
a Chair, Vice Chair and Clerk from among the membership. Alternate
members shall not participate in any election of officers of the
Commission. In all other matters, in case of an inability to act because
of absence, sickness of self-interest on the part of any member of the
Commission, that Commissioner's place shall be taken by an alternate
member designated by the Chair. All members shall serve without
compensation. The Commission shall adopt rules of procedure not
inconsistent with the provisions of the General Statutes of the State
of Connecticut and may, subject to appropriation, employ clerical or
technical assistance or consultants and may accept money gifts and
expend the same for such purposes.
B.
§ 74-4 HOUSING PARTNERSHIP § 77-2
77:35
§ 77-2. Housing Partnership created; membership.
There is hereby created the Colchester Housing Partnership, appointed by
the chief elected official of the municipality. The partnership shall consist of
the following members:
§ 77-3. Responsibilities of town for initial designation under
program.
Responsibilities of the Municipality of Colchester, in order to receive initial
designation under the Connecticut Housing Partnership Program shall
include the following:
§ 77-4. Duties of Housing Partnership.
Duties of the Colchester Housing Partnership, in order to receive
development designation under the Connecticut Housing Partnership
Program, shall include the following:
A. The chief elected official of Colchester.
Representatives of the Planning Commission, Zoning Commission,
Inland Wetlands Commission, Housing Authority and any local
community development agency, not to exceed five in number.
B.
Representatives of the local business community, such as local bankers,
realtor's and developers, not to exceed three in number.
C.
Representatives of public interest groups, such as housing advocates,
members of the clergy, members of local civic groups and
representatives of local nonprofit corporations, not to exceed three in
number.
D.
Local urban planning, land use and housing professionals, not to exceed
three in number.
E.
Submit evidence to the Commissioner of Housing that the Colchester
Housing Partnership has been formed in accordance with C.G.S.
§ 8-336f.
A.
Submit evidence to the Commissioner of Housing that sufficient local
resources have been committed to the Colchester Housing Partnership.
B.
To examine and identify housing needs and opportunities in the
community.
A.
To explore the availability of any state, municipal or other land that is
suitable for the development of affordable housing.
B.
To review applicable zoning regulations to determine whether such
regulations restrict the development of affordable housing in the
community.
C.
D. To identify any necessary changes to such regulations.
§ 77-2 COLCHESTER CODE § 77-4
77:36
§ 77-5. Conflicting resolutions, orders, rules and regulations.
At all times when any orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated
pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing
resolutions, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be
inconsistent therewith.
§ 77-6. No conflict with state or federal statutes.
This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal
statute, rule or regulation.
§ 77-7. Expenses.
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the
municipality in carrying out any Partnership activities authorized by this
chapter without prior approval by the legislative body nor shall any person
have any right to bind the municipality by contract, agreement or otherwise
without prior and specific approval of the legislative body.
Chapter 92
OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION FUND
§ 92-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148(c)(2)(K),
the Town of Colchester (the Town) does hereby create a special fund, which
fund shall be known as the "Open Space Preservation Fund" (the fund),
and which fund shall not lapse at the end of the municipal fiscal year. The
fund's purposes shall be the preservation of open space or the acquisition
of land or interests in land for open space or for recreational or agricultural
purposes (the "open space purposes").
§ 92-2. Sources of funding, investments, and limitation on fund use.
To establish priorities and develop a long-range plan to meet identified
housing needs in the community consistent with regional housing
needs.
E.
To establish procedures for the development of a written proposal to
achieve such priorities in accordance with said plan.
F.
To start an activity, development or project designed to create
additional affordable housing in Colchester.
G.
In addition to such sums as may be appropriated by the Town annually
for deposit into the fund, the Town is authorized to and may deposit into
the fund all monies received by it, from whatever source, as monetary
gifts, grants or loans for open space purposes.
A.
§ 77-4 OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION FUND § 92-2
92:37
§ 92-3. Expenditures from the fund.
Expenditures shall be made from the fund only in accordance with the
following procedures and requirements:
§ 92-4. Process for approval of acquisitions for open space
purposes.
Fees to the Town collected in lieu of any requirement to provide open
space, pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes §§ 8-25 and 8-25b, and
as authorized by the Zoning and Planning Commission, pursuant to the
Town's Subdivision Regulations, shall be deposited into the fund.
B.
The fund shall be in the custody of the Town Treasurer or other officer
in charge of funds of the Town, and all or any part of the monies in
the fund may, from time to time, be invested in any securities in which
public funds may be lawfully invested. All income derived from such
investments shall be placed into the fund and become a part thereof.
The monies so invested shall at all times be subject to withdrawal from
such investments for use as, hereinafter set forth.
C.
No sums contained in the fund, including interest and dividends earned
upon said sums, shall be transferred to any other account within the
Town budget. No expenditures shall be made from the fund except in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
D.
The continuation of the fund shall be perpetual, notwithstanding that
from time to time the fund may be unfunded.
E.
Expenditures from the fund shall be made exclusively for acquisition
costs, including but not limited to appraisal and closing costs, of real
property or of easements, interests or other rights therein, the use of
which shall be limited to open space purposes;
A.
Expenditures from the fund shall only be made for acquisitions that
have been approved in accordance with the procedures set forth in
§ 92-4 below; and
B.
All expenditures from the fund shall conform to the Town's general
procedures with regard to the expenditure of municipal funds.
C.
The Conservation Commission is hereby designated to act on behalf
of the Town for the purpose of reviewing and recommending to the
Board of Selectmen acquisitions for open space purposes. Any person,
including other agencies and departments of the Town, may propose
possible acquisitions to the Conservation Commission for review. The
Conservation Commission shall request input on possible acquisitions
from other agencies and departments of the Town (such as the Parks
and Recreation Department and the Zoning and Planning Commission),
as appropriate in each circumstance.
A.
§ 92-2 COLCHESTER CODE § 92-4
92:38
Chapter 124
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Leashing of dogs on public streets and
sidewalks — See Ch. 10, Art. I.
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 93.
Roads — See Ch. 109.
The Conservation Commission shall recommend to the Board of
Selectmen the acquisition of any parcel or interest therein to be used
for open space purposes ("proposed acquisition"). The recommendation
shall describe the proposed use and include a comprehensive statement
of the Conservation Commission's evaluation of the proposed
acquisition.
B.
If the Board of Selectmen approves a proposed acquisition, it shall
forward the Conservation Commission's recommendation for the
proposed acquisition to the Zoning and Planning Commission for a
report pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 8-24, and to the
Board of Finance.
C.
Following action by the Board of Finance and the issuance of the Zoning
and Planning Commission's report, pursuant to Connecticut General
Statutes § 8-24, final action on the proposed acquisition shall be taken
by the Board of Selectmen or, if required by Town Charter, by the Town
Meeting.
D.
§ 92-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 92-4
124:39

ARTICLE I
Street Numbering System
[Adopted 11-24-1986]
§ 124-1. Purposes.
To act and consider upon an ordinance providing for a town-wide street
numbering system for the purpose of creating order in the streets of
Colchester, to ensure that the town has proper and useful planning, to
promote public safety and convenience and to ease and speed essential
emergency services, the town adopts the following article.
§ 124-2. Adoption of numbering system; maps.
The number system, as shown on a set of maps on file in the office of the
Town Assessor entitled "Town of Colchester Numbering System, 1986" is
adopted as specified in C.G.S.§ 7-148 as the street numbering system of the
Town of Colchester.
§ 124-3. Numbering of unaccepted streets.
Certain streets and roads have been numbered which are not town roads.
This has been done for consistency and convenience and cannot be
interpreted as acceptance of the street by the town.
§ 124-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 124-3
124:41

ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice
[Adopted 12-27-1988]
§ 124-4. Adoption of statute.
The provisions of C.G.S.§ 7-163a, removing liability of the Town of
Colchester to any person injured by the presence of ice and/or snow on a
public sidewalk, are hereby adopted pursuant to the terms of said statute.4
4. Editor's Note: See Art. III, Sidewalk Maintenance, of this chapter.
§ 124-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 124-4
124:43

ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted 9-25-1990]
§ 124-5. Adoption of provisions.
The following article relating to the maintenance and care of sidewalks
within the Town of Colchester is herewith adopted.
§ 124-6. Adoption of statute.
The Town of Colchester does herewith adopt the provisions of
C.G.S.§ 7-163A, relating to the nonliability of the Town of Colchester.
§ 124-7. Responsibilities of owners and occupants of premises.
Every person owning or occupying any premises abutting upon any
sidewalk within the Town of Colchester shall be responsible for proper
maintenance and upkeep of said sidewalks. Such maintenance and upkeep
shall include keeping said sidewalks free from holes, obstructions and any
other objects or state of repair that will either impede or make hazardous
the use of said sidewalks by passersby. Such maintenance and upkeep shall
also include keeping said sidewalks free from litter, debris of all kinds,
ice and snow, whether actually creating a hazardous condition or not. For
purposes of definition, a motor vehicle may be considered as an obstruction.
§ 124-8. Obstructions interfering with pedestrian traffic.
It shall be unlawful to place, or cause to be placed, any obstruction within
the visually discernible boundaries of any sidewalk or otherwise generally
accepted public walking path within the Town of Colchester so as to impede
or otherwise make hazardous the safe and easy passage of pedestrian
traffic.
§ 124-9. Repairs by town; responsibility for costs.
Where, in the opinion of the Board of Selectmen, a violation of §§ 124-7 and
124-8 of this article results in the eminent threat of danger to the public,
including pedestrian users of said sidewalks, the Town of Colchester may
make such repairs or improvements as are necessary to abate the threat
to public safety, and the costs of said repairs and/or improvements shall be
borne by the person owning or occupying the premises abutting upon said
sidewalk.
§ 124-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be fined not more
than $100 for each day the violation continues.
§ 124-5 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 124-11
124:45
§ 124-11. When effective; repealer; effect of repeal.
This article shall take effect from and after its passage and publication
as provided by law. Upon its effective date those ordinances adopted by
the former Borough of Colchester on January 9, 1989, entitled "Ordinance
Regarding Obstruction of Sidewalks," and that ordinance adopted by said
borough on April 16, 1974, entitled a "By-law in Relation to Sidewalk
Maintenance and Upkeep," and that ordinance adopted January 21, 1986,
entitled an "Ordinance Revision Respecting Removal of Ice and Snow from
Public Sidewalks," are repealed, provided that the repeal of the ordinance
adopted January 21, 1986, shall not impose upon the Borough of Colchester
and its successor by merger, the Town of Colchester, any liability that did
not heretofore exist.
§ 124-11 COLCHESTER CODE § 124-11
124:46
Chapter 136
TOWN CENTER NEIGHBORHOOD STRATEGIC PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town Center Neighborhood Strategic
Plan — See Ch. A156.
§ 136-1. Adoption of plan.
The legislative body of the Town of Colchester, Connecticut, hereby
approves and adopts the Town Center Neighborhood Strategic Plan, dated
February, 1998.5
§ 136-2. Town Center Neighborhood Revitalization Zone Committee.
The legislative body of the Town of Colchester, Connecticut, hereby
establishes a Town Center Neighborhood Revitalization Zone Committee
by reconstituting the Town Center Neighborhood Revitalization Planning
Committee to become said Zone Committee.
Chapter A156
TOWN CENTER NEIGHBORHOOD STRATEGIC PLAN
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. A156, Town Center Neighborhood Strategic Plan.
§ 124-11 TOWN CENTER NEIGHBORHOOD STRATEGIC § 136-2
136:47