Part I: Ordinances
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted by Town Meeting 2-15-2005]
§ 1-1. Adoption.
The compilation of the ordinances of the Town of Ellington, codified and
consolidated into chapters and sections in the form attached hereto and
made a part hereof, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as
"Part I of the Code of the Town of Ellington, Connecticut," hereinafter called
the "Code." All provisions contained in Part I of the compilation provided for
herein and known as the "Code of the Town of Ellington" shall be in force
and effect on and after the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code
by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date
from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are
hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Town.
§ 1-3. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Town of Ellington of a general
and permanent nature in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance
which are inconsistent with any provisions of the Code are hereby repealed
from and after the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-4. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this ordinance
or of any ordinance appearing in the Code or included in this Code through
supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, article or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 1-5. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk of the Town of Ellington and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if
this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Town
Clerk of the Town of Ellington by impressing thereon the Seal of the Town
of Ellington, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said
Town Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication
of this ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-6. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
ordinances in the Code of the Town of Ellington, or any new ordinances,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention that
they be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this ordinance
shall affect the status of any ordinance contained herein, and such
ordinances may be amended, deleted or changed from time to time as the
Town deems desirable.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Town of Ellington required to be filed
in the office of the Town Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted by the Town subsequent to the enactment
of this ordinance in such form as to indicate the intention that they be a
part of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein
by temporary attachment of copies of such changes until such changes are
printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements
shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Town Clerk of the Town of Ellington or an authorized agent of the Town
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by the Town. The Town Clerk may
also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Town of Ellington, or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Town of Ellington to
be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other provision of this
ordinance, shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine of not more than $100.
§ 1-5 ELLINGTON CODE § 1-10
1:4
§ 1-10. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the Town of Ellington, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided in Subsections B and
C of this section. Certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said ordinances.
It is the intention of the Town Meeting that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
B. The following changes are made throughout the Code:
(1) References to specific chapters and sections of the Connecticut
General Statutes are revised to reflect the numbering of the statutes
as of the publication of this Code.
(2) References to the "Department of Health," "Department of Health
Services" and "Health Department" of the State of Connecticut are
amended to "Department of Public Health."
C. Section 116-3 is added to read as follows: "Boating on Crystal Lake
is subject to regulations of the State Department of Environmental
Protection. See § 15-121-B15j of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies."
§ 1-11. Effective date.
This ordinance shall be effective on March 21, 2005.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:5
Chapter 5
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 5-1. Findings and intent.
The legislative body of the Town of Ellington, Connecticut finds:
A. Adult-oriented establishments require special supervision from the
Town's public health and safety agencies in order to protect and
preserve the health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such
establishments, as well as the health, safety and welfare of the Town's
citizens.
B. Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and
towns in the United States indicate that:
(1) Large numbers of persons, primarily male, frequent adult-oriented
establishments, especially those which provide closed booths,
cubicles, studios and rooms for the private viewing of so-called
"adult motion pictures" and/or live entertainment;
(2) Closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms have been used by
patrons, clients or customers of adult-oriented establishments for
the purpose of engaging in sexual acts;
(3) Male and female prostitutes are known to frequent such
establishments in order to provide sex for hire to the patrons, clients
or customers within the booths, cubicles and rooms;
(4) Doors, curtains, blinds and/or other closures installed in or on the
entrances and/or exits of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms
are closed while such booths, studios, cubicles and rooms are in
use and encourage patrons using such booths, cubicles, studios
and rooms to engage in sexual acts therein with prostitutes and/or
other members of the same sex, thereby promoting and encouraging
prostitution and the commission of sexual acts which cause blood,
semen, and urine to be deposited on the floors and/or walls of such
booths, creating risk to the health and safety of other persons who
may come in contact with such deposits; and
(5) The reasonable regulation and supervision of such adult-oriented
establishments tend to discourage such sexual acts and prostitution
and encourage safe use of said premises and thereby promote the
health, safety and welfare of the patrons, clients and customers of
such establishments.
C. Unregulated operation of adult-oriented establishments is and would be
detrimental to the general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of
Ellington.
D. The Constitution and laws of the State of Connecticut grant to the
Town powers, especially police power, to enact reasonable legislation
§ 1-11 ELLINGTON CODE § 5-1
5:6
and measures to regulate and supervise adult-oriented establishments
as hereinafter defined in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
E. It is not the intent of the body enacting this chapter to deny to any
person rights to speech protected by the United States and/or State
Constitution, nor is it the intent of this body to impose any additional
limitations or restrictions on the contents of any communicative
materials, books and/or other materials. Further, by enacting this
chapter, this body does not intend to deny or restrict the right of any
adult to obtain and/or view any materials protected by the United States
and/or State Constitution, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any
constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such
materials may have to sell, distribute or exhibit such materials.
§ 5-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its stock and trade in books, films, video cassettes, magazines,
other periodicals or other film or electronic media which are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as
defined below, and in conjunction therewith having facilities for
presentation of adult entertainment, as defined below, and including adultoriented
films, movies or live entertainment for observation by patrons
therein.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition or any adult-oriented motion
picture, live performance, display or dance of any type which has as a
significant or substantial portion of such performance any actual or
simulated performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition and
viewing of specified anatomical areas, removal of articles of clothing or
appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling or any other personal services
offered customers.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building regularly
used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons
therein.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — Includes, without limitation, adult
bookstores and adult motion-picture theaters and further means any
premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted
and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms,
studios, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the
premises for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or
wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the
public, a patron, or a member, whether such adult entertainment is held,
conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. "Adult-
§ 5-1 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 5-2
5:7
oriented establishment" further includes, without limitation, an adult
entertainment studio or any premises that are physically arranged and
used as such, whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment
studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio,
modeling studio or any other term of like import.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who
work in or at or render any services directly to patrons of or assist in the
operation of facilities regulated by this chapter.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who provides entertainment within an adultoriented
establishment as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is
charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not entertainment is
provided as an employee or an independent contractor.
INSPECTOR — An employee of the North Central Health Department
authorized and designated by the Director of Health, or an employee of
the Department of Inspections and Permits authorized and designated by
the Director of said Department, or the Ellington Zoning Enforcement
Officer, Building Official, Fire Marshal, Town Engineer or a member of the
Connecticut State Police Department to inspect premises regulated under
this chapter in case of violations being found on such premises and to
require corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found on said premises.
LEGISLATIVE BODY or BODY — The Town Meeting of the Town of
Ellington, Connecticut.
MINOR — A person under the age of 18 years old.
OPERATOR — Any person, partnership or corporation operating,
conducting or maintaining an adult-oriented establishment.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) Human genitals or pubic region.
(2) Buttocks.
Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
(3)
A.
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely
opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or female breasts.
C.
§ 5-2 ELLINGTON CODE § 5-3
5:8
§ 5-3. Exceptions.
This chapter is not intended to apply to any medical publications or films;
nor to any bona fide educational publications or films; nor to any art
or photography publications which devote at least 25% of the lineage of
each issue to articles and advertisements dealing with subjects of art or
photography; nor to any news periodical which reports or describes current
events and which, from time to time, publishes photographs of nude or
seminude persons in connection with the dissemination of the news; nor
to publications or films which describe and report different cultures and
which, from time to time, publish or show photographs or depictions of
nude or seminude persons when describing cultures in which nudity or
seminudity is indigenous to the population.
§ 5-4. General regulations.
A. No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow
or permit any minor to be a patron, employee, or independent contractor
working at such establishment or to loiter in any part of the
establishment, including parking lots immediately adjacent to such
establishment used by patrons of such adult-oriented establishment.
B. Every adult-oriented establishment doing business in the Town on and
after the effective date of this chapter shall meet all of the following
requirements:
(1) The establishment shall be well lighted and shall be equipped with
overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every
place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not
less than one footcandle as measured at each of the following levels:
floor level; 30 inches above floor level; and 50 inches above floor
level. It shall be the duty of the operator and its agents to ensure that
the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any
patron is present in the premises. Lighting shall not be controlled
from within any booth.
(2) The establishment shall be physically arranged in such a manner
that the entire interior portion of the booths, cubicles, rooms or
stalls wherein adult entertainment is provided shall be clearly visible
from the common areas of the premises. Visibility into such booths,
cubicles, rooms or stalls shall not be blocked or obscured by doors,
curtains, partitions, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever.
It shall be unlawful to install enclosed booths, cubicles, rooms or
stalls within adult-oriented establishments for whatever purpose,
but especially for the purposes of providing for the secluded viewing
of adult entertainment. Any room or other area used for the
purposes of viewing adult entertainment shall be readily accessible
at all times and shall be continuously open to view in its entirety.
C. Upon the effective date of this chapter, the operator of each adultoriented
establishment shall be responsible for and shall acquire a
permit and assure that its business and premises comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter.
D. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be presumed the act or omission of the
§ 5-3 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 5-4
5:9
operator, as such act or approval of the operator is presumed to be the
result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's
conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission
in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the
omission.
E. An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees and
independent contractors and patrons while on the licensed premises,
and any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be presumed to be the act or omission of
the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator shall be
subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter.
F. All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection during any
of their hours of operation as well as the normal workday by inspectors
as defined in this chapter.
G. No adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted on a site that is
closer than 500 feet to an area zoned residential.
H. No adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted on a site that is
closer than 1,000 feet to an existing school, church, or Town facility.
§ 5-5. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which is found to have
violated this chapter shall be fined a definite sum not to exceed $100 for
each such violation.
B. Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense, and
any violation continuing for more than one hour shall be considered a
separate offense for each hour of violation.
§ 5-6. License required.
A. Each operator or owner shall apply for and obtain a license for the
operation of the regulated business.
B. Application shall be made to the Zoning Enforcement Officer on such
form as may be prescribed by him together with an application fee of
$100.
C. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall review the application and refer
it to all such other departments as may be required by this chapter to
review the application and/or facility. Only after receiving affirmative
responses from all such departments shall the Zoning Enforcement
Officer issue the permit.
D. All permits shall be valid for a period of one year or until September 1,
whichever first occurs. All such permits will renew on September 1.
E. Renewal permits shall require the same application and application fee
and shall be reviewed in the same manner by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer. Failure of the applicant to file his application at least 30 days
before the permit expires shall be grounds for the Zoning Enforcement
Officer to decline to reissue the permit for a period not exceeding the
delay, and the facility shall not operate without a permit.
§ 5-4 ELLINGTON CODE § 5-7
5:10
§ 5-7. Adult worker permit.
Each person who works at such a facility in any capacity shall apply for an
adult worker permit.
A. Application shall be made to the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
B. Application shall be on a form prescribed by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer which shall include personal identification, personal work history,
criminal record, and position to be held, including a description of the
work to be performed.
C. Permit shall be valid until September 1.
D. An application fee of $25 shall be paid with initial application. Renewal
permits shall require an application fee of $10.
E. Each permit shall be valid to work only at a single designated facility. If
the permittee moves to another facility another permit shall be required
which shall require an application fee of $10.
Chapter 10
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 116.
§ 5-7 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 5-7
10:11

ARTICLE I
Possession by Minors
[Adopted 11-13-2000, effective 12-12-2000]
§ 10-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — As defined in § 30-1 of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
§ 10-2. Prohibited acts.
No person under the age of 21 shall be in possession of containers of
alcoholic liquors, whether open or closed, within the Town of Ellington
except when accompanied by or in the presence of his or her parent,
guardian, or spouse who has attained the age of 21 years.
§ 10-3. Hosting events.
No person shall host an event which allows the consumption or dispensing
of alcoholic liquor to or by a minor or minors except as provided in § 10-2
above. This prohibition shall apply to events on both public and private
property.
§ 10-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a violation
as defined in Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148 and/or 53a-27.
§ 10-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 10-4
10:13
Chapter 13
AMBULANCE SERVICE
§ 13-1. Adoption of statute.
The provisions of § 7-148 of the Connecticut General Statutes, enacted by
the 1967 General Assembly as Public Act 126, concerning the furnishing
of ambulance service by the Town or any person, firm or corporation are
hereby adopted.1
§ 13-2. Duties of Board of Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen shall, before the Town undertakes to furnish
ambulance service pursuant to this chapter, establish the conditions,
charges and rules of operation for such service.
Chapter 17
ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC
1. Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(D).
§ 10-4 ELLINGTON CODE § 13-2
13:14
ARTICLE I
Special Events
[Adopted effective 2-24-1981]
§ 17-1. Applicability; purpose.
The provisions of this article shall apply to any outside area used for
the purpose of public assembly when such public assembly exceeds, or
can reasonably be expected to exceed, 250 persons (including employees,
volunteers, vendors, visitors, patrons, sponsors, exhibitors, etc.). The
regulation of said outside public assemblages and the supervision of the
same are hereby declared to be necessary for the protection of the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of Ellington.
§ 17-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
terms shall have the meaning indicated:
SPECIAL EVENT — Any public gathering of more than 250 persons
assembled at one time for one particular event. The term "special event"
shall not be interpreted to include the normal day-to-day operation of an
existing commercial enterprise.
§ 17-3. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to:
A. Private functions for which no admission charge is made nor a monetary
donation or contribution required of attendees; or
B. Functions sponsored by churches on their own premises or by
governmental or quasi-governmental organizations or by Town service
organizations.
§ 17-4. License required; application; public notice.
A. No special event shall be held without a valid license.
B. Tickets to a special event shall not be sold without a valid license.
C. Application for such license shall be made to the First Selectman not
later than 60 days before the starting date of the special event upon
forms approved by the Board of Selectmen.
D. Public notice of each application disclosing the pertinent facts
concerning the special event shall be made by the First Selectman within
seven days after the application is received (cost of this notice shall be
borne by the applicant).
E. The Board of Selectmen shall not grant or deny the license until at least
10 days after such public notice but not more than 14 days after public
notice.
§ 17-5. Qualifications of applicant; inspections.
§ 17-1 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 17-5
17:15
A. General standards to be applied. The general standards herein set out
relative to the qualification of every applicant for a special event license
shall be considered and qualified by the First Selectman.
(1) Citizenship. The applicant shall be a citizen of the United States or a
declarant thereof as authorized by law.
(2) Age. The applicant shall be of majority.
(3) Good moral character. The applicant shall be of good moral
character. In making such determination the First Selectman shall
consider:
(a) Felony history. All felony convictions, the reasons therefor, and
the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to his release.
(b) License history. The license history of the applicant; whether
such person, in previously operating in this or another state
under a license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the
reasons therefor, and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent
to such action.
(c) General personal history. Such other factors relevant to the
general personal history of the applicant as he shall find
necessary to a fair determination of the eligibility of the
applicant. In making such determination, the First Selectman
shall require three character references of persons unrelated to
the applicant.
(4) Type of business. The applicant's type of business or activity must be
bona fide and lawful.
(5) Type and character of event. The type and character of the proposed
special event.
(6) No obligations to Town of Ellington. The applicant shall not be in
default under the provisions of this article or indebted or obligated
in any manner to the Town of Ellington except for current taxes not
yet due.
(7) Compliance with zoning regulations. The applicant shall present
a certificate of occupancy or zoning permit to the effect that the
proposed use of any premises is not a violation of Town zoning
regulations.2
B. Further information: The applicant shall also further specify:
(1) Name(s) of applicant. If a partnership, names of all partners; if a
corporation, club or association, names of officers.
(2) Date organized and under laws of what state, if a corporation, club
or association.
(3) Legal residency, to assure avenues of communication.
(4) Location of proposed special event.
(5) Dates and hours of special event. No license shall be valid for more
than three consecutive calendar days.
(6) Anticipated maximum number of persons who will be assembled at
one time for the proposed special event. No persons in excess of
this maximum shall be permitted within the confines of the location
of said special event. In order to assure compliance with this
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 17-5 ELLINGTON CODE § 17-5
17:16
requirement, the applicant shall provide the First Selectman with a
daily accounting of ticket sales.
C. Plot plan or sketch of facilities and write-up as may be required by the
special event demonstrating adequate plans to meet local, state and
other applicable standards for:
(1) Vehicle parking spaces at a ratio of one for every two persons
expected to attend.
(2) Vehicle ingress and egress and on-site traffic control.
(3) Food supplies and facilities.
(4) Drinking water.
(5) Sanitation facilities.
(6) Lodging.
(7) Medical facilities and services.
(8) Fire zones.
(9) Refuse disposal, including cleanup of premises and removal of
rubbish after conclusion of the event.
(10) Law enforcement.
(11) Fire prevention and protection.
(12) Lighting.
D. The facilities for the proposed special event shall be subject to review
by the following officers of the Town of Ellington not later than 48 hours
of the time the licensed event is scheduled to begin and shall remain
subject to subsequent inspections by said Town officials as they deem
necessary:
(1) Chief of Police.
(2) Fire Marshal.
(3) Building Officer.
(4) Director of Health.
(5) Ambulance Coordinator.
(6) Fire Chief.
(7) Zoning Enforcement Officer.
(8) Director of Public Works.
§ 17-6. Application contents, form and fee.
A. Contents. The application shall contain all information necessary to
comply with § 17-5 above.
B. Form. The form of the application shall be a written application
appended with a statement signed and sworn to by the applicant(s),
either the individual(s), all partners, or all corporate officers, before
a notary public of Connecticut, under penalty of false statement, that
he will be responsible for the holding, operation and conduct of the
proposed special event in accordance with the terms of the license and
the provisions of this article and that the statements contained in the
application are, to the best of his knowledge and belief, true.
C. Payment of fees. The application shall be accompanied by the full amount
of fees chargeable for such license. Such fees shall include an issuance
fee of $100 for each special event applied for.
§ 17-5 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 17-7
17:17
§ 17-7. Grant or refusal of license.
The Board of Selectmen, in granting or refusing the license, shall consider
each of the sections of this article as well as any other information which
the Selectmen may require for the protection of the public communicated
to the Selectmen during the 10 to 14 days following the public notice
concerning the application. In any case of the denial or refusal of the Board
of Selectmen to grant or renew a license, the First Selectmen shall notify
the applicant in writing by certified mail of the proposed action and set a
day and place for a hearing thereon, giving the applicant reasonable notice
in advance thereof and an opportunity to be represented by counsel at such
hearing.
§ 17-8. Transfer of license; police protection; bond and insurance.
A. A license may not be transferred by the licensee to any other person,
corporation, partnership, club or association.
B. Each licensee shall pay for police protection as required by the Board of
Selectmen. The funds for said police protection, including a contingency
fund, shall be deposited in an Ellington special fund two weeks prior to
the special event. Any unused funds shall be returned to the licensee
upon certification by the Board of Selectmen that all conditions of said
police protection have been met.
C. Each licensee shall be required to post an indemnity bond and/or
performance bond in favor of the Town of Ellington conditioned upon
saving harmless the Town of Ellington from any and all liabilities or
causes of action which might arise by virtue of the granting of a license
to the licensee and conditioned further that no damage will be done to
the streets, sewers, trees or adjoining property, that no dirt, paper, litter
or other debris will be permitted to remain upon the streets or upon any
private property by such licensee, and that all other conditions of the
license shall be met. Such cash bond(s) shall be returned to the licensee
upon certification by the Board of Selectmen that all conditions of this
article have been met.
D. Each licensee shall obtain public liability insurance with a minimum
combined single limit of $1,000,000 applicable to bodily injury and
property damage, naming the Town of Ellington as an additional named
insured.
§ 17-9. Revocation of license.
The First Selectmen shall have the power to revoke any license issued
hereunder for cause, after due notice. Cause shall be deemed to include,
but shall not be limited to, false information in the application for a license
knowingly given, failure to comply with the conditions under which the
license has been granted, any violation of this article or conviction of
a crime involving moral turpitude subsequent to the application for the
license.
§ 17-7 ELLINGTON CODE § 17-10
17:18
§ 17-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to
comply with any order made thereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of $100. The imposition of any penalty for any violation
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations immediately, and,
when not otherwise specified, each day that a prohibited condition is
maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The Town of Ellington shall
be entitled to apply for an injunction to prohibit the holding of special events
where the sponsor or promoter has failed to comply with the provisions of
this article.
§ 17-10 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 17-10
17:19

ARTICLE II
Use of Outside Areas
[Adopted effective 2-24-1981]
§ 17-11. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to any outside area used for
the purpose of public assembly when such public assembly exceeds, or
can be reasonably expected to exceed, 100 persons (including employees,
volunteers, vendors, visitors, patrons, sponsors, exhibitors, etc.).
§ 17-12. Authority of Fire Marshal.
A. The Fire Marshal shall designate fire zones as permitted in Chapter 74,
Article I, Fire Zones, of this Code.
B. The Fire Marshal may require such fire-extinguishing apparatus as he
may deem necessary to be held on the grounds and in a state of
immediate readiness and with sufficient qualified personnel to provide
reasonable and adequate safety from fire and other emergencies. (The
foregoing may include but be limited to fire extinguishers and qualified
employees as approved by the Fire Marshal.)
C. The Fire Marshal may require direct communication with a designated
emergency dispatch center from a safe area within the assembly area.
D. Such features as seating, capacity, aisles, lighting, storage of
combustibles, storage of flammable liquids, rubbish handling, vending
equipment, cooking equipment, electrical connections and equipment,
displays and exhibits, stage and bandstand construction, operating
procedures and methods shall be installed, operated and/or maintained
as the Fire Marshal may deem necessary for public safety.
§ 17-13. Discontinuance of assembly.
Any violations of the foregoing, or the existence of any other hazardous
condition, as determined by the Fire Marshal, which may jeopardize the
safety of the public shall be just cause for the discontinuance of the public
assembly function until such time as required safety features have been
reestablished.
§ 17-14. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to
comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made
thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not
more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both such
fine and imprisonment. The imposition of any penalty for any violation shall
not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall
be required to correct or remedy such violations immediately, and, when not
otherwise specified, each day that a prohibited condition is maintained shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 17-11 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 17-14
17:21
Chapter 24
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
§ 17-14 ELLINGTON CODE § 17-14
17:22
ARTICLE I
Development and Industrial Commission
[Adopted effective 5-21-1960]
§ 24-1. Established; statutory authority.
The Town of Ellington, Connecticut, hereby establishes a Development and
Industrial Commission in accordance with § 7-136 of the General Statutes
of Connecticut, Revision of 1958.
§ 24-2. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall conduct researches into business and industrial
conditions it its municipality, shall seek to coordinate the activities of
unofficial bodies organized for such purposes, may advertise and may
prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts and pamphlets which in
its judgment will further its official purposes.
§ 24-3. Appointment and removal of members; compensation.
Within 30 days after the effective date of this article, the Board of Selectmen
of the Town of Ellington shall appoint five members to said Commission, of
whom one shall be appointed for a term ending on the first day of July 1961,
one for a term ending on the first day of July 1962, one for a term ending
on the first day of July 1963, one for a term ending on the first day of July
1964, and one for a term ending on the first day of July 1965, and on or
before the first day of July 1961, and annually thereafter, the successors to
the members whose terms then expire shall be appointed for terms of five
years each. The Board of Selectmen shall designate the Chairman of said
Commission. Any vacancy in the membership of the Commission shall be
filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the Board of Selectmen. Any
member of the Commission shall be removed by the Board of Selectmen for
cause and, on request of such member, after public hearing. The members
of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their services as
such but shall be reimbursed for their necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their official duties.
§ 24-4. Number of members from same political party.
Not more than a bare majority of said Commission shall be members of the
same political party.
§ 24-1 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 24-4
17:23

ARTICLE II
Recreation Commission
[Adopted effective 7-11-1962]
§ 24-5. Established; powers and duties.
A. There is herewith established a Recreation Commission within the Town
of Ellington which shall have all of the powers under the General
Statutes of Connecticut to establish, maintain and conduct public parks,
playgrounds, baths, swimming pools, gymnasiums, recreation places and
public gardens.
B. The Recreation Commission herein established is authorized and
empowered to request and receive appropriations from the Town, to
receive funds from other sources, and to expend such funds for its
authorized purposes.
§ 24-6. Membership; terms of office.
A. The Recreation Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be
residents and legal voters of the Town and who shall be appointed by the
Board of Selectmen for terms as hereinafter set forth.
B. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint seven members of the Recreation
Commission whose terms shall commence on the effective date of this
article as follows:
(1) Three members for terms expiring on June 1, 1965.
(2) Two members for terms expiring on June l, 1964.
(3) Two members for terms expiring on June 1, 1963.
(4) Members shall be appointed for three-year terms, except to fill
unexpired vacancies, upon expiration of the terms of the initial
appointment.
C. The Board of Selectmen shall fill any vacancy on the Commission to
complete any unexpired term.
§ 24-7. Officers; compensation.
Members of the Commission shall appoint from their number a Chairman
who shall serve during his term of office and a Secretary who shall keep
a record of the Commission's meetings and correspondence. No member
of the Commission shall be entitled to compensation for his service, but
reasonable expenses may be authorized.
§ 24-5 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 24-7
17:25

ARTICLE III
Planning and Zoning Commission
[Adopted effective 11-15-1963]
§ 24-8. Alternate members.
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have, in addition to its five
regular members, three alternate members who shall be appointed by
the Board of Selectmen.
B. Initial appointments of alternate members shall be for terms of three,
four and five years ending on September 1, 1966, 1967 and 1968,
respectively, and thereafter at the expiration of his term of office each
alternate member shall be appointed for a term of five years.
§ 24-8 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 24-8
17:27

ARTICLE IV
Park Commission
[Adopted 3-20-1973]
§ 24-9. Established.
A Park Commission is herewith constituted to supervise the several existing
Town-owned parks and recreation areas within the Town of Ellington and
such areas as may be acquired or established in the future.
§ 24-10. Authority to promulgate regulations.
The Park Commission is authorized and empowered to promulgate and
enforce regulations for the administration and control of all recreational
areas and parks within its jurisdiction.
§ 24-11. Appointment and removal of members.
The Park Commission shall consist of seven electors of the Town of Ellington
who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for four-year terms
commencing on July 1 in the year of appointment. Members presently
serving shall be appointed as follows: two to serve until July 1, 1974, two
to serve until July 1, 1975, two to serve to July 1, 1976, and one to serve
until July 1, 1977. All members shall serve until their successors have
been appointed and qualified. Any vacancies shall be filled by the Board
of Selectmen for the balance of the term vacated. Any member of the
Commission may be removed for cause by the Board of Selectmen and, on
request of such member, after public hearing.
§ 24-12. Compensation.
Members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their service
but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in performance of
their official duties.
§ 24-9 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 24-12
17:29

ARTICLE V
Conservation Commission
[Adopted effective 5-1-1974]
§ 24-13. Designation as Inland Wetlands Agency.
Pursuant to the provisions of Public Act No. 73-571 of the 1973 Session
of the Connecticut General Assembly, the Conservation Commission of the
Town of Ellington is hereby designated as the Inland Wetlands Agency as
provided for by Public Act 73-571.3
§ 24-14. Authority to promulgate regulations.
The Conservation Commission, acting as the Inland Wetlands Agency, is
authorized to promulgate such regulations, in conformity with the
regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection
pursuant to § 22a-39 of the General Statutes (Revision of 1958), as
amended, as are necessary to protect the wetlands and watercourses within
the territorial limits of the Town of Ellington.4
§ 24-15. Implementation of state act.
The Conservation Commission, acting as the Inland Wetlands Agency, shall
implement and administer the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act
(§§ 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended).
§ 24-16. Licensing of regulated activities.
The Conservation Commission, acting as the Inland Wetlands Agency, shall
serve as the sole agent for the licensing of regulated activities as provided
for by § 3 of Public Act No. 73-571.5
3. Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 22a-42.
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses.
5. Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 22a-42.
§ 24-13 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 24-16
17:31

ARTICLE VI
Public Safety Commission
[Adopted effective 9-15-1974]
§ 24-17. Establishment.
Pursuant to § 7-148 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, the
Public Safety Commission of the Town of Ellington is hereby established.
§ 24-18. Membership; compensation. [Amended effective
11-1-1974]
The Commission shall consist of nine members who shall serve without
compensation, one of whom shall be a member of the Ellington Center
Volunteer Fire Department, one of whom shall be a member of the Crystal
Lake Fire Department, one of whom shall be a member of the Ellington
Volunteer Ambulance Corps., one of whom shall be a Town Constable, and
five of whom shall be electors of the Town of Ellington.
§ 24-19. Appointment; terms of office.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint all members of the Commission,
whose terms shall commence on the effective date of this article as follows:
A. Two members for terms expiring September 1, 1975.
B. Two members for terms expiring September 1, 1976.
C. Two members for terms expiring September 1, 1977.
D. Three members for terms expiring September 1, 1978.
E. Members shall be appointed for four-year terms, except to fill unexpired
terms of the initial appointments.
§ 24-20. Vacancies.
Any vacancies shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen for the balance of
the term vacated.
§ 24-21. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall draw lines of communication and form operational
policies among the Town agencies involved with public safety and work with
area towns having similar public safety problems in applying for federal and
state grants and technical assistance.
§ 24-17 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 24-21
17:33

ARTICLE VII
Cultural Arts Commission
[Adopted effective 2-28-1975]
§ 24-22. Establishment.
Pursuant to § 7-148 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, the
Cultural Arts Commission of the Town of Ellington is hereby established.
§ 24-23. Membership; compensation.
The Commission shall consist of nine members, who shall serve without
compensation, six of whom shall be electors of the Town of Ellington.
§ 24-24. Appointment; terms of office.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint all members of the Commission,
whose terms shall commence on the effective date of this article as follows:
A. Two members for a one-year term.
B. Two members for a two-year term.
C. Two members for a three-year term.
D. Three members for a four-year term.
E. Annually thereafter members shall be appointed to said Commission in
like manner to succeed those whose terms expire, to serve for terms of
four years each and until their successors are appointed. Vacancies shall
be filled by the Board of Selectmen for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 24-25. Powers and duties.
Said Commission shall encourage within the Town participation in and
promotion, development, acceptance and appreciation of artistic and
cultural activities, which may include but are not limited to music, theater,
dance, painting, sculpture, architecture, literature, films and allied arts
and crafts. All activities undertaken in carrying out the aforesaid purposes
shall be directed toward encouraging and assisting, rather than in any way
limiting, the freedom of artistic expression which is essential for the wellbeing
of the arts.
§ 24-22 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 24-25
17:35

ARTICLE VIII
Deferred Compensation Committee
[Adopted effective 12-26-1980]
§ 24-26. Appointment.
Pursuant to § 1106 of the Ellington Charter, the Board of Selectmen is
authorized to appoint a Deferred Compensation Committee consisting of
three persons for the purpose of recommending to the Board of Selectmen
for its approval rules and regulations in the administration and adoption of
a Deferred Compensation Plan for the Town of Ellington consistent with the
Revenue Act of 1978 and recommending modifications to such plan from
time to time as may be necessary or desirable to comply with amendments
to said Act or regulations which may be issued thereunder.
§ 24-26 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 24-26
17:37

ARTICLE IX
Board of Education
[Adopted effective 6-11-1985]
§ 24-27. Election of members.
A. In each biennial election commencing with the November 5, 1985,
election an elector may vote for any five persons nominated as
candidates for election to the Board of Education, and the persons
receiving the greatest number of votes shall be elected, except that
when the number of members of any one political party who would be
elected without regard to § 9-167a of the Connecticut General Statutes,
as amended from time to time, exceeds the maximum number as
determined by said section, then only the candidates of such political
party with the highest number of votes up to the limit of such maximum
shall be elected. The next highest ranking candidates, not from such
political party, shall be elected, up to the number of places to be filled in
such election.
B. Each political party shall have the right to nominate as many persons as
there are vacancies on the Board, and those names shall be placed upon
the ballot.
§ 24-27 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 24-27
17:39

ARTICLE X
Insurance Advisory Board
[Adopted effective 4-13-1987]
§ 24-28. Appointment; terms of office; qualifications; powers and
duties.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint an Insurance Advisory Board
consisting of five members. All members shall be appointed for four-year
terms, except that of those such members first appointed under the
provisions of this article, three shall be appointed for four-year terms and
two shall be appointed for two-year terms. Biennially thereafter, the Board
of Selectmen shall appoint, in the manner provided herein, four or five
members, depending on the number of members whose terms then expire.
Members shall have expertise in the fields of life, health, property, casualty
and liability insurance. The Finance Officer shall serve as an ex officio
member of the Board, and the Board of Selectmen and the Board of
Education shall each designate one of its members to be its liaison to this
Board. Such liaison member shall be entitled to participate in all discussions
but shall not be counted for quorum purposes nor be entitled to vote.
Said Board shall provide advice and assistance to the Board of Selectmen,
Finance Officer, the agents of record and Town boards and commissions in
the management of the Town's insurance program.
§ 24-29. Persons previously appointed.
The terms of those persons previously appointed by the Boards of
Selectmen and Education from their membership to be their
representatives shall terminate upon the effective date hereof, and they
shall become the liaison members until their successors are appointed and
qualified.
§ 24-28 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 24-29
17:41

ARTICLE XI
Flood and Erosion Control Board
[Adopted 6-19-2006]
§ 24-30. Establishment.
Flooding and erosion control are issues of concern to the citizens and
government of the Town of Ellington which need to be addressed in
cooperation with the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 24-31. Designation of Board.
Pursuant to the specific authority of Connecticut General Statutes,
§ 25-84(a), since the Town of Ellington has a population of less than 50,000,
the Board of Selectmen is hereby designated as the Ellington Flood and
Erosion Control Board.
§ 24-32. Powers and duties.
The Flood and Erosion Control Board shall have all the powers and duties
set forth in Chapter 477 of the General Statutes, which includes § 25-84 et
seq. and such other powers and duties as the Board may from time to time
find necessary or convenient to address the specific conditions found within
the Town of Ellington which may cause flooding of property or erosion
and to contract with the Commissioner of Environmental Protection to join
with or accept payments or grants to assist in the accomplishment of the
purposes set forth in the statutes or this article.
§ 24-30 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 24-32
17:43
Chapter 28
BUDGET AND FINANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Funds — See Ch. 80. Taxation — See Ch. 160.
§ 24-32 ELLINGTON CODE § 24-32
17:44
ARTICLE I
Competitive Bidding
[Adopted effective 6-8-1991]6
§ 28-1. Requirements. [Amended 10-21-2013]
For any purchase estimated at $25,000 or more, the Finance Officer shall
invite sealed bids unless the Board of Selectmen shall decide it to be against
the best interest of the Town. For any purchase less than $25,000 or such
other amount required by law, the Finance Officer or his designee shall
negotiate directly with prospective suppliers prior to the Finance Officer
awarding the contract.
§ 28-2. Applicability.
These regulations shall apply to the awarding of any contract or the
purchase of any personal property by the Town of Ellington.
§ 28-3. Effect on Charter provisions.
This article supersedes the monetary limits of Ellington Charter § 1111
until such time as said section is revised. It shall not alter or amend the
remaining provisions of the Charter or limit the Selectmen's authority to
waive bidding procedures as set forth in Charter § 1111.
6. Editor's Note: For the most current provisions regarding competitive bidding, see Section
1111 of the Charter.
§ 28-1 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 28-3
17:45

ARTICLE II
Mill Rate for Temporary Budget
[Adopted 8-3-1994, effective 9-1-1994]
§ 28-4. Limitation on rate.
When in the course of the annual Town budget process it is deemed that
a temporary budget for the forthcoming fiscal year must be adopted, when
the Board of Selectmen sets a mill rate at that time, the new set mill rate
will be no higher than to meet the voter-approved budget of the current
fiscal year, according to the grand list at the time this mill rate is to be set.
§ 28-5. Time limit for setting rate.
When the mill rate is to be set by the Board of Selectmen as in § 28-4 above,
it will be set no sooner than the last Tuesday of June.
§ 28-4 ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC § 28-5
17:47
Chapter 32
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 36.
Building fees — See Ch. 70, Art. II.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 74.
Sewers — See Ch. 143.
Water — See Ch. 180.
Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch.
210.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 225.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 28-5 ELLINGTON CODE § 28-5
32:48
ARTICLE I
Basic Building Code
[Adopted effective 4-22-1963]
§ 32-1. Code adopted by reference.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file with the Town Clerk
of the Town of Ellington, known as the "Basic Building Code, 1957 Edition,"
with accumulative supplements to date, be and hereby is adopted as the
Building Code of the Town of Ellington for control of buildings and
structures as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Basic Building Code are
hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this
article.
§ 32-2. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Town of Ellington inconsistent
with said Basic Building Code hereby adopted are herewith repealed.
§ 32-3. Septic tanks. [Added 6-11-1968]
On or after the effective date of this section, no person, firm or corporation
shall install, remove or repair any septic tank or its appurtenances within
the Town of Ellington without first obtaining a permit from the Building
Official and paying a fee of $15 for the same.
§ 32-4. Penalties for offenses. [Added 7-27-1972; amended effective
6-3-1993]
A. Any person who violates any provision of this code shall be fined not less
than $200 nor more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than six months
or both, as provided by Connecticut General Statutes § 29-254a.
B. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the building after
having been served with a stop order, except such work as he is directed
to perform to remove a violation of unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a
fine of not less than $200 nor more than $1,000. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 32-1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 32-4
32:49

ARTICLE II
Withholding of Permits for Tax-Delinquent Property
[Adopted 11-13-2000, effective 12-12-2000]
§ 32-5. Authority to withhold approval.
Pursuant to § 7-148, Connecticut General Statutes, as such statute may
be amended from time to time, approval of all applications for building
permits, certificates of occupancy, or other building applications made to
the Building Official of the Town shall be withheld for any property upon
which taxes are delinquent for the property for which an application is
made.
§ 32-6. Implementation procedures.
A. The Board of Selectmen will adopt and implement procedures to
implement this article.
B. Before approving any building application for property for which the
taxes appear to be unpaid, the Building Official shall require any
applicant for any building application to obtain a certification from the
Tax Collector that:
(1) The delinquent taxes have been paid; or
(2) The taxpayer has entered into an acceptable agreement with the Tax
Collector for the payment of the delinquent taxes.
§ 32-7. Exception.
This article shall not apply in situations where the property is the subject
of a tax appeal and the taxpayer has made the minimum tax payments
required by § 12-118 of the Connecticut General Statutes.7
§ 32-8. Emergencies.
The Building Official may grant a building application without the
satisfaction of the above certifications if he certifies in writing, as part of the
file, that an emergency exists affecting the health or safety of the occupants
of a building upon which property the building application is sought.
7. Editor's Note: Section 12-118 was repealed by P.A. 95-283.
§ 32-5 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 32-8
32:51
Chapter 36
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 32. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 225.
§ 36-1. Assignment of numbers.
It shall be the duty of the Building Official to assign a number to every
residential, commercial, industrial or other structure located on premises
abutting a public street or highway within the Town of Ellington, except
those structures such as barns, garages or outbuildings which are located
on the same premises as a numbered structure.
§ 36-2. Duty of homeowners.
Every owner, agent or lessee or occupant shall, within the effective date of
this chapter, ascertain from the Building Official the number assigned to
each structure owned, possessed or controlled by him and shall place said
number upon each said structure in the manner hereinafter provided.
§ 36-3. New construction.
Any building or dwelling under construction must be clearly identified by
a street number. This number should be placed on a sign or appropriate
marker 10 feet off the road's edge or designated entrance to the
construction site. It shall be posted on the site by the time of the first
required inspection of the Building Official and shall remain in place until a
certificate of occupancy is issued, at which time the number shall be affixed
permanently as specified in § 36-4 and 36-5 of this chapter.
§ 36-4. Number standards.
All numbers provided for herein shall be Arabic numbers not less than three
inches in height against a contrasting background. All numbers shall be of
durable metal, glass, wood or plastic or may be painted of a neat design
with durable material. Numbers made from nonpermanent materials such
as paper or cardboard shall be in noncompliance with this chapter.
§ 36-5. Location of numbers.
Numbers shall be placed on the house or building where visible from the
street or normal approach by emergency personnel. In the event numbers
are not clearly legible from the road due to topography, vegetation or
distance from the street, then a second set of numbers must be installed
within 25 feet from the pavement or edge of road so as to be plainly visible
from the road. The second set of numbers may be located on a post office
§ 32-8 ELLINGTON CODE § 36-5
36:52
delivery box set at the road side immediately in front of and on the same
side of the road as the building, on a fence, on a tree or on a sign designed
for this purpose.
§ 36-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, whether owner, agent or occupant, who shall fail or refuse to
number correctly any house or other building owned, occupied or controlled
by him after 10 days' written notice from the Building Official or who shall
willfully remove, obliterate, conceal or obscure any house number shall be
deemed in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to a fine at the
current rate set by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 36-7. Appeals.
Any person who is aggrieved by the action of the Building Official may
submit an appeal to the First Selectman as set forth in Chapter 46,
Citations, of this Code. Any such appeal shall be in writing setting forth the
basis for the appeal.
Chapter 46
CITATIONS
§ 46-1. Findings and purpose.
It is hereby found and declared that it is desirable to adopt a citation
hearing procedure in accordance with and under authority contained in
Connecticut General Statutes § 7-152c in order to permit a local forum
under which citizens may be heard in connection with citations that may be
issued by municipal officials in connection with any municipal ordinance.
§ 46-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
CITATION HEARING BOARD — The Board of Selectmen shall constitute the
Citation Hearing Board and shall conduct hearings pursuant to the rules
set forth in this chapter and issue decisions in connection with citations
for violation of any municipal ordinance. The Citation Hearing Board is
hereafter referred to as the "Board."
CITED PERSON — The person, individual or business to whom or to which
a notice of violation was issued by an official and whose act or conduct is
the subject of a hearing pursuant to this chapter.
NOTICE — Any notice required by this chapter shall be given and is
sufficient if provided in one of the following forms:
A. In-hand delivery by an agent designed by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 36-5 CITATIONS § 46-2
46:53
OFFICIAL — The municipal official charged with enforcing a municipal
ordinance or regulation who issued the notice of violation or citation subject
to a hearing pursuant to this chapter.
ORDINANCE — Any ordinance, rule, regulation or policy adopted by the
Town of Ellington or any of its boards, commissions or agencies proscribing
specified actions or activities and which ordinance or rule, regulation or
policy imposes a penalty or fine or requires specified action by the party
charged.
§ 46-3. Appeal and required notice.
A. Appeal by cited person. A cited person may at any time, but not later
than six months following the date of a notice of violation of any
municipal ordinance or regulation, appeal such notice of violation and
the financial penalty imposed thereby by filing a notice of appeal in
the office of the First Selectman, which notice shall include all of the
following information:
(1) Name, current mailing address, telephone number and FAX number,
if any, of the cited person taking the appeal.
(2) A copy of the notice of violation from which an appeal is being taken
or sufficient identification of the notice for the First Selectman to
identify the subject of the appeal, i.e., the date, place of violation,
and name of the official issuing the notice of violation.
(3) A statement of the facts or theories upon which the appeal is based
and which the appellant would like the Board to consider.
B. Notice to person cited. At any time within 12 months from the expiration
of the final period for the uncontested payment of any fine, penalty, cost
or fees set forth in any citation issued under any municipal ordinance for
an alleged violation thereof, the officer charged with such enforcement
shall provide written notice to the person cited. Such notice shall inform
the person cited:
(1) Of the nature of the allegations against him which constitute a
violation of a specific ordinance and the amount of fines, penalties,
costs or fees due.
(2) That he may contest his liability before the Citation Hearing Board
by delivering a written notice in person or by mail within 30 days of
the date of such notice to the office of the First Selectman.
(3) That if he does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and
judgment shall be entered against him.
(4) That such judgment may issue without further notice.
C. If the person cited wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation,
he may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines,
penalties, costs or fees set forth in the citation to the First Selectman's
Certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the person cited
at his last known address.
B.
Delivery by any commercial carrier or delivery service such as Fed Ex
or UPS.
C.
D. A commercial process server, state marshal, police officer or constable.
§ 46-2 ELLINGTON CODE § 46-3
46:54
office either in person or by mail. Such payment shall be inadmissible in
any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person.
D. Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing
within 30 days of the date of the notice provided for in this section shall
be deemed to have admitted liability, and the designated official shall
certify such person's failure to respond to the Board. The Board shall
thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided
for by the applicable ordinances and shall follow the procedures set forth
in § 46-4H and I of this chapter.
E. Notice of hearing. The Board, through the office of the First Selectman,
will give written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to the
cited person and official not less than the seventh calendar day prior to
the hearing by any means considered by the First Selectman as adequate
to give all parties notice of the hearing, including a notice delivered by
confirmed FAX to the number given by the cited person.
§ 46-4. Hearing procedures.
A. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice as
defined herein of the date, time and place for the hearing.
B. Such hearing shall be held not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days
from the date of the sending or delivery of the notice of the hearing,
provided that the Hearing Board shall grant, upon good cause shown,
any reasonable request by an interested party for postponement or
continuance.
C. Since the primary purpose of the ordinances of the Town is to gain
compliance with the purposes thereof, the Hearing Board, upon receipt
of a request for additional time within which to remedy the state of
facts which gave rise to the issuance of the citation, may continue the
hearing for a reasonable amount of time to permit the cited person to
accomplish that goal and may impose such additional conditions upon
the continuance as the Hearing Board deems appropriate.
D. An original or certified copy of the initial notice of violation issued by
the issuing official shall be filed and maintained by the First Selectman's
office and shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of
§ 52-180 of the Connecticut General Statutes and evidence of the facts
contained therein. The presence of the issuing official shall be required
at the hearing if the cited person so requests.
E. The cited person wishing to contest his liability shall appear at the
hearing and may be represented by counsel and may present evidence
in his behalf. If the cited person fails to appear, the Hearing Board may
enter an assessment by default against him upon a finding of proper
notice and liability under the applicable statutes or ordinances.
F. Any municipal official, other than a sitting member of the Hearing
Board, may present evidence on behalf of the municipality.
G. The Hearing Board may accept copies of police reports, investigatory
and citation reports and other official documents delivered to it directly
or by carrier and may determine thereby that the appearance of a
witness is unnecessary. The Hearing Board shall conduct the hearing in
the order and form and accept such methods of proof as it deems fair
§ 46-3 CITATIONS § 46-4
46:55
and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall
not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or
affirmation.
H. The Hearing Board shall file its decision not later than the 45th day
following completion of the hearing in the office of the First Selectman,
and said office shall provide notice to the person cited in any of the
ways specified in § 46-3A and provide notice to the officer who issued
the initial citation. If the Board determines that the cited person is not
liable, it shall dismiss the matter and enter its determination in writing
accordingly. If the Board determines that the cited person is liable for
the violation, it shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties,
costs or fees against such person as provided by the applicable
ordinances of the municipality.
I. If the assessment is not paid on the day of its entry, the Hearing Board
shall give a notice as defined herein of the assessment to the person
found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months
after such assessment, a certified copy of the notice of assessment
with the Clerk of the Superior Court for Geographical Area No. 19,
together with an entry fee of $8. The certified copy of the notice of
assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within such twelvemonth
period, assessments against the same person may be accrued and
filed as one record of assessment. The Clerk shall enter judgment in
the amount of such record of assessment and court costs of $8 against
such person in favor of the Town of Ellington. Notwithstanding any other
provision of the General Statutes, the Hearing Board's assessment,
when so entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money
judgment and a levy of execution on such judgment may issue without
further notice to such person.
J. A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this
section is entitled to judicial review by way of an appeal in the Superior
Court. An appeal shall be instituted within 30 days of the issuance of
notice of such an assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment,
together with an entry fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a small
claims case pursuant to § 52-259 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
in the Superior Court for Geographical Area No. 19 which shall entitle
such person to a hearing in accordance with the rules of the Judges of
the Superior Court.
§ 46-5. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof shall be held
invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this chapter, or the application of
such terms and provisions to persons or circumstances other than those to
which it is held invalid or unenforceable, shall not be affected thereby, and
each remaining term and provision hereof shall be deemed valid and shall
be enforced to the fullest extent permitted by law.
§ 46-4 ELLINGTON CODE § 46-6
46:56
§ 46-6. Effect on other laws.
The provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any and all provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes and ordinances
of the Town of Ellington.
Chapter 48
CITATIONS FOR WETLAND AND ZONING VIOLATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citations — See Ch. 46.
Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch.
210.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 48-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter. (Masculine terms include the feminine.)
CITATION — A written statement of the relevant conditions and facts giving
rise to the wetland or zoning violation, including a reference to the specific
section(s) of the wetland or zoning regulations which has been violated, the
time period during which the violation has existed, the potential fine and
the cited persons right to appeal pursuant to § 46-3A.
CITED HEARING BOARD — As defined pursuant to § 46-2.
CITED PERSON — As defined pursuant to § 46-2.
OFFICIAL — The Zoning Enforcement Officer, Deputy Zoning Enforcement
Officer, Wetland Agent or municipal official charged with enforcing a
municipal ordinance or regulation or who issued the notice of violation or
citation.
§ 48-2. Authority to issue citations; fines.
A. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (C.G.S.) § 8-12a, as may be
amended, and in addition to the remedies provided in C.G.S. § 8-12, an
official, as defined herein, is hereby authorized to issue citations for
violations of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Ellington.8 The fine
for each zoning violation may not exceed $150 for each day a violation
continues.
B. Pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-42g, as may be amended, and in addition to the
remedies provided in C.G.S. § 22a-44, an official, as defined herein, is
hereby authorized to issue citations for violations of the Inland Wetlands
Regulations of the Town of Ellington.9
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses.
§ 46-6 CITATIONS FOR WETLAND AND ZONING § 48-2
48:57
(1) The fine for each wetland violation shall not be more than the
following:
(a) For activities that occur within the established upland review
area of an inland wetland or watercourse, but not within its
related inland wetland or watercourse: $500.
(b) For activities that occur within an inland wetland or
watercourse: $1,000.
(2) Each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed to be a separate and
distinct offense.
C. Any such fine shall be made payable to the Treasurer of the Town of
Ellington.
§ 48-3. Service of notice; citation.
A. Any citation issued under this chapter shall be and is sufficient if
provided in one of the following forms, unless otherwise stated:
(1) In hand delivery by an official charged with enforcing the ordinance
or regulation.
(2) Certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address
of the person cited or to the address listed in the records of the
Assessor's Office.
(3) Delivery by any commercial carrier or delivery service such as, but
not limited to, FedEx or UPS.
(4) A commercial process server, state marshal, police officer or
constable.
B. When a citation is refused by any of the above methods, it may be sent
by first class mail. The official issuing citation shall retain a true and
attested duplicate original of such citation.
§ 48-4. Citations and procedures.
A. The provisions of § 46-3 as to the time within which an appeal may be
filed to the contrary notwithstanding, any person receiving a citation
may, within 10 days following service of the citation, file an appeal in
writing in the office of the First Selectman pursuant to the provision
of § 46-3A and C.G.S. § 7-152c(d). The failure to file an appeal shall be
deemed to have admitted liability for the violation cited.
B. Any person receiving a citation shall have 30 days from the date of the
citation to make an uncontested payment without requesting a hearing.
If the person cited makes an uncontested payment within the prescribed
30 days and the cited violation has been remedied, the fine shall be
$150 for a zoning violation. In the case of a wetlands violation, if any
uncontested payment is made within the prescribed 30 days and the
cited violation has been remedied the fine shall be $500 or $1,000,
whichever fine is applicable pursuant to § 48-2B.
C. If the person cited fails to pay the fine within the time prescribed in
Subsection B of this section, an official authorized to issue citations may
proceed as provided in § 46-3B et seq.
D. The failure to pay the assessment of any fine(s) made by the citation
hearing officer may result in a Superior Court judgment as provided
§ 48-2 ELLINGTON CODE § 48-4
48:58
by C.G.S. § 7-152(f), as may be amended, entitled to judicial review as
provided in C.G.S. § 7-152c(g), as may be amended.
§ 48-5. Effective date.
The effective date of this chapter is March 3, 2007.
Chapter 51
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ACTION PLAN AGENCY
§ 51-1. Establishment; membership; compensation.
Pursuant to § 8-207 of the General Statutes of Connecticut,10 1958 Revision,
as amended, a Community Development Action Plan Agency is hereby
established, hereinafter called the "Agency." Said Agency shall consist of
five members who shall serve without compensation. Members of said
Agency shall be designated in the manner prescribed by § 8-207(c),
Connecticut General Statutes, and shall include the First Selectman of the
Town as a voting member ex officio. Vacancies in said Agency shall be filled
in the manner prescribed by § 8-207(c), Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 51-2. Officers.
The Agency shall elect from among its members a Chairman, Vice
Chairman, a Secretary and a Treasurer. The offices of Secretary and
Treasurer may be combined.
§ 51-3. Powers and duties.
The Agency shall have all powers necessary to carry out all the purposes
of Chapter 133 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, 1958 Revision, as
amended.
Chapter 62
ELECTIONS AND TOWN MEETINGS
10.Editor's Note: Section 8-207 was repealed by P.A. 78-303.
§ 48-4 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ACTION PLAN § 51-3
51:59

ARTICLE I
Polling Hours
[Adopted effective 7-11-1959]
§ 62-1. Hours established.
On and after the effective date of this article, the hours which the polls
within the Town of Ellington for regular and special municipal elections or
for electors' meetings shall be open shall be 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
§ 62-1 ELECTIONS AND TOWN MEETINGS § 62-1
62:61

ARTICLE II
Warning of Special Town Meetings
[Adopted effective 10-24-1964]
§ 62-2. Number of signatures required.
On and after the effective date of this article, any application or petition
requiring that a Special Town Meeting be warned by the Selectmen shall
contain the signatures of at least 50 inhabitants of the Town of Ellington
qualified to vote at Town Meetings.
§ 62-2 ELECTIONS AND TOWN MEETINGS § 62-2
62:63
Chapter 67
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 24.
Personnel — See Ch. 220.
§ 67-1. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of the Town of Ellington Code of Ethics is to:
A. Provide a code of ethical conduct to guide its elected officials, appointed
officials and employees in the proper discharge of their official
responsibilities.
B. Provide a Code of Ethics for the prevention of the misuse of one's official
position for personal financial gain.
C. Provide an independent commission to hear, review and evaluate
complaints under the Code of Ethics which is a critical link between
persons subject to the code and our residents' confidence in ethical Town
governance.
§ 67-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVISORY OPINIONS — Written opinions of the Ethics Commission
regarding whether situations or activities may or may not result in a
violation of the Code of Ethics not pertaining to a specific person subject
to the code. (Refer to § 67-6 for further details.)
APPOINTED OFFICIAL — A person who is appointed by the Board of
Selectmen to serve on any appointed board, agency or commission of
the Town, with or without compensation, in accordance with the Town
Charter.
CODE — The Code of Ethics adopted by the Board of Selectmen in
accordance with Section 825 of the Town Charter.
COMPLAINANT — The person who alleges a violation of the Code of
Ethics by a person subject to the code.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — Information, whether transmitted
orally or in writing, which is obtained by reason of the public position or
office held and is of such nature that it is not, at the time of transmission,
a matter of public record or public knowledge and not subject to
disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST — A conflict between one's obligation to the
Town or the position served and one's self-interest.
§ 62-2 ELLINGTON CODE § 67-2
62:64
ELECTED OFFICIAL — A person who is elected by electors of the
Town, with or without compensation, to any elected board, agency or
commission of the Town in accordance with the Town Charter.
EMPLOYEE/PERSONNEL — A person who holds a compensated position
of employment with the Town, with the exception of individuals who
receive only stipends and/or seasonal workers (Department of
Recreation summer help, etc.).
GIFT — A payment, subscription, advance, forbearance, rendering of
service, deposit of money, or anything of value, unless consideration of
equal or greater value is transferred in its place. The term "gift" shall
not include: a political contribution otherwise reported by law, services
provided to support a political candidate or political party without
compensation by persons volunteering their time; a commercially
reasonable loan made on terms not more favorable than loans made in
the ordinary course of business; anything of value received because of
a family member or other close personal relationship with the donor; an
occasional nonpecuniary gift, insignificant in value; an award publicly
presented in recognition of public service or any other gift which would
have been offered or given to him if he were not a public official or Town
employee.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER — Includes spouse, domestic partner,
parents, step- parents, brother, sister, children, grandparents and
grandchildren, as well as any other person who permanently resides in
the individual's household, whether related or not.
PERSONAL FINANCIAL INTEREST — A direct or indirect pecuniary or
material benefit accruing to a person subject to the Code of Ethics or an
immediate family member.
PERSON SUBJECT TO THE CODE — A person bound by reason of his
office or position not to violate the provisions of this Code of Ethics and
includes appointed officials, elected officials, employee/personnel, Town
Attorney and Town Engineer.
PROBABLE CAUSE — The existence of facts and circumstances within
one's knowledge, and of which one has reasonably trustworthy
information, sufficient in itself to warrant a person of reasonable caution
to believe that a violation of the Code of Ethics has occurred.
PROPRIETARY INTEREST — A financial asset that is privately owned
and/or controlled.
RESPONDENT — The person against whom a complaint is brought.
B. Usage. When the context so requires, the masculine gender shall include
the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
§ 67-3. Establishment of Ethics Commission; rules, responsibilities
and procedures.
§ 67-2 ELECTIONS AND TOWN MEETINGS § 67-3
62:65
A. In Section 7-148h(a) of the General Statutes, the Legislature of the
State of Connecticut delegates to local government units the power to
establish a commission to investigate allegations of unethical conduct,
corrupting influence, illegal activities or other behavior levied against
any elected official, appointed official or employee that would reflect
adversely against the interests of the Town of Ellington. Therefore,
the Town of Ellington has included in the Town Charter, Section 825,
establishing an Ethics Commission as follows:
"The Board of Selectman shall appoint an Ethics Commission, in
accordance with the provisions of Section 802 of this charter, consisting
of five (5) members to serve staggered terms of four (4) years. The Ethics
Commission shall promote and affirm ethical behavior of the Town's
boards, commissions, employees, elected and appointed officials. The
Ethics Commission shall draft an Ethics Code for the Town for approval
by the Board of Selectmen. The Ethics Commission will receive inquiries
and requests for advisory opinions from town officials, employees,
consultants and residents regarding possible code violations and will
respond with formal procedures. The Ethics Commission will review,
evaluate, resolve and adjudicate, as appropriate, ethical issues and
concerns; disseminate informational and educational materials to
enhance public awareness of the code; and maintain open-minded
impartiality in all Ethics Commission dealings consistent with the
application of precedent and rationale in its decision making."
B. The Ethics Commission has established the following rules by which it
shall function:
(1) Vacancies shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen in accordance
with the Town Charter.
(2) The Ethics Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman
annually.
(3) Three members shall constitute a quorum; and a majority vote of
the quorum shall be required for action of the Commission, with the
following two exceptions:
(a) Any meeting whose purpose is to review and evaluate or make
a determination regarding probable cause shall require at least
three affirmative votes;
(b) To determine a violation of this code shall require at least four
affirmative votes.
(4) The Commission will meet according to the published schedule,
but at least quarterly. The Commission will review the code for
revisions and amendments at least annually. The Commission shall
keep minutes of its meetings.
(5) Any amendments to the code will be made on the recommendation
of the Ethics Commission, adopted by the Board of Selectmen and in
accordance with the Town Charter, effective as set forth by the Board
of Selectmen.
(6) The Commission will establish regulations and procedures for the
initiation and handling of complaints.
(7) The Commission may retain independent counsel, as deemed
necessary, in accordance with the Town Charter, Section 913, Town
§ 67-3 ELLINGTON CODE § 67-3
62:66
Attorney, subject to approval of the Board of Selectmen. The
independent counsel shall not have a vote in any decision of the
Commission.
(8) No Ethics Commission member shall:
(a) Hold or campaign for any Town public office, paid or unpaid,
during his term;
(b) Be a person subject to the code, with the exception of a person
who serves solely as an ad-hoc committee member;
(c) Be a principal party under any contract doing business with the
Town;
(d) Receive any compensation for serving on the Commission, either
directly or indirectly;
(e) Have been a person subject to the code for a period of one year
prior to appointment to the Ethics Commission;
(f) Have been found in violation of any state, municipal or
professional Code of Ethics within the past seven years;
(g) Participate in any Ethics Commission probable cause review,
evaluation or hearing, including the decision and voting process,
that involves an immediate family member or the supervisor/
employer of that family member;
(h) Be a member of a Town political committee;
(i) Serve on the Ethics Commission for more than one consecutive
four-year term. Reappointment to the Ethics Commission must
be in accordance with Subsection B(8)(e) as stated above, with
the exception of the charter members of the Ethics Commission
for the purpose of allowing them to serve one complete four-year
term.
(9) Confidentiality.
(a) In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, Section 1-82a,
Commission members are required to keep confidential all
complaints, allegations, information supplied to or received from
the Commission, information learned from any preliminary
review or evaluation discussions, decisions and records until
such time that the Commission makes a finding of probable
cause, except upon the request of the respondent.
(b) All past members of the Ethics Commission are bound to this
same rule of confidentiality.
§ 67-4. Standards of ethical conduct.
The requirements herein set forth shall constitute reasonable standards
and guidelines for the ethical conduct of persons subject to the code. The
Commission will review and evaluate allegations of unethical conduct levied
against any person subject to the code.
A. Disqualification in matters involving a personal financial or proprietary
interest. No person subject to the code shall participate in the hearing
or decision of the board or commission of which he is a member upon
any matter in which he or an immediate family member knowingly has
a direct or indirect personal financial interest. In the event of selfdisqualification,
the fact of disqualification shall be entered on the
§ 67-3 ELECTIONS AND TOWN MEETINGS § 67-4
62:67
records of the commission or board but not necessarily the reason
for disqualification. No person subject to the code shall appear for or
represent any person in any matter pending before the commission or
board of which he is a member.
B. Disclosures.
(1) Disclosure of confidential information. No person subject to the code
shall disclose or use any confidential information concerning Town of
Ellington affairs for the purpose of advancing his or others' personal
financial interest.
(2) Disclosure of any personal financial interest. Failure to disclose any
personal financial interest in any matter coming before any board,
commission, or agency of the Town by any person subject to the code
or failure to disclose his knowledge of an immediate family member
who has such a personal financial interest is a violation of this code.
If a conflict does exist, he should recuse himself.
C. Gifts and favors. No person subject to the code or a member of his
immediate family shall solicit or accept any gift with a cumulative value
greater than $100, in any one year from any person or organization who,
to his knowledge, has a direct or indirect financial interest in any manner
in business dealings with the Town. Said limit of $100 shall apply to any
and all gifts from all persons within one organization and to any and all
gifts from all organizations under common control.
D. Use of influence. No person subject to the code shall solicit any business,
directly or indirectly, from another official or employee over whom he
has any direct or indirect control or influence with respect to tenure,
compensation or duties.
E. Incompatible dealing. No person subject to the code shall engage in or
participate in any business or transaction, including outside employment
with a private business, or have an interest, direct or indirect, which is
incompatible with the proper discharge of his official responsibilities or
which would tend to impair his judgment or action in the performance of
his official responsibilities.
F. Competitive bidding. Persons subject to the code, or business with which
he is associated, or a member of that person's immediate family, shall not
enter into a contract with the Town unless it is awarded in accordance
with Town Charter Sections 1008 through 1011.
G. Use of Town assets. No person subject to the code shall use or permit
the use of Town funds, services, equipment, owned or leased vehicles,
materials or other property for personal convenience or profit, except
when such services are available to the public generally or are provided
in conformance with established Town policies.
§ 67-5. Statute of limitations.
No complaint may be made under this chapter later than three years after
the violation alleged in the complaint has been committed. Complaints
involving alleged violations prior to the adoption of this code will not be
considered.
§ 67-4 ELLINGTON CODE § 67-6
62:68
§ 67-6. Advisory opinions.
The Commission may render an advisory opinion with respect to the
applicability of the code regarding specific situations to any person subject
to the code, person serving the Town, persons doing business with the Town
and Town residents, pursuant to a written request. The Commission will
make available to the public any advisory opinions that do not invade an
individual's privacy to the extent of the law and may take other appropriate
steps in an effort to increase public awareness of this code. An advisory
opinion shall provide a defense to any complaint brought before the
Commission on that subject unless material facts were omitted or misstated
in the request for the advisory opinion. An advisory opinion request form
may be obtained from the Town Clerk's office.
§ 67-7. Complaint, procedure; determination of probable cause;
violation hearings.
A. Procedure for receiving complaints. Complaints alleging a violation of the code
shall be submitted in writing in the following fashion:
(1) All complaints must be submitted using the ethics complaint form. The ethics
complaint form can be obtained from the Town Clerk's office.
(2) The ethics complaint form must be signed, under penalty of false statement,
before a notary. If a person makes a false statement in a complaint, the
complainant shall be subject to penalties under the provisions of Connecticut
General Statutes Section 53a-157.
(3) The Ethics Complaint Form may be submitted to the Commission by delivery in
any manner in a sealed envelope to:
Ellington Town Hall
Town Clerk's Office
Attn: Ethics Commission-Confidential
55 Main Street, PO Box 187
Ellington, CT 06029
(4) Upon receipt of the sealed envelope, the Town Clerk's office shall notify the
Chairman of the Commission of such receipt via phone or other methods to
ensure notification and forward the sealed envelope to the Ethics Commission
Chairman or his designee.
(5) All filed complaints must specify the alleged violation act(s), identify the section
of the code that is alleged to have been violated, the dates or approximate
dates of such alleged acts, and set forth a summary of the evidence upon
which the complainant will rely to support the allegations in the complaint. In
summarizing the evidence, the complainant must summarize the nature and
content of expected testimony but need not identify any witness other than
himself who may testify.
(6) Not later than 10 business days after the receipt of such complaint by the Town
Clerk, the Commission shall provide notice of such receipt by certified mail to
the complainant and to the respondent.
§ 67-6 ELECTIONS AND TOWN MEETINGS § 67-7
62:69
(7) The Commission will begin its evaluation, as described below, of any
complaint(s) alleging a violation of the code at its next regularly scheduled
meeting or a special meeting if necessary.
B. Jurisdiction.
(1) The jurisdiction of the Commission's investigatory powers is limited to
alleged violations of the code.
(2) The Commission will confirm that the Commission has jurisdiction over
the subject matter, the Commission has jurisdiction over the person
(respondent), and the complaint states a claim upon which relief can be
granted. The Commission will conduct a probable cause review and
evaluation of the alleged violation of the code, unless the evaluation
discloses a lack of jurisdiction or subject matter.
(3) If the Commission dismisses the complaint, it shall inform the complainant
and the respondent of its finding, and provide a summary of its reasons
for making that finding, within 10 business days, by certified mail. If the
Commission finds that it has jurisdiction and meets the requirements above,
it shall inform the complainant and the respondent of its finding and provide
a summary of its reasons for making that finding, within 30 business days,
by certified mail. The Commission's decision of jurisdiction will be final,
unless new evidence is introduced, and will be binding on all involved
individuals.
C. Probable cause determination.
(1) In accordance with General Statutes Section 1-82a, the Commission shall
conduct a confidential review and evaluation to determine if probable cause
exists that a violation of the code could have or is occurring. These inquiries
may include interviews or discussions with the complainant, respondent,
any person subject to the code, persons serving the Town or persons doing
business with the Town or members of other public and private agencies
or persons who may have first-hand knowledge relating to the complaint.
All probable cause reviews and evaluations shall be held in compliance
with Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-148h(a) seq., as described
in Subsection D. All review and evaluation discussions will be conducted
in executive session, unless waived by the respondent. There must be
facts and circumstances of which the Commission is aware and deems
trustworthy sufficient to justify the belief of a reasonable person, that
a violation of the code has been or is being committed and that the
respondent is the person who committed it.
(2) At the conclusion of the review and evaluation, the Commission will dismiss
the complaint if it finds that there is a lack of probable cause. The
Commission shall inform the complainant and the respondent of its findings
and decision by certified mail within 10 business days.
(3) At the conclusion of the review and evaluation, if the Commission finds
that probable cause does exist, by a concurring vote of at least three of its
members, the Commission will schedule a violation hearing to determine
if a violation of the code did occur or is occurring. The Commission shall
inform the complainant and the respondent of its decision to hold a violation
hearing. The complainant and respondent will be notified by certified mail
within 10 business days. That finding shall become public and be included
in the Commission's minutes.
§ 67-7 ELLINGTON CODE § 67-7
62:70
(4) The Commission's probable cause review and evaluation shall be completed
within 45 business days from the determination of jurisdiction.
D. Hearings after determination of probable cause.
(1) The Commission shall have the power to hold violation hearings, administer
oaths, examine witnesses, and receive oral and documentary evidence. In
accordance with the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes Section
7-148h(a), it may issue subpoenas or subpoenas duces tecum, enforceable
upon application to the Superior Court, to compel the attendance of persons
at hearings and the production of books, documents, records and papers
which the Commission deems relevant to the hearing process.
(2) No later than the 10 days prior to the commencement of any hearing
conducted pursuant to this subsection, the Commission, complainant and
respondent shall exchange lists of intended witnesses. Failure to give such
notice will act as a waiver of the omitting parties' right to present testimony
from a witness not on their witness list. The Commission may waive this
requirement or reschedule a hearing for good cause shown.
(3) At this violation hearing:
(a) The Commission shall make a record of all proceedings conducted
pursuant to this subsection.
(b) The Commission shall examine witnesses and receive oral and
documentary evidence it deems relevant to the matter under
consideration.
(c) The complainant shall have the opportunity to appear before the
Commission to present corroborating evidence and witnesses, who must
testify under oath, in support of the allegations in the complaint.
(d) The respondent shall have the right to appear and be heard, to present
witnesses and offer any evidence which may establish that no violation
of this code exists.
(e) The respondent and complainant shall have the right to be represented
by legal counsel and to examine and cross-examine witnesses.
(f) The Commission shall be governed by the administrative rules of
evidence.
(g) The Commission shall determine whether or not a violation occurred.
(4) The Commission shall inform the complainant and respondent of its findings
and provide a written statement containing its decision and reasons for
making that decision. This notification will be made by certified mail within
10 business days.
(5) The record of its findings shall be made public and be included in the
Commission's minutes, within 10 business days.
(6) The hearing shall be completed within 60 business days from the time of the
determination of probable cause.
E. Any of the time limits set forth in this code are directory and not mandatory
and may be extended upon the written request of any party with the approval
of the Commission. The extension of a deadline shall automatically extend
all subsequent deadlines by the period of the extension unless specifically
otherwise provided. The Commission may extend any timeline at its discretion.
F. The Commission shall maintain a record of all complaints filed. If, in the
Commission's opinion, it perceives abuse in the filing of baseless complaints
§ 67-7 ELECTIONS AND TOWN MEETINGS § 67-7
62:71
by an individual or organization, the Commission may refuse to take action on
future complaints.
§ 67-8. Penalties.
If the Commission determines the respondent has in fact violated the
provisions of this code, it shall file a memorandum of decision. This
memorandum shall include a recommendation for action by the Board of
Selectmen or the Board of Education, as appropriate. The authority affected
shall inform the Commission of the action taken or lack of action and the
reasons therefor.
A. The recommended action may include, but not be limited to:
(1) Reprimand and/or public censure;
(2) Termination, suspension of compensation or suspension of position
for not more than 90 days;
(3) A penalty of not more than $250 per violation;
(4) Restitution of any pecuniary benefits received because of the
violation committed.
B. No action may be recommended which would violate the provisions of
state or federal law. In the case of union employees, such recommended
action does not constitute a unilateral change in the conditions of
employment. No such recommendation shall limit the authority of the
Board of Selectmen or Board of Education under the Town Charter
or under any ordinance, statute, or any other law or contract. Any
discussion by the Board of Selectmen or Board of Education of an
individual affected by the memorandum of decision shall be in executive
session, unless the individual affected requests that such discussion be
held in open session and be done in accordance with due process.
C. Any person who knowingly files a false statement under this code is
subject to prosecution under General Statutes Section 53a-157b.
§ 67-9. Appeal process.
The Commission's finding and its memorandum of decision and
recommendation for action filed with the Board of Selectmen or the Board
of Education is a preliminary step pursuant to this code. The Board of
Selectmen or the Board of Education, as appropriate, may review the
record, conduct a further hearing or meeting, and permit either
complainant or respondent to present further evidence as it finds
appropriate. Thereafter, its decision will be final and binding upon both
the respondent and the Ethics Commission from which either party who is
aggrieved may appeal to the Superior Court under its rules.
§ 67-10. Distribution of code.
The Town Clerk shall provide a copy of this code to every person subject to
the code within 60 days after enactment of this code. Thereafter, each new
person subject to the code shall be furnished a copy before entering upon
the duties of his office or employment. This code shall be made available to
the general public at the Town Clerk's office.
§ 67-7 ELLINGTON CODE § 67-10
62:72
Chapter 70
FEES
§ 67-10 ELECTIONS AND TOWN MEETINGS § 67-10
62:73

ARTICLE I
Dog Impoundment Fees
[Adopted effective 4-13-1987]
§ 70-1. Fees established.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Public Act 86-284,11 the Town of
Ellington hereby establishes the following fees to be charged by the Canine
Control Officer in addition to fees set by statute:
A. For the redemption by the owner or keeper of any dog captured or
impounded, the sum of $15.
B. For the board, care and detention of each dog impounded, the sum of $8
per day.
11.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 22-333.
§ 70-1 ELECTIONS AND TOWN MEETINGS § 70-1
62:75

ARTICLE II
State Building Code Fees
[Adopted 11-13-2000, effective 12-12-2000; amended in its entirety
9-19-2005, effective 10-13-2005]
§ 70-2. Building and demolition permits.
Fees for all types of building permits issued pursuant to the State Building
Code and demolition permits shall be at a rate established by the Board of
Selectmen of estimated costs or the minimum fee.
A. “Estimated cost” shall be determined using cost factors, as established
by the Ellington Building Official, for each type and category of building
permit.
B. “Minimum fees” for building permits shall be established by the
Ellington Board of Selectmen.
§ 70-3. Amendments to rates and fees.
The Board of Selectmen may update rate and minimum fees as necessary.
§ 70-4. Amendments to cost factors.
The Building Official may update estimated cost factors as necessary and
shall advise the Board of Selectmen of such changes.
§ 70-5. Exceptions. [Added 5-1-2006]
Permit fees shall be waived for churches and other nonprofit organizations.
§ 70-6. (Reserved)
§ 70-2 ELECTIONS AND TOWN MEETINGS § 70-6
62:77

ARTICLE III
Fees for GIS Information
[Adopted 10-7-2002, effective 11-2-2002]
§ 70-7. Findings, purpose and authority.
A. The Town of Ellington hereby establishes and hereafter shall charge
reasonable fees to produce, copy or otherwise make available
information contained within and available through its geographic
information system (GIS).
B. The Town has expended considerable amounts of time, energy, resources
and money to collect data and to store it within a GIS system, which
makes the information very usable for a number of municipal functions
and also provides a database which can be very desirable and usable
by citizens and professionals. In order to offset some of the costs to the
Town and to recognize the benefit to other users, it is appropriate to
establish a fee schedule and method of sharing costs by those who make
use of this data. This policy is established to accomplish this purpose
pursuant to the authority granted the Town by C.G.S. § 7-148s.
§ 70-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CD or COMPACT DISC — Optical media used to store digital data.
ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION — Transfer or transmission of GIS or
computer data by electronic means, including transfer of data over the
internet or direct computer connection.
EXPORT FORMAT — A form of an original digital data set generally used
to transfer data to different computer operating systems or computer
applications.
FLOPPY DISK — Magnetic media used to store digital data, 3.5 in size
containing 1.44 MD of data.
FULL DATA SET — All GIS Town-wide data sets, excluding topography and
ortho-photos.
PRE-MADE MAP — A map available in paper or digital form in advance of a
request according to parameters preset by the Town.
PROGRAMMING TIME — Time spent developing a map, filling a GIS data
request, changing a data format, developing a GIS computer application, or
similar requests.
§ 70-9. Selectmen authorized to set fees.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to set reasonable fees for copying,
transfer or transmission of geographic information system (GIS)
information and services from time to time to reflect the Town's cost to
§ 70-7 ELECTIONS AND TOWN MEETINGS § 70-9
62:79
acquire and/or produce the data as well as the actual cost to copy, transfer
or transmit the data, including the labor costs to do the same.
§ 70-9 ELLINGTON CODE § 70-9
62:80
ARTICLE IV
Land Use Fees
[Adopted 5-1-2006]
§ 70-10. Findings.
A. It is necessary for the Town of Ellington to incur certain expenses
in order to administer the Zoning, Subdivision and Inland Wetlands
Regulations of the Town, which includes the expense of required legal
advertisements, administrative review of applications, engineering and
legal expenses to assure the Town that construction is in accordance
with the regulations and approved plans.
B. It is appropriate to assess the expense incurred by the Town in
processing and administering land use applications and construction
against those who precipitate and benefit by that work.
C. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 8-1c, the Town of Ellington
hereby adopts the following Schedule of Fees for various land use
activities.
§ 70-11. Fee Schedule.
A. Planning and zoning fees shall be a follows:
Fees For Fee
Bond reduction processing fee $200
Earth removal renewal (requires
additional special permit fee)
$300
Subdivision and resubdivision
processing fee (plus below)
$500 or $150 / lot, whichever is
greater
New road $200/100 linear feet
Existing Town / state road $50/100 linear feet
Subdivision reapproval/modification
(not resubdivision)
$100
Regulation amendment processing $300
Zoning Map amendment processing
(zone change)
$300
Site plan review - entire site area
0 to 25,000 square feet $250
25,001 square feet to 50,000
square feet
$350
50,001 square feet and greater $550
Site plan modification - total
modification area
0 to 5,000 square feet $100
§ 70-10 ELECTIONS AND TOWN MEETINGS § 70-11
62:81
Fees For Fee
5,001 square feet to 25,000
square feet
$200
25,001 square feet and greater $400
Special permit $200
Location approval for motor vehicle
dealer's and repairer's license
$100
Zoning Permit
Less than $20,000 construction $20
Greater than $20,000
construction
$150
Use variance $250
Bulk variance (setback, coverage,
height, area, or similar), appeal of
decision of ZEO
$150
B. Wetlands and watercourses fees shall be as follows:
Fee For Fee
Permitted and nonregulated uses
Permitted uses as of right
0 to 5 acres of direct impact $75
5 to 10 acres of direct impact $150
10 acres and above of direct impact $250
Nonregulated uses $50
Regulated uses
Administrative permits $50
Agency permits $250
Nonsignificant activity
Significant activity base fee (Fees
for significant activities located
within a mapped watershed of a
public water supply company are
double the requirements.), plus:
For each lineal foot of
watercourse directly affected,
plus
$5
For each new or modified
watercourse crossing, plus
$75
For upland review area not
protected by easement, plus
$25/acre
§ 70-11 ELLINGTON CODE § 70-11
62:82
Fee For Fee
An additional fee for inland
wetland soils directly affected as
follows:
1 to 500 square feet $75
501 to 2,500 square feet $150
2,501 to 10,000 square feet $500
10,000 square feet and
above
$750
Map and regulation amendments $150
Notes:
The Wetlands Agency may recover the costs of any expert retained by
the Agency to offer an opinion, substantiate, or refute any subject related
to an application for permit from the applicant in accordance with CGS
§ 22a-42a(e).
The Ellington Planning Department shall collect all other fees or
surcharges as required by the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 70-12. Preapproval deposits and fees.
It is anticipated that the fees in § 70-11 will reimburse the Town for actual
expenses incurred in the processing of each of the applications to a
decision. In addition, as to all applications for subdivision, resubdivision,
special permit, site plan approval or modification, and wetlands applications
requesting watercourse crossing or relocation of wetlands, the land use
department receiving the application will require a deposit equal to the
anticipated cost of materials and services to be performed by professionals
other than Town employees, including but not limited to the review of the
applications for conformance with the regulations of the Inland/Wetlands
and Watercourse Agency and the Planning and Zoning Commission,
including the computation of the cost to construct improvements subject to
bonding requirements. Such sums shall be deposited with the Town, and all
bills received from professionals other than Town employees in connection
with that application shall be charged against that deposit. If the deposit
is exhausted, then an additional deposit will be required before any further
action is taken on the application. Upon approval of the application and
issuance of the requested permit, any excess deposit shall be refunded to
the applicant not later than 60 days thereafter.
§ 70-13. Post-approval deposit and fees.
Prior to issuance of the permit following approval by the appropriate land
use commission or agency, the professional who has been engaged to review
the application shall provide to the land use agency an estimate of the cost
for said professionals other than Town employees, to inspect construction at
§ 70-11 ELECTIONS AND TOWN MEETINGS § 70-13
62:83
reasonable intervals to insure that construction complies with the approved
plan, conformance with the Phase II Regulations of the Connecticut Clean
Water Act, inspections for reductions of performance bonds, review of
plan revisions and documents necessary to implement or complete the
plans, and review and inspection of all improvements necessary for Town
acceptance of the project infrastructure or for issuance of a certificate
of zoning compliance. A fee equal to that estimated cost shall be paid to
the Town through the agent issuing the permit prior to the recording of
any plan in the land records and prior to the issuance of any permit for
construction in accordance with the approval. All charges thereafter by
said professionals in connection with a permit shall be charged against
the deposit. If the deposit is exhausted, then an additional amount shall
be collected based upon the professional's additional estimate of costs
before any further work or inspections are conducted. Failure to make
an additional deposit shall be grounds for the appropriate enforcement
officer to issue a stop work or cease-and-desist order. Upon completion of
the project and acceptance by the Town of any project infrastructure or
issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance, any excess funds shall be
returned to the applicant not later than 60 days following said event.
§ 70-14. Experts.
Nothing herein shall prohibit any agency of the Town from requiring the
applicant or permittee, at his expense, to provide professional consultant
reports or certification as to conditions before or after construction (or test
results) nor shall this article in any way impact bonding requirements set
forth in any of the land use regulations.
§ 70-15. Exemptions.
The Town of Ellington and all of its boards, commissions, agencies and
departments are exempt from the payment of any and all of the fees
or deposits required by this article. Charities, churches and nonprofit
organizations are not exempt.
§ 70-13 ELLINGTON CODE § 70-15
62:84
Chapter 74
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public assemblies — See Ch. 17.
Building construction— See Ch. 32.
Crystal Lake Fire District — See Ch. A400.
§ 70-15 FIRE PREVENTION § 70-15
74:85

ARTICLE I
Fire Zones
[Adopted 11-13-2000, effective 12-14-2000]
§ 74-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY VEHICULAR TRAFFIC — Includes fire apparatus, rescue
vehicles, police vehicles, and private vehicles answering or working at
emergency calls and shall also include any of the foregoing while such
vehicles are on standby duty or any other official duty.
FIRE LANE — The same definition as the term "fire zone."
FIRE MARSHAL — The Town Fire Marshal and any of his deputies.
FIRE ZONE — Any area, space, lane, drive, path, or state, Town or private
road or street so designated a fire zone by the Town Fire Marshal. Such
designation shall cause that zone to become permanently available to
emergency vehicular traffic and also available for large-scale fire-fighting
evolutions.
PROPERTY OWNER AND/OR OPERATOR — Includes any and all persons
who own, lease or operate any property or premises and/or any and all
owners, lessees and/or operators and/or employees of such owner, lessee
or operator upon any property or premises upon which a fire zone is
established or designated to be established, including any and all owners,
lessees and/or operators of motor vehicles or other materials or property
being cited and their agents, employees and/or representatives.
TEMPORARY FIRE ZONE — A fire zone as specified above, except that it
shall be established on a temporary basis to meet specific requirements in
response to or in anticipation of a specific event.
§ 74-2. Designation and posting of fire zones.
A. The Fire Marshal shall designate all fire zones as he may determine
appropriate in the interests of public safety.
B. No property owner or operator or other person shall establish any fire
zone without a specific written or verbal fire zone designation by the Fire
Marshal, whether that designation is for a permanent or temporary fire
zone.
C. Fire zones may be designated and ordered established verbally or in
letter format from the Fire Marshal.
D. The Fire Marshal shall establish requirements for the proper posting of
any fire zone, which may vary between applications due to the particular
circumstances.
E. The Fire Marshal shall furnish to the policing agency, from time to
time, an updated listing of established fire zones in the Town. Said
policing agency shall review this list and, in the process of patrolling
the fire zones, shall report to the Fire Marshal any conditions found to
§ 74-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 74-2
74:87
exist which appear to be a hindrance or an impediment to the proper
enforcement of this article.
§ 74-3. General regulations.
A. Establishment of fire zone(s).
(1) The Town Fire Marshal shall make reasonable requirements
regarding the establishment of fire zones on any premises as
specified in § 74-2 or as authorized by the Connecticut Fire Safety
Code or the Connecticut General Statutes.
(2) This article shall apply equally to all lands and property, public and
private, including but not limited to the premises of any assembly,
educational, health care, residential, mercantile, business,
industrial, storage and/or unusual occupancies, including outside
areas of public assembly and construction sites, except single- and
two-family residential properties unless Chapter 17, Public
Assemblies, Article II, Use of Outside Areas, of this Code is
applicable.
(3) Property owners and/or operators shall establish fire zones exactly
as specified and required by any order of the Fire Marshal
designating any fire zone and this shall be accomplished within the
period specified in any such order.
(4) Fire zones may be temporarily suspended only by the Fire Marshal
when such suspension is in the best interests of the public and does
not impact negatively upon the emergency services.
B. Design, construction and posting of fire zone(s).
(1) Fire zones shall be of sufficient design, width, turning radius, and
durability so as to assure safe passage, setup and operation of
emergency vehicles.
(2) Fire zones which are established within 50 feet of a principal
building shall be interpreted and understood to include the area
between the fire zone and the subject building.
(3) Fire zones may be required to be of specific design so as to permit
particular fire ground operations within their confines.
(4) Construction requirements of fire zones shall consider severe
weather conditions, such as snow, wind and flooding.
(5) In an effort to establish traffic patterns so as to further secure fire
zones, such items as signs, berms, curbing, painted lines, barriers
and other means, separately or in combination, may be required.
(6) All materials used in posting of or otherwise establishing a fire zone
shall be professionally prepared materials designed for such use and
application.
C. Maintenance of fire zone(s).
(1) Property owners and/or operators shall supervise and maintain fire
zones sufficiently to assure instant availability to the emergency
services and shall not permit any obstruction to or encroachment
upon any fire zone established upon their premises.
(2) At any indoor or outdoor public assembly occupancy the Fire
Marshal may require the owner or operator to hire private duty
§ 74-2 ELLINGTON CODE § 74-3
74:88
police officers in sufficient numbers and for sufficient duration so as
to ensure proper enforcement of this article.
(3) Snow shall be removed from any fire zone prior to the opening of the
premises to the public when such snow is in excess of four inches.
In circumstances where the premises are not normally open to the
public, such snow shall be removed from any fire zone within three
hours following the end of a storm.
(4) No person shall cause or encourage or otherwise allow or permit any
obstruction to or encroachment upon any fire zone.
(5) Immediate hazards, obstructions and/or encroachments upon any
fire zone may be ordered by the enforcing authorities to be removed
forthwith, and refusal of any such order by the owner, lessee and/
or operator of the premises and/or the owner, lessee and/or operator
of the offending property or material shall be just cause for the
enforcing authorities to effect the removal through any reasonable
means.
(6) In instances where the safety of the public is in immediate jeopardy
due to a violation of this article, enforcing authorities or any fire
officer may cause the immediate removal of any such hazards,
obstructions and/or encroachments without providing prior notice to
the owner, lessee and/or operator of the premises and/or the owner,
lessee and/or operator of the offending property or material, except
that as soon as is reasonably possible following such removal written
notice shall be provided to the address(es) of record, if any, for the
property thus removed.
(7) Said owner, lessee and/or operator shall be liable for all expenses
and damages associated with any such removal as authorized in
Subsection C(6) and (7), including expenses associated with the
removal, transportation and storage of any property or material
associated with such removal.
§ 74-4. Enforcement officers.
This article shall be enforceable by the Town policing agency and by the
Town Fire Marshal.
§ 74-5. Appeals.
A. Persons directed under the provisions of this article to provide one or
more fire zones may appeal the need for or particular requirements for
a fire zone to the Town traffic authority in writing using forms developed
by the Fire Marshal.
B. Appeal forms may be obtained from either the Fire Marshal, First
Selectman or policing agency, and completed forms must be filed with
the First Selectman within 15 calendar days of receipt of the order to
establish the fire zone.
C. The Town traffic authority, after a hearing at which the appellant and
Fire Marshal shall be invited to appear and give evidence, shall issue a
written decision upon the appeal form which may uphold the directive,
modify the directive, rescind the directive, or any combination thereof.
The appellant(s) shall then be notified by said traffic authority and a
§ 74-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 74-5
74:89
copy of the fully executed appeal form shall be transmitted to the Fire
Marshal.
§ 74-6. Penalties for offenses.
A. Violation of this article shall be an infraction as defined in Connecticut
General Statutes §§ 51-164m and 51-164n, as the same may be modified
from time to time. In the event that a greater penalty is specifically set
forth in the Connecticut General Statutes, then the greater penalty shall
apply.
B. Any person who violates any provision of the Fire Safety Code shall
be fined not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 or imprisoned not
more than six months, or both, pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
§ 29-295.
§ 74-5 ELLINGTON CODE § 74-6
74:90
ARTICLE II
Open Burning
[Adopted 7-16-2001, effective 8-10-2001]
§ 74-7. Scope.
A. This article shall be applicable to the entire Town.
B. This article shall apply to all lands, public and private.
C. Nothing within this article shall be construed as restricting the duties
and responsibilities of the Open Burning Official as may be prescribed by
the General Statutes or the Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
§ 74-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENCLOSED COOKING FIRE — Includes charcoal, gas or wood fires in
containers carrying recognized testing laboratory listing, acceptance or
approval and constructed for the obvious and express purpose of cooking.
FIRE — A general term referencing all of the types of open outside fires and
shall not be construed to include any type of fire normally kindled within a
structure.
FIRE MARSHAL — Includes the Fire Marshal and any Deputy Fire Marshal
or inspector.
NONPERMITTED FIRE — Includes any type of fire requiring approval
or authorization as provided in § 74-10 but not having such approval or
authorization; this shall include any fire deemed a hazard or nuisance as
provided for in § 74-10.
OPEN BURNING — Includes fires for the control or destruction of bona
fide disease and pests, agricultural burning or vegetation management on
farms; fires by any resident to dispose of brush on the property where
he resides; fires for Fire Department training; fires authorized by the Fire
Marshal at the Town landfill or transfer station; clearing of vegetative
debris following a natural disaster; fire breaks; and habitat or ecological
sustainability on municipal property or on privately owned property
permanently dedicated as open space and shall include no other fires.
OPEN BURNING OFFICIAL — The official appointed by the Board of
Selectman to administer this article and open burning regulations of the
Department of Environmental Protection.
OPEN COOKING FIRE — Includes all types of cooking fires kindled outside
on single- or two-family property.
PERMITTED FIRE — Includes any fire that has been properly authorized by
the Open Burning Official and/or the Fire Marshal and shall also include any
other type of fire authorized by § 74-10.
§ 74-7 FIRE PREVENTION § 74-8
74:91
PERMITTEE — Includes any person to whom an open burning permit has
been issued, any person authorized by the Fire Marshal to kindle a fire, and
any agent thereof.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON — Includes the permittee and those persons
designated or allowed by the permittee to kindle or maintain any fire under
the provisions of this article and all of whom shall be considered agents of
the permittee.
§ 74-9. Administration.
A. The Board of Selectman may designate one or more special annually
recurring periods when open burning may be permitted under this
article, there being no permitted burning during nondesignated times.
B. Subject to Subsection A above, the Open Burning Official may designate
certain days and times as being those periods during which application
may be made for an open burning permit.
C. Any violation of § 74-10 of this article shall be sufficient reason to deny
any future application from the violator or from any other person acting
as an agent of the violator for an open burning permit as issued by the
Open Burning Official or for approval as granted by the Fire Marshal.
D. The Fire Marshal or any fire officer having jurisdiction, after having
been made aware of a particular open fire and having satisfied himself
as to the circumstances and applicable requirements, shall cause any
fire not specifically permitted in § 74-10 or any fire deemed a hazard or
nuisance to be immediately extinguished as a nonpermitted fire and may
summon the fire service to accomplish this extinguishment.
E. Any fire officer who orders any fire to be extinguished shall cause the
Fire Marshal to be notified immediately and shall provide sufficient
details so as to assist the Fire Marshal in determining the need for
investigation.
F. Upon receipt of any complaint concerning any open fire, the Fire
Marshal shall cause an investigation to be made to determine the
validity of the complaint and shall take enforcement action when
deemed appropriate.
G. The Fire Marshal shall assume responsibility for notifying the Open
Burning Official when enforcement action is taken in those instances
where an open burning permit was in effect.
H. The Fire Marshal shall institute procedures necessary to accomplish the
requirement of obtaining Fire Marshal approval as required in § 74-10.
I. A fee schedule shall be adopted by the Board of Selectmen for permit
applications and may be amended as appropriate by that Board.
§ 74-10. Regulations.
A. No person shall kindle any fire within the Town unless he has received
a permit from the Open Burning Official for those fires defined as "open
burning" in § 74-8 or as further excepted in Subsections A(1), (2) and (3)
of this section.
(1) An open cooking fire as defined in § 74-8 or a campfire properly
maintained and kindled in a proper container on single- or two-
§ 74-8 ELLINGTON CODE § 74-10
74:92
family residential property and not containing pressure-treated
wood shall be permitted without any prior notice or approval.
(2) An enclosed cooking fire as defined in § 74-8 properly attended
on any property shall be permitted without any prior notice or
approval, except that such fires in forests and woodlands shall
require Fire Marshal approval.
(3) Any other fire of any type on any and all types of property
whatsoever shall require Fire Marshal approval.
B. Any fire shall be considered a nonpermitted fire if it is determined to be
a hazard or nuisance, whether an open burning permit has been issued
or Fire Marshal approval has been granted or whether it is within a
stated exception.
C. Sufficient tools and equipment necessary to extinguish any fire of any
kind whatsoever must be present and readily available, and a
responsible person, physically capable of using those tools and
equipment, must be present and in control of any such fire.
D. The permittee or responsible person must be in physical possession
of any written permit during the entire process of the open fire. Said
person must present any written permit or authorization to the Fire
Marshal, fire officer or police officer upon request.
E. The permittee shall extinguish any permitted fire prior to leaving the
proximate area of said fire for any reason whatsoever or upon the order
of the Fire Marshal, Open Burning Official, or any fire officer or police
officer.
(1) Insufficient or unsuitable equipment or insufficient manpower to
control any fire, a change to unfavorable weather conditions, a
determination that the fire is a hazard or a nuisance, a change
in the Department of Environmental Protection forest fire index
which would render the fire a violation, notice of an air pollution
emergency, or any evidence of a type or magnitude of fire contrary
to that which was specifically permitted or authorized or otherwise
allowed by this article shall justify any order to extinguish such fire.
(2) In lieu of any order to any person in charge of any fire to extinguish
said fire or in the event of any refusal to comply with such an order,
the Fire Department is authorized to extinguish said fire and shall
immediately cause the Fire Marshal to be notified.
F. No permittee or responsible person shall allow a fire to extend in area
beyond that which is specifically authorized or permitted or otherwise
allowed.
G. No permittee or responsible person shall introduce or allow the
introduction of any improper, unauthorized or otherwise illegal material
into any open fire. Proper, authorized and legal materials shall be
limited to:
(1) Agricultural burning for vegetation management and for the
prevention, control or destruction of diseases and pests.
(2) Brush, the diameter of which is not greater than three inches at the
widest point.
§ 74-10 FIRE PREVENTION § 74-10
74:93
(3) Other materials for which the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection has issued a permit, provided that the
Fire Marshal also approves the burning of such materials.
H. The permittee or responsible person shall be liable for any suppression
costs that may reasonably be brought forth in the name of the Town of
Ellington which were incurred as a result of any open fire.
I. No landowner shall knowingly allow, permit, authorize or encourage any
type of nonpermitted fire upon his property.
J. Any change in the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) forest
fire hazard index to "High" or greater shall cause any permit or
authorization to be null and void without consideration of distance to
woodland or grassland.
K. No DEP open burning permit shall be issued to any resident for any
open burning when such open fire would occur upon any property or
premises regulated by the Fire Safety Code of the State of Connecticut
unless such permit is approved by the Fire Marshal, except this shall not
be applicable to operating farms.
L. Violation of any condition set down as a part of any permit approval or
other approval shall constitute a violation of this article.
M. No permit approval or other approval shall be granted for property not
appearing to conform to Chapter 36, Numbering of Buildings, of this
Code.
§ 74-11. Enforcement.
Section 74-10 of this article shall be enforceable by the Fire Marshal and
the policing agency having jurisdiction. The Fire Marshal may develop
citation forms suitable for use by that office and for that purpose. The
policing agency may utilize any forms it deems appropriate for that purpose.
§ 74-12. Penalties for offenses.
A. Violation of this article shall be an infraction as defined in Connecticut
General Statutes § 51-164m and 51-164n, as the same may be modified
from time to time. In the event that a greater penalty is specifically set
forth in the Connecticut General Statutes, then the greater penalty shall
apply.
B. Any person who violates any provision of the Fire Safety Code shall
be fined not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 or imprisoned not
more than six months, or both, pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
§ 29-295, as the same may be amended from time to time.
§ 74-10 ELLINGTON CODE § 74-12
74:94
Chapter 80
FUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Budget and finance — See Ch. 28.
§ 74-12 FIRE PREVENTION § 74-12
74:95

ARTICLE I
Road Improvement Fund
[Adopted effective 4-29-1988]
§ 80-1. Creation, purpose and title.
The Town of Ellington does hereby authorize the creation of an independent
fund to accept voluntary contributions for the improvement of Town roads
to be known as the "Ellington Road Improvement Fund."
§ 80-2. Contributions.
Contributions for the fund may be received from developers, builders,
property owners and others whose developments may necessitate
improvements to (a) Town road(s) and such others who may desire to make
contributions.
§ 80-3. Fund income.
The fund shall not become a part of the general fund of the Town. The
contributions shall be deposited in an account wherein the income of the
fund shall accumulate until such a time as expenditures from the fund are
authorized. The fund may be commingled in the discretion of the Finance
Officer to maximize income and minimize management costs, provided that
it shall always be accounted for as a separate fund.
§ 80-4. Administration.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall control the Road Improvement Fund and
shall, when it deems it appropriate, recommend expenditures for the
improvement of roads. In determining which roads are to be improved,
the Board of Selectmen shall seek and receive the advice of the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
B. The Board of Selectmen shall recommend expenditures from the fund
only for the improvement of Town roads. Said fund may also be spent
for design and construction costs, equipment, materials, engineering
fees, land acquisitions, easements, legal fees and other expenses related
to road improvements. Appropriations from said fund shall require the
approval of the Board of Selectmen and the regular appropriation rules
and procedures governing Town expenditures.
C. There shall be no requirement that the funds be spent for improvement
to particular roads or that the improvements bear any particular
relationship to the source of the funds.
§ 80-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 80-4
74:97

ARTICLE II
Municipal Land Trust Fund
[Adopted effective 5-8-1989]
§ 80-5. Creation, purpose and title.
The Town of Ellington does hereby authorize the creation of a special fund,
which shall be known as the "Town of Ellington Municipal Land Trust Fund,"
for the purpose of the purchase of land for municipal space needs.
§ 80-6. Deposits.
There shall be deposited in said fund:
A. All moneys received by the Town of Ellington, from whatever source and
by whatever means, as gifts to the Municipal Land Trust Fund for the
purchase of land for municipal space needs; and
B. Any moneys appropriated to said fund by the Town of Ellington, in
its discretion, which moneys have been acquired from the sale of real
property owned by the Town of Ellington.
§ 80-7. Fund income.
Said fund shall be in the custody of the Town of Ellington Finance Officer
and shall not become a part of the general fund of the Town. All or any part
of the moneys in said fund may, from time to time, be invested in securities
in which public funds may lawfully be invested. All income derived from
such investments shall be paid into the fund and become a part thereof. The
moneys so invested shall at all times be subject to withdrawal from such
investment for use in the purchase of land for municipal space needs, as
provided under this article.
§ 80-8. Annual report.
Annually, the Finance Officer having custody of such fund shall submit to the
Board of Selectmen a complete report of the condition of said fund, which
report shall be made a part of the annual municipal report.
§ 80-9. Administration.
The Board of Selectmen shall control the Municipal Land Trust Fund and
shall, when the Board of Selectmen deems appropriate, recommend
expenditures from the fund solely for the purchase of land for municipal
space needs.
§ 80-10. Expenditures.
Upon authorization of the Board of Selectmen and in accordance with all
appropriation rules, procedures and legal requirements governing Town
expenditures, the moneys in said fund may be used for expenditures
incurred in the purchase of land for municipal space needs, including
§ 80-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 80-10
74:99
expenditures for construction costs, legal fees, and other expenses directly
related to the purchase of land.
§ 80-10 ELLINGTON CODE § 80-10
74:100
ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Improvement Fund
[Adopted effective 8-8-1992]
§ 80-11. Creation, purpose and title.
The Town of Ellington does hereby authorize the creation of an independent
fund to accept voluntary contributions for the improvement of Town
sidewalks to be known as the "Ellington Sidewalk Improvement Fund."
§ 80-12. Contributions.
Contributions for the fund may be received from developers, builders,
property owners and others whose developments may necessitate
construction of sidewalks or improvements to Town sidewalks and such
others who may desire to make contributions.
§ 80-13. Fund income.
The fund shall not become a part of the general fund of the Town. The
contributions shall be deposited in an account wherein the income of the
fund shall accumulate until such a time as expenditures from the fund are
authorized. The fund may be commingled in the discretion of the Finance
Officer to maximize income and minimize management costs, provided that
it shall always be accounted for as a separate fund.
§ 80-14. Administration.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall control the Sidewalk Improvement Fund
and shall, when deemed appropriate, recommend expenditures for the
improvement of sidewalks. In determining which sidewalks are to be
constructed or improved, the Board of Selectmen shall seek and receive
the advice of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
B. The Board of Selectmen shall recommend expenditures from the fund
only for the construction or improvement of Town sidewalks. Said fund
may also be spent for design and construction costs, equipment,
materials, engineering fees, land acquisition, easements, legal fees and
other expenses related to the sidewalk construction or improvements.
Appropriations from said fund shall require the approval of the Board
of Selectmen and the regular appropriation rules and procedures
governing Town expenditures.
C. There shall be no requirement that the funds be spent for sidewalks in
particular areas or that the area of construction or improvement bear
any particular relationship to the source of the funds.
§ 80-11 FIRE PREVENTION § 80-14
74:101

ARTICLE IV
Board of Education Dental Self-Insurance Fund
[Adopted 11-5-2018 by Town Meeting; effective 11-30-2019]
§ 80-15. Creation, purpose, and title.
The Town of Ellington does hereby authorize the creation of a special
fund to be known as the "Board of Education Dental Self-Insurance Fund."
The fund shall be used for the purchase of dental insurance and services,
payment of administrative costs, and the accumulation of reserves for
future dental insurance expenses for the employees (active and retired) of
the Ellington Board of Education and their dependents.
§ 80-16. Contributions.
Based on the recommendation of the town's consultants, the Board of
Finance and the Superintendent of Schools, the Town's annual budget
shall include allocations to the fund in amounts reasonably adequate to
meet the fund's purposes. Contributions to the fund may also be received
from employees of the Ellington Board of Education via insurance premium
payments or co-pays.
§ 80-17. Investment of fund contributions.
Fund contributions may be invested, as deemed appropriate by the
Ellington Finance Officer, in (a) certificates of deposit with either national
or state banks located in the Town or any other Connecticut town, (b)
cash deposits with mutual savings banks located in the Town or any other
Connecticut town, or (c) securities in which public funds may lawfully be
invested. All income derived from such investments shall be paid into the
fund and become a part thereof.
§ 80-18. Fund income.
The fund shall be in the custody of the Ellington Finance Officer and
shall not become a part of the Town's general fund. The fund shall not
be reduced or used for purposes other than those specifically provided in
§ 80-15 above. Except as otherwise specifically authorized in § 80-17 above,
all fund contributions shall be deposited in an account wherein the fund's
income shall accumulate until such time as expenditures from the fund
are authorized by the Board of Education. The fund may be commingled,
in the discretion of the Ellington Finance Officer, to maximize income
and minimize management costs, provided that the fund shall always be
accounted for as a separate fund.
§ 80-19. Fund administration.
A. The Board of Education shall administer and control the fund and shall,
when it deems the situation appropriate, approve expenditures for the
purposes contained in § 80-15 above. Expenditures from the fund shall
§ 80-15 FIRE PREVENTION § 80-19
74:103
adhere to the regular appropriation rules and procedures governing
Town expenditures.
B. The fund may be liquidated only by a decision of the Board of Selectmen
after consultation with the Board of Education, Finance Officer and the
Town Attorney; provided, however, that the fund shall remain in effect
until such time as all claims required to be paid under the Town and/or
Board of Education's contractual obligations have been satisfied.
§ 80-19 ELLINGTON CODE § 80-19
74:104
ARTICLE V
Board of Education Special Revenue Fund
[Adopted 2-11-2019 by Town Meeting; effective 3-7-2019]
§ 80-20. Creation, purpose, and title.
The Town of Ellington does hereby authorize the creation of a special
nonlapsing fund to be known as the "Board of Education Special Revenue
Fund." The fund shall be used by the Board of Education to facilitate the
administration of special education programs.
§ 80-21. Contributions.
Contributions to the fund shall be received from tuition and fees for special
education programming and services, as well as Medicaid reimbursements.
§ 80-22. Investment of fund contributions.
Fund contributions may be invested, as deemed appropriate by the
Ellington Finance Officer, in (a) certificates of deposit with either national
or state banks located in the Town or any other Connecticut town, (b)
cash deposits with mutual savings banks located in the Town or any other
Connecticut town, or (c) securities in which public funds may lawfully be
invested. All income derived from such investments shall be paid into the
fund and become a part thereof.
§ 80-23. Fund income.
The fund shall be in the custody of the Ellington Finance Officer and
shall not become a part of the Town's general fund. The fund shall not
be reduced or used for purposes other than those specifically provided in
§ 80-20 above. Except as otherwise specifically authorized in § 80-22 above,
all fund contributions shall be deposited in an account wherein the fund's
income shall accumulate until such time as expenditures from the fund
are authorized by the Board of Education. The fund may be commingled,
in the discretion of the Ellington Finance Officer, to maximize income
and minimize management costs, provided that the fund shall always be
accounted for as a separate fund.
§ 80-24. Fund administration.
A. The Board of Education shall administer and control the fund and shall,
when it deems the situation appropriate, approve expenditures for the
purposes contained in § 80-20 above. Expenditures from the fund shall
adhere to the regular appropriation rules and procedures governing
Town expenditures.
B. The fund may be liquidated only by a decision of the Board of Selectmen
after consultation with the Board of Education, Finance Officer and the
Town Attorney; provided, however, that the fund shall remain in effect
until such time as all claims required to be paid under the Town and/or
Board of Education's contractual obligations have been satisfied.
§ 80-20 FIRE PREVENTION § 80-24
74:105
Chapter 104
NUCLEAR-FREE ZONE
§ 104-1. Zone established.
The Town of Ellington shall be and is established as a nuclear-free zone
wherein no nuclear weapons or products associated with nuclear weapons
may be positioned or manufactured within the geographical boundaries of
the Town of Ellington.
§ 104-2. Transportation and storage of radioactive wastes or
nuclear components.
A. No radioactive wastes or nuclear components of any kind, excluding
medical wastes, shall be transported through the Town of Ellington
except in clearly marked vehicles and with at least three days' advance
notice to the Chief of Police of times and routes of transit.
B. No radioactive wastes or nuclear components of any kind shall be stored,
either on a temporary or permanent basis, within the boundaries of the
Town.
§ 104-3. Smoke detectors, watches and clocks.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to regulate consumer use of
radioactive smoke detectors and light-emitting watches and clocks.
§ 104-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates the provisions of this
chapter shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more than $100 for each
day such violation continues. Each and every violation of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense. All such civil penalties shall be deposited to
the general fund of the Town of Ellington.
§ 104-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph or word of this chapter shall be held
to be invalid, either on its face or as applied, the invalidity of such provision
shall not affect the other sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences or
words of this chapter and the application thereof, and to that extent the
sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences or words of this chapter shall
be deemed severable.
Chapter 109
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 80-24 ELLINGTON CODE § 104-5
104:106
ARTICLE I
Building Official
[Adopted effective 2-28-1974]
§ 109-1. Compensation.
Commencing July 1, 1974, the Building Official of the Town of Ellington shall
receive an annual salary as may be provided from time to time at the Annual
Budget Meeting of the Town, and thereafter he shall not be entitled to retain
any portion of any fees collected by him in the performance of his official
duties.
§ 109-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 109-1
109:107

ARTICLE II
Justices of the Peace
[Adopted 5-20-1996, effective 6-13-1996]
§ 109-2. Statutory authority; number.
Pursuant to Public Act 94-230 (C.G.S. §§ 9-183a to 9-184 and 9-186), there
shall be 60 Justices of the Peace for the Town of Ellington, each of whom
shall be an elector of the Town.
§ 109-3. Nominations by political parties.
Pursuant to § 9-183c of the Connecticut General Statutes, the political
parties having the largest and second largest total number of enrolled party
members in the state, as determined by the latest enrollment records in the
office of the Secretary of State, shall each be entitled to nominate 1/3 of the
total number of Justices of the Peace. One-third of the Justice positions shall
be reserved for members of minor parties and unaffiliated voters.
§ 109-2 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 109-3
109:109
Chapter 116
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 10. Public assemblies — See Ch. 17.
§ 116-1. Use restricted to certain times.
No unauthorized person shall use or be physically within any public park
or recreation area except at such times as the Board of Selectmen may
designate by public signs or notices or as specifically authorized by a special
permit issued by the Board of Selectmen or its duly authorized agent.
§ 116-2. Use of Sandy Beach facilities by nonresidents.
No person, not a resident of the Town of Ellington, shall use any facility at
the Sandy Beach recreational area except under a special permit issued by
the Board of Selectmen or its duly authorized agent.
§ 116-3. Boating on Crystal Lake.12
Boating on Crystal Lake is subject to regulations of the State Department
of Environmental Protection. See § 15-121-B15j of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies.
§ 116-4. Alcoholic beverages.
No person shall have in his possession or consume any alcoholic beverage
in any recreational area, and no person shall enter any recreational area
under the influence of alcohol or drugs. The Board of Selectmen may issue
special permits for group gatherings in which limited alcoholic beverages
may be permitted.
§ 116-5. Pets or riding animals. [Added 3-18-1976]
No person shall have in his possession or control any pets or riding animals,
including but not limited to dogs and horses, in any public park or
recreation area as may be designated by the Board of Selectmen upon the
advice of the Parks and Recreation Commission.
§ 116-6. Disposal of trash.
No person shall leave any refuse or trash in any recreational area except in
receptacles provided for that purpose. Where no receptacles are provided,
12.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 109-3 ELLINGTON CODE § 116-6
116:110
all such refuse or trash shall be properly disposed of outside the
recreational areas.
§ 116-7. Rest rooms.
All persons shall use rest rooms in recreational areas where provided and
shall cooperate in keeping such rest rooms in a neat and sanitary condition.
§ 116-8. Camping.
No person shall camp in any recreational area other than those designated
for camping and unless a special permit has been obtained from the Board
of Selectmen or its duly authorized agent.
§ 116-9. Games involving certain propelled objects.
No person shall take part in the playing of any games involving horseshoes,
arrows, stones, balls or other propelled objects within any recreational area
except in areas set aside for such activities.
§ 116-10. Firearms.
No person shall have in his possession or use firearms or any other device
firing projectiles of any kind within any recreational area.
§ 116-11. Damage to facilities.
No person shall willfully cause damage to any facilities or appurtenances,
real or personal, within any recreational area.
§ 116-12. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100
for each offense.
Chapter 121
PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
§ 121-1. License required; exceptions.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, no person, with or without a
team, cart or vehicle, except those exempted by the statutes of the state,
shall vend or hawk upon the public streets any goods, wares, or other
merchandise at public or private sale or auction, or vend or peddle such
articles from house to house within the Town limits, unless he shall have
obtained a license to do so from the Resident State Trooper. This section,
however, shall not apply to occupants of stores or shops within the Town or
to charitable, religious and nonprofit civic organizations.
§ 116-6 PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS § 121-2
121:111
§ 121-2. Fee; exhibition and term of license.
The fee for such license shall be $25 each year or portion thereof. Each
person so licensed shall be required to exhibit his license at the request of
any citizen. All licenses shall be good for one year after issuance.
§ 121-3. Application for license.
Each applicant for a license shall submit an application on a form provided
by the Resident State Trooper, to be completed under penalty of false
statement, providing at least the following information and evidence:
A. Name, alias, company name, and trade name.
B. Addresses of individuals and/or businesses for previous five years.
C. Age and physical characteristics of the applicant.
D. Social Security number and motor vehicle operator's number.
E. Year, make, model, color and registration of all vehicles to be used in
vending.
F. Criminal record of each individual vendor.
G. Other towns where the applicant holds or has held a vendor license
during the past five years.
H. Location where vending will take place.
I. Days and times of day when vending will take place.
J. Copy of motor vehicle license.
K. Copy of motor vehicle registration certificate.
L. Copy of Connecticut sales tax permit.
M. Evidence that each seal or measuring device bears a current approval
stamp and stamp of the State Sealer of Weights and Measures.
§ 121-4. Investigation; action on application.
The Resident State Trooper, before issuing a license under authority of this
chapter, shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral
character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public
good. If as a result of such investigation the applicant's business or moral
character shall be found to be unsatisfactory, the Resident State Trooper
shall not issue the license and shall provide a report of his findings to the
First Selectman, who shall bring the application to the next regular meeting
of the Board of Selectmen for its review. The Board will either affirm the
decision/recommendation of the Resident State Trooper or overrule the
decision/recommendation and direct the Resident State Trooper to notify
the applicant that no license will be issued or to issue the license, as the
case may be.
§ 121-5. Disposition of fees; record of licenses.
The Resident State Trooper shall pay over all money received for such
licenses to the Town Treasurer and shall keep a record of all licenses issued,
the date thereof, and the name of the licensee to whom given.
§ 121-2 ELLINGTON CODE § 121-6
121:112
§ 121-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $100 for each offense, and each day's violation thereof shall be
deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 126
PRECIOUS METALS, PURCHASERS OF
§ 126-1. Licensing authority.
Pursuant to Public Act 80-477,13 the First Selectman is hereby authorized
and directed to license purchasers of gold, gold-plated ware, silver, silverplated
ware, platinum ware, watches, jewelry, precious stones or coins
and to require such information from license applicants as he deems
appropriate or necessary or as may be recommended by the Connecticut
State Police. At such time as a Chief of Police is designated to serve, then
such license function shall be performed by him.
§ 126-2. Fee.
The licensee shall pay such fee as provided by such statute as it may be
amended from time to time.
Chapter 136
REGIONAL AGENCIES
13.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 21-100.
§ 121-6 PRECIOUS METALS, PURCHASERS OF § 126-2
126:113

ARTICLE I
Regional Planning Authority
[Adopted 12-16-1958, effective 1-3-1959]
§ 136-1. Adoption of statute.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 1, Public Act 635 of the January
1957 session of the General Assembly, the Town of Ellington, having a
duly constituted Planning and Zoning Commission established pursuant to
the provisions of the General Statutes, hereby adopts Chapter 46 of the
General Statutes, as amended, and joins the Regional Planning Authority
for the Capital Planning Region as defined by the Connecticut Development
Commission under provisions of Section N178 of the November 1955
Supplement to the General Statutes, which planning region includes the
municipalities of Avon, Bloomfield, Bolton, East Granby, East Hartford,
East Windsor, Ellington, Farmington, Glastonbury, Hartford, Manchester,
Newington, Rockville, Rocky Hill, Simsbury, South Windsor, Tolland,
Vernon, West Hartford, Wethersfield, Windsor and Windsor Locks.
§ 136-2. Local representation.
The Town of Ellington, having a population of 3,094, according to the
Federal Census of 1950, shall have two representatives on the Board of
the Authority who shall be appointed as follows: The Board of Selectmen
is hereby authorized to appoint to the Board of the Authority two electors
of the Town of Ellington in the following manner: one member to serve
two years and one member to serve one year. Thereafter all appointments
shall be made for a period of two years. Appointees under this section
shall continue to serve after expiration of their term until their successor is
appointed and takes office. Appointees may be reappointed for successive
terms. At least one appointee shall be a member of the Ellington Planning
and Zoning Commission. Terms of office of initial appointees shall
commence upon their appointment.
§ 136-3. Resignation of member.
Any representative who is absent from three consecutive regular meeting
of the Regional Planning Authority and any intervening duly called special
meetings thereof shall be considered to have resigned from said Regional
Planning Authority and the vacancy shall be filled by the Board of
Selectmen, except that the requirements of this section may be waived
where illness or other extenuating circumstances make it impossible for a
representative to meet the attendance requirements of this section.
§ 136-1 REGIONAL AGENCIES § 136-3
136:115

ARTICLE II
Regional Council of Elected Officials
[Adopted effective 3-5-1966]
§ 136-4. Election to join.
The Town of Ellington does hereby join the Regional Council of Elected
Officials, as defined by Public Act 511 of the 1965 General Assembly,14
created by ordinances of the towns, cities and boroughs within its planning
region as defined by the Connecticut Development Commission.
§ 136-5. Local representation.
The representative to said Regional Council shall be the First Selectman of
the Town of Ellington.
§ 136-6. Powers and duties.
The Regional Council shall have such powers, purposes, responsibilities and
duties as stated in Public Act 511 of the 1965 General Assembly.
14.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 4-124c.
§ 136-4 REGIONAL AGENCIES § 136-6
136:117

ARTICLE III
Regional Council of Governments
[Adopted 6-18-1973]
§ 136-7. Adoption of statute.
The Town of Ellington does hereby adopt §§ 4-124i through 4-124p of the
1971 Supplement to the Connecticut General Statutes (Public Act 821),
providing for the formation of a Regional Council of Governments within a
planning region as defined or redefined by the Director of the Office of State
Planning, and does hereby join such Regional Council of Governments when
and as such Council is duly established in accordance with said statutes,
upon the adoption of said statutes by not less than 60% of all municipalities
within such planning region. The adoption of such sections of the General
Statutes is intended to include the provisions of any special act of the
1973 General Assembly respecting additional representation for the core
city within the Capitol Region on a Regional Council of Governments, and
a nonvoting advisory regional forum thereunder, consistent with proposed
bylaws of such Regional Council of Governments dated January 25, 1973,
and endorsed by the existing Regional Council of Governments on May 3,
1973.
§ 136-8. Filing of article.
The Town Clerk is directed to immediately prepare and file with the Director
of the Office of State Planning a certified copy of this article.
§ 136-7 REGIONAL AGENCIES § 136-8
136:119
Chapter 138
RENTAL PROPERTY
§ 136-8 ELLINGTON CODE § 136-8
138:120
ARTICLE I
Landlord Identification
[Adopted 6-19-2006]
§ 138-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADDRESS — A location as described by the full street number, if any, the
street name, the city or town, and the state, including zip code, and not a
mailing address such as a post office box number.
DWELLING UNIT — Any house or building or portion thereof which is
rented, leased or hired out to be occupied, or is arranged or designed
to be occupied, or is occupied, as the home or residence of one or more
persons, living independently of each other, and doing their cooking upon
the premises, and having a common right in the halls, stairways or yards.
AGENT IN CHARGE — One who manages real estate, including, but not
limited to, the collection of rents and the supervision of property.
§ 138-2. Address filing.
A. Each nonresident owner of occupied or vacant rental real property shall
maintain on file in the office of the Ellington Tax Assessor the current
residential address of the nonresident owner of such property, if the
owner is an individual, or the current residential address of the agent
in charge of the building or property, if the nonresident owner is a
corporation, partnership, trust or other legally recognized entity owning
rental real property in the state.
B. If such residential address changes, notice of the new residential
address shall be provided by such nonresident owner or agent in charge
of the building or property to the office of the Ellington Tax Assessor not
more than 21 days after the date that the address change occurred.
C. If the nonresident owner or agent fails to file an address pursuant to this
article, the address to which the Town of Ellington mails property tax
bills for the rental real property shall be deemed to be the nonresident
owner's or agent's current address. Such address may be used for
compliance with the provisions of Subsection A.
§ 138-3. Service of notices.
Service of state or municipal orders relating to maintenance of such rental
real property or compliance with state law and local codes concerning such
real property directed to the nonresident owner or agent at the address on
file, or deemed to be on file in accordance with the provisions of § 138-2,
shall be sufficient proof of service of such orders in any subsequent criminal
or civil action against the owner or agent for failure to comply with the
orders. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to limit the
validity of any other means of giving notice of such orders that may be used
by the state or the Town of Ellington.
§ 138-1 RENTAL PROPERTY § 138-4
138:121
§ 138-4. Penalties for offenses.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes Section
51-164p, the Town of Ellington hereby establishes a civil penalty for a
violation of any provision of this article, which penalty shall be $250 for the
first violation and $1,000 for any subsequent violation.
§ 138-5. Appeals.
Any person who is assessed a civil penalty pursuant to this article may
appeal therefrom to the Superior Court not later than 30 days after the
mailing of notice of such assessment of the civil penalty by filing a petition
to reopen the assessment together with an entry fee on an amount equal
to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to Connecticut General
Statute Section 52-259 at the Superior Court facility designated by the
Chief Court Administrator, which shall entitle such person to a hearing in
accordance with the rules of the judges of the Superior Court.
§ 138-4 ELLINGTON CODE § 138-5
138:122
Chapter 140
RIGHT TO FARM
§ 140-1. Purpose.
Agriculture is a significant part of Ellington's heritage, and protecting
farmland and farming activities is essential to quality of life, community
character, and a sustainable economy. The purpose of this chapter is to
protect agricultural land and to encourage agricultural operations in
Ellington and to limit the circumstances in which agricultural operations
can be considered a nuisance.
§ 140-2. Declaration.
No present or future agriculture operation conducted or maintained in a
manner consistent with accepted customs or standards of the agricultural
industry, as such customs and standards may evolve over time, on a farm
shall become or be considered a nuisance. Agriculture operations may
occur on holidays, weekends, and weekdays by night and day, provided
that such activities do not violate applicable health, safety, fire, life or
building codes. It is hereby determined that whatever impact may be caused
through generally accepted agricultural practices, that such is offset and
ameliorated by the benefits of farming to the neighborhood, community, and
society.
§ 140-3. Definitions.
[Reference C.G.S. § 1-1(q), Definition of Agriculture] The terms "agriculture
and farm" shall be defined as provided in C.G.S. § 1-1(q), as amended.
§ 140-4. Farming not deemed to be nuisance.
A. Notwithstanding any general statute or municipal ordinance or
regulation pertaining to nuisances to the contrary, no agriculture or
farming operation, place, establishment or facility, or any of its
appurtenances, or the operation thereof, shall be deemed to constitute a
nuisance, either public or private, due to alleged objectionable (1) odor
from livestock, manure, crops or cover crops, fertilizer or feed, (2) noise
from livestock, or farm equipment used in normal, generally acceptable
farming procedures, (3) dust created during farming operations, (4) use
of chemicals, provided that such chemicals and the method of their
application conform to practices approved by the Commissioner of
Energy and Environmental Protection, or, where applicable,
Commissioner of Public Health, or (5) water pollution from livestock
or crop production activities, except the pollution of public or private
drinking water supplies, provided that such activities conform to
acceptable management practices for pollution control approved by the
Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection; provided that
such agricultural or farming operation, place, establishment or facility
has been in operation for one year or more and has not been
§ 138-5 RENTAL PROPERTY § 140-4
138:123
substantially changed, and such operation follows generally accepted
agricultural practices. Inspection and approval of the agricultural or
farming operation, place, establishment or facility by the Commissioner
of Agriculture or his designee shall be prima facie evidence that such
operation follows generally accepted agricultural practices.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply whenever a nuisance
results from negligence or willful or reckless misconduct in the operation
of any such agriculture or farming operation, place, establishment or
facility, or any of its appurtenances.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter shall restrict the power of the
Ellington Planning and Zoning Commission, Inland Wetlands Agency,
Planning, Building, Fire or Health Departments under the Connecticut
General Statutes. The Planning and Zoning Commission is urged to
adopt regulations consistent with this chapter, and partner with the
Conservation Commission to make the permanent preservation of
farmland within Ellington a criterion in planning and policy decisions.
§ 140-5. Notification.
When a residential subdivision or residential development is proposed
adjacent to preserved farmland, actively farmed land, or an agriculturalrelated
use, the following statement shall be noted on the plans and on each
property deed contained in the subdivision or development: "This property
abuts or is in proximity to a permanently protected farm and/or an active
agricultural or farming operation. Agricultural operations sometime emit
noise, run-off, odor, dust or chemical spray drift during either the day or
night that are annoying or irritants to some people. Ellington is a right to
farm community."
§ 140-6. Interpretation.
This chapter shall be interpreted by the Planning and Zoning Commission
whose determinations shall be final and binding.
§ 140-7. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective 21 days after publication thereof in a
newspaper having substantial circulation in the Town of Ellington.
Chapter 143
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 32.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 154.
Water — See Ch. 180.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 225.
Water Pollution Control Authority — See Chs.
305 to 330.
§ 140-4 ELLINGTON CODE § 140-7
143:124
ARTICLE I
Sewer Authority
[Adopted effective 3-21-1966]
§ 143-1. Creation; membership; compensation; officers.
There is herewith created pursuant to Chapter 103 of the General Statutes
of Connecticut a body to be known as the "Sewer Authority of the Town of
Ellington."
A. Said Sewer Authority shall consist of five persons, all of whom shall be
residents and electors of the Town of Ellington. If any person serving as a
member of said Sewer Authority shall cease to be a resident of the Town,
his membership on said Sewer Authority shall terminate and the position
held by him shall be legally vacant.
B. The members of the Sewer Authority, and any vacancies occurring
therein, shall be filled by appointment of the Board of Selectmen. Initial
appointment of members shall be for terms of one through five years,
respectively, all terms to commence on April 1, 1966. Any vacancy
occurring on said Authority shall be filled for the unexpired portion of
the term. No member of the Authority shall be entitled to compensation
for his services, but any member shall be entitled to reimbursement or
payment for reasonable expenses in connection with his duties when
approved by a majority vote of the full membership or approved by
the Chairman. The members shall, upon assuming office, elect from
among their members a Chairman and Secretary who shall, respectively,
conduct all meetings of the Authority and keep a record of the same.
C. The Authority may employ necessary secretarial and technical assistance
in the performance of its duties, and the salaries of such persons shall be
deemed necessary expenses of the Authority.
§ 143-2. Powers and duties.
The Sewer Authority of the Town of Ellington shall have all the powers
and duties provided in Chapter 103 of the General Statutes of Connecticut,
Revision of 1958, as amended.
§ 143-1 SEWERS § 143-2
143:125

ARTICLE II
Sewer Construction and Use
[Adopted effective 12-26-1980]
§ 143-3. Purpose.
In order to protect, preserve and ensure the public health of the residents
of the Town of Ellington and in order to ensure proper removal and disposal
of sewage wastes and sewage waters within the Town of Ellington, to
ensure the proper operation and maintenance of public sanitary sewers and
sewage pumping facilities within said Town, and to provide for the keeping
of adequate records of sewers, appurtenances, and connections thereto,
the following article regulating the construction, use, repair, alteration and
discontinuance or abandonment of sewers and appurtenances of the public
sanitary sewer system of the Town of Ellington as provided in § 7-247 et seq.
of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut is hereby enacted.
§ 143-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated. The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in
milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The amount of chlorine, in milligrams per liter,
which must be added to water or wastes to produce a free residual chlorine
in such waters or wastes of 1.0 milligram per liter.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
COMMERCIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from commercial processes
as distinct from sewage, including but not limited to laundries, restaurants,
gas stations, etc.
COOLING WATER — Includes clean wastewater from air-conditioning,
industrial cooling, condensing and similar apparatus and from hydraulically
powered equipment. In general, "cooling water" will include only water
which is sufficiently clean and unpolluted to admit for discharge without
treatment or purification into any natural open stream or watercourse
without offense.
§ 143-3 SEWERS § 143-4
143:127
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial processes as
distinct from sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds,
marshes, swamps, bogs, and other bodies of water, natural or artificial,
public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon
the boundaries of the Town of Ellington.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food which have been shredded to such degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any
dimension.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
REASONABLE LENGTH OF TIME — Ninety days, weather permitting.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm-,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEPTIC TANK or PRIVATE SEPTIC DISPOSAL SYSTEM — An on-site
subsurface waste disposal system constructed and maintained in
accordance with all requirements of the Public Health Code, Building Code,
Zoning Ordinance,15 this article and any other regulations, laws or
ordinances of the Town of Ellington.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, excluding,
however, all those industrial and commercial wastes other than from toilets,
normal bathroom use, or on-premises restaurant kitchens.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 143-4 ELLINGTON CODE § 143-4
143:128
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries storm- and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage.
SUBSOIL DRAINAGE — Includes water from the soil percolating into
subsoil drains and through foundation walls or basement floors or from
underground pipes or from similar sources.
SUPERINTENDENT — That person designated by the Ellington Water
Pollution Control Authority to implement and enforce the provisions of this
article, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or wastewater and which are removable by
laboratory filtering, expressed as milligrams per liter (mg/l) by weight (or
pounds per day).
TOWN — The Town of Ellington, Connecticut.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency under the provisions of § 307(u) of the Act or other acts.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
WPCA or WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Ellington
WPCA as defined in Chapter 103 of the Connecticut General Statutes
(1958), as amended, and as designated in the Ellington Charter, § 812.
WPCF or WATER POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY — All facilities for
collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater.
§ 143-5. Unlawful deposits and discharges; connection to public
sewers required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within
the Town of Ellington or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town
any human or animal excrement, garbage, sanitary sewage, industrial
or commercial wastes or any polluted waters. Customary agricultural
utilization and disposition of animal excrement in a sanitary manner
upon public or private property shall be lawful within the Town of
Ellington.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town
of Ellington, or any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any sewage
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article and
the appropriate permits obtained from the Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection and the Ellington WPCA.
C. The owner of all existing or subsequently constructed houses, buildings
or properties used or to be used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation, or other purposes situated within the Town and abutting
§ 143-4 SEWERS § 143-5
143:129
on any public street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located an
adjoining public sanitary sewer of the Town is hereby required, at his
expense, to install suitable toilet, bathroom and kitchen facilities therein,
as appropriate to its use, and to connect such facilities directly with the
public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article,
within six months after date of official notice to do so.
§ 143-6. Building sewers and connections.
A. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Superintendent.
B. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential
and commercial service and for service to establishments producing
industrial wastes. In either case, the owner, licensed drain layer, or
a duly authorized agent shall make application on a form furnished
by the WPCA. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee will be
established by the WPCA from time to time.
C. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner or drain
layer shall indemnify the Town or WPCA from any loss or damage to the
public sanitary sewer and/or road or public facility that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
D. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another
on a interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed
to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway,
the building sewer from the front building may, with the approval of
the Superintendent, be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer.
E. Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found by the Superintendent on examination and
test to meet all requirements of this article. All costs incurred for such
testing are to be borne by the owner.
F. The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall conform to the
requirements of the Ellington House Connection Policy and local
building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of
the Town. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof,
the materials of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9, as
amended, shall apply.
G. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer. Plans and
§ 143-5 ELLINGTON CODE § 143-6
143:130
specifications of the lift station shall be submitted to the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection (CDEP). Copies of the CDEP
approval must be submitted to the Superintendent before a connection
permit will be issued. Duplex lift systems shall be provided for
commercial and industrial buildings.
H. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff
or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which, in turn, is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
I. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the Town or the procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of
Practice No. 9, as amended. All such connections shall be made gastight
and watertight. Any deviations from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
J. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Superintendent or his representative.
K. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Town or appropriate Town agency.
L. No building sewer shall be constructed within 25 feet of a water supply
well. If a building sewer is constructed within 25 to 75 feet of a water
supply well it shall be constructed of extra-heavy cast iron (ASTM 74-69)
with leaded joints, ductile iron or PVC (SDR 35) whose infiltration/
exfiltration rate shall not exceed 25 gallons/diameter/mile/day.
§ 143-7. Discharges to public sewers.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any
sanitary sewer.
B. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on
approval of the Superintendent to a storm sewer or natural outlet in accordance
with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
C. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are,
or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to
cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the WPCF or to
the operation of the WPCF. At no time shall two successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system (or at any
point in the system) be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the
lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a
sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment
§ 143-6 SEWERS § 143-7
143:131
facilities, such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater
than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure,
bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders,
sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass
clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar,
asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating
oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
(3) Any sewage having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and
personnel of the WPCF. The upper limit of pH for any industrial wastewater
discharge shall be established under the discharger's state discharge permit.
(4) Any sewage containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly
or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any
wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or
plant life, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the WPCF, or exceed
the limitation set forth in federal pretreatment standards.
(5) Any noxious or malodorous sewage, gases, or solids which, either singly or by
interaction with other sewage, are sufficient to prevent entry into the public
sewers for their maintenance and repair.
(6) Any substance which may cause the WPCF's effluent or any other product
of the WPCF, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for the
reclamation process where the WPCF is pursuing a reuse and reclamation
program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the WPCF cause the
facility to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines
or regulations developed under § 405 of the Act, any criteria, guidelines,
or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the
Resource Conservation Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or
state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.
(7) Any wastewaters which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by
the sewage treatment processes employed or which are amenable to the
treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant cannot meet
the requirements of a state and/or federal agency having jurisdiction over the
discharge of wastewaters.
D. The following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes shall be limited
in discharges to public sewers to concentrations or quantities which will not
harm either the sewers or water pollution control facility, will not have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger public
property or constitute a nuisance. The Superintendent or Commissioner of
Environmental Protection may set limitations lower than the limitations
established in the regulations below if more severe limitations are necessary
to meet the above objectives. The limitations or restrictions on materials or
characteristics of sewage discharged to the public sewer are as follows:
(1) Sewage having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.).
(2) Sewage containing fats, wax, grease, petroleum, or mineral oil, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l with floatable oil not to exceed 20 mg/l
or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32° and 150° F. (0° and 65° C.).
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be
connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants,
§ 143-7 ELLINGTON CODE § 143-7
143:132
hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates
from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the
premises or when served by caterers.
(4) Any sewage containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may
be established by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
(5) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may
exceed limits established by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection in
compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations.
(6) Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to,
sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
(b) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions).
(c) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine demand in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the water pollution control
facility.
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting a slug as
defined in § 143-4.
(7) Sewage containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction
by the wastewater treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment
only to such degree that the water pollution control facility effluent cannot meet
the limits stipulated in the WPCF NPDES permit.
(8) Any sewage which, by interaction with other sewage in the public sewer, releases
obnoxious gases, forms suspended solids which interfere with the collection
system, or creates a condition which may be deleterious to structures and
treatment processes or which may cause the effluent limitations of the NPDES
permit to be exceeded.
(9) Overflow from holding tanks or other receptacles storing organic wastes.
(10) Sewage with concentrations of pollutants in excess of the following limits:
Constituent Concentration
[parts/million (ppm)]
Arsenic as As .05
Barium as Ba 5.0
Boron as Bo 5.0
Cyanides as CN (amenable) .1
Fluoride as F 20
Chromium (Total) 1.0
Chromium (Cr+6) 0.1
Magnesium as Mg 100
Maganese as Mn 5.0
Copper as Cu 1.0
Zinc as Zn 1.0
Nickel as Ni 1.0
§ 143-7 SEWERS § 143-7
143:133
Constituent Concentration
[parts/million (ppm)]
Cadmium .1
Lead .1
Tin 2.0
Silver .1
Mercury .01
Note: All metals are to be measured as total metals.
E. State permit required.
(1) In accordance with § 22a-430 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, a permit from the Commissioner of Environmental Protection is
required prior to the initiation of a discharge of any of the following
wastewaters to a public sewer:
(a) Industrial wastewater of any quantity.
(b) Domestic sewage in excess of 5,000 gallons per day through any
individual building sewer connection to a public sewer.
(2) A potential discharger must submit a permit application to the Department
of Environmental Protection not later than 180 days prior to the anticipated
date of initiation of the proposed discharge.
F. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to
the public sewers which contain the substances or possess the characteristics
enumerated in Subsection D of this section and which in the judgment of the
Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage facilities,
processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard
to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may reject the wastes,
require pretreatment of the wastes to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers, require control over the quantities and rates of discharge,
and/or require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
Subsection K of this section. If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment
or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plant and
equipment shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances, and laws.
G. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, the option of the
Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Superintendent and shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
H. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
I. When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole
§ 143-7 ELLINGTON CODE § 143-7
143:134
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such
manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained
by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
J. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes
to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance
with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be
determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at
said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required,
the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole
in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the
effect of constituents upon the sewage facilities and to determine the existence
of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will
determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of the premises is
appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but
not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-fourhour
composites of all outfalls, where pH values are determined from periodic
grab samples.)
K. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Ellington Water Pollution Control
Authority and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the Ellington WPCA for treatment,
subject to pretreatment and payment therefor by the industrial concern.
L. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the
Superintendent and the Commissioner of Environmental Protection a detailed
written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be
taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall
not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the sewer system, fish kills, aquatic plants, or
any other damage to persons or property, nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this
article or other applicable law.
M. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other
prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a dangerous
discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
§ 143-8. Drain laying for building drains and sewers.
A. The Town of Ellington may license as a drain layer any person, firm, or
corporation found to be suitable and competent who or which shall have
applied to it on forms to be provided for that purpose and who shall
have furnished the surety bond and insurance required by §§ 143-11 and
143-12 hereof.
B. No person other than those described in Subsection A or E of this
section shall construct, repair, alter or remove any sewer, building drain,
§ 143-7 SEWERS § 143-8
143:135
building sewer, or sewer line connected to or with or discharging directly
or indirectly to or into any public sanitary sewer of said Town or intended
to discharge thus at some future time, regardless of whether said work
is located in a public street or in public or private land.
C. The following may, as indicated, construct, repair, alter, or remove
sewers, subject to supervision and approval by the Ellington WPCA:
(1) Regular forces of a contractor employed by the Town, operating
under orders of the WPCA and in the performance of work for said
Town.
(2) Regular forces of the Town and/or the State Department of
Transportation operating under and subject to permit for the
particular job to be issued by said WPCA or the Superintendent and
while engaged in the regular work and operations of said Town or
State Department of Transportation.
(3) Regular forces of any public utility corporation authorized by state
law to construct, maintain, and operate pipes or ducts within public
highways within said Town, while engaged in work incidental to the
regular structures of said utility company and operating under and
subject to the conditions of a permit for the particular job issued by
said WPCA or the Superintendent.
D. The limitations as to persons who may construct, alter, or repair building
drains and building sewers as provided in Subsection B of this section
shall not restrict the usual work of plumbers or others when operating
in accordance with local plumbing and building codes of the Town when
they are working on pipes within or not more than five feet outside the
walls of a building or similar structure, provided that no plumber, drain
layer or other person shall make any connection to a public sewer of said
Town without a permit therefor, even if said sewer is located under or
immediately adjacent to any building or similar structure, and provided
that all fixtures within said building or structure and all use made of
them shall conform to the requirements of this article as to what may
and may not be permitted to be discharged into public sanitary sewers.
E. Owner performance. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the owner
of a building or structure from personally installing the building sewer
on his own property under the conditions herein specified:
(1) Approval of plans and final approval by the Superintendent shall be
obtained;
(2) A permit shall be secured as herein provided before the work is
performed;
(3) Permit fees shall be paid and applications made for inspections; and
(4) All work shall be performed by the owner himself in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
§ 143-9. Permits.
A. No person, other than those working for and under the direction of the
Town, shall make any excavation for or construct, install, lay, repair,
alter, or remove any sewer, building drain, building sewer, sewer
connection, or appurtenance thereof or connect to such sewer within
the Town which is in any way connected to or discharges directly or
§ 143-8 ELLINGTON CODE § 143-9
143:136
indirectly to or into any public sanitary sewer of said Town, or is
intended at some future time to be so connected or so discharged,
until said person or party shall have applied for and secured from the
Superintendent a permit for doing such work. Such permits may be
issued only to those qualified to perform such work as provided in
§ 143-8A or E of this article.
B. Every application for a permit shall be made in writing on forms to be
provided by the WPCA for that purpose and shall be signed by the drain
layer, owner, or an authorized agent thereof. The application shall state
the location and ownership of the property to be served by the sewer
in question, the post office address of said property owner, and a brief
description of the work to be done and shall contain an agreement that
the permittee will do the work in accordance with the requirements of
Town and local laws, ordinances, regulations and permits as those laws,
etc., may apply to the particular locations of work and will save said
Town and others harmless from damages, loss, damage claims, etc., in
accordance with the terms of the drain layer's surety bond provided for
in § 143-12 hereof.
C. Any person who applies for a permit to connect into a public sanitary
sewer or sewer line shall pay the prescribed fee for each such permit.
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable by the permittee. Permits
shall be kept on the premises where and at all times when work is in
progress and shall be shown to any proper person asking to see the
same. All persons operating under such permits shall be held responsible
for conformity with the requirements thereof and with this article.
D. Any permit, in whole or in part, may be suspended, canceled, or
terminated by the WPCA or the Superintendent on written notice to the
permittee for violation of the conditions thereof or for the violation of the
requirements of this article.
§ 143-10. Conduct of permittee.
Each drain layer licensed in accordance with § 143-8A hereof shall be
responsible for the proper performance of all work performed under the
permits issued to him and for the conduct of all work and all materials
furnished on work by his employees or agents. Work may be sublet only
to another drain layer licensed under § 143-8A, and then the drain layer to
whom the permit was issued shall be fully responsible for compliance with
this article and the conditions of the permit as if he had done the work.
§ 143-11. Liability and insurance.
Each drain layer shall save the Town of Ellington, its agents, and servants
harmless from all loss or claims of loss, damage or injury arising from the
operations of said drain layer under any permits issued him by reason of his
negligence in performing the work for which he has been issued a permit.
He shall file with the Town a certificate or certificates of insurance, as
required by the Ellington WPCA.
§ 143-9 SEWERS § 143-12
143:137
§ 143-12. Surety bond.
Every person making application for a permit shall file with the WPCA a
satisfactory bond with surety in a form satisfactory to the WPCA or the
Superintendent. The bond shall be in an amount determined by the WPCA
or the Superintendent, conditioned upon the applicant:
A. Substantially and properly performing all work to be done under the
permit issued to him in a workmanlike manner;
B. Using proper materials;
C. Restoring that portion of any street or public place which has excavated
in accordance with the rules contained in the permit issued to him and
maintaining the same for a period of one year; and
D. Reimbursing the Town for any expense for repairs to such street or
public place made necessary by reason of the excavation.
§ 143-13. Order to connect building to public sewer.
A. Within 60 days after a public sanitary sewer in a public street becomes
operational, the Sewer Authority may order the owner of any building to
which a sewerage system is available to connect such building with the
system.
B. The basis for an order to connect will be: [Amended effective
7-26-1989]
(1) The existence of an inadequate or failing on-site subsurface sewage
disposal system;
(2) By reason of density of development, proximity to natural outlets
or watercourses, proximity to water supply wells, and/or soil or
other conditions affecting subsurface drainage and water flow, the
Water Pollution Control Authority determines that continued use or
construction of a septic tank or other private septic disposal system
will not adequately ensure the public health or protect against
discharge of sewage into natural outlets or watercourse; or
(3) Any order by the Connecticut Department of Environmental
Protection or other regulatory authority directing the Town to abate
pollution by the installation of a municipal sanitary sewage system.
C. No such order shall be issued until after a public hearing with respect
thereto after due notice in writing to such property owner.
D. Such order, when issued, shall notify such property owner that he or she
must connect with said sewer within six months after such notification.
E. Failure to obtain a permit to make such connection shall be prima facie
evidence that no connection has been made.
F. No subsurface sewage disposal system shall, after the effective date of
this regulation, be constructed, altered, repaired or rebuilt in an area
where public sewers are available and the connection thereto is feasible.
§ 143-14. Protection from damage.
Any person who willfully breaks, damages, destroys, or injures any
structure, appurtenance, or equipment that is a part of the public sanitary
sewer system shall be subject to the penalties imposed under § 53a-117 of
the Connecticut General Statutes (Rev. 1958), as amended.
§ 143-12 ELLINGTON CODE § 143-15
143:138
§ 143-15. Right of entry by inspectors.
The Water Pollution Control Authority and the Superintendent, and any
other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper credentials
and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the
purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing of
all discharges into the building drain and sanitary sewer, in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
§ 143-16. Notice of violation; penalties for offenses.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article except § 143-15
shall be served by the Town with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such
notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article may be fined
not more than $100. Each day that any violation of this article continues
and each day that person continues to discharge prohibited wastes or
substances into any public sanitary sewer shall be deemed a separate
offense for the purpose of applying the above penalty.
§ 143-17. Enforcement.
A. If any person shall construct, install, alter, or repair any sewer, building
drain, building sewer or connection to any public sanitary sewer of the
Town in violation of the requirements of this article or, having obtained a
permit as provided in this article, shall construct, install, alter, or repair
any sewer, building drain, building sewer or connection thereto without
having given the Superintendent or his authorized representative
adequate notice, time, opportunity and assistance, during regular
working hours, to inspect such sewer, connection and the work and
materials used thereon, said Superintendent shall order or direct the
person who constructed, installed, altered, or repaired such sewer, etc.,
to uncover and fully expose any or all portions of such sewer, etc., and
afford said Superintendent and his authorized representatives adequate
opportunity to examine and inspect such sewer, etc., and to secure
such records thereof as may be proper. If such sewer, etc., and the
appurtenances thereof shall be found not to be in full accord with the
requirements of this article and the standards established under its
provisions, then said Superintendent shall order and direct such person,
owner or lessee to make such changes in or additions to or remove
portions of appurtenances of such sewer, etc., as may be necessary to
ensure that such sewer, etc., will conform to the requirements of this
article and of the standards established under its provisions. All of such
work shall be performed by said person, owner or lessee without delay
and without expense to the Town.
B. If any person, after proper order or direction from the Superintendent,
fails to take the remedial steps or perform the acts required by this
article, or fails thereof, as required by this article, the WPCA or the
Superintendent, by such agents and/or facilities as it or he may choose,
may disconnect the sewer, etc., which was wrongfully connected,
§ 143-15 SEWERS § 143-17
143:139
altered, repaired or used or through which improper wastes were
discharged into the public sanitary sewer system of the Town. All costs
for disconnecting shall be borne by such person and shall be paid to the
WPCA immediately upon notice of the amount of such costs. [Amended
effective 7-26-1989]
C. If any person, after order or direction from the WPCA, as authorized
by this article, fails to make connection with a public sanitary sewer,
the WPCA, or its duly authorized agent, may choose to construct said
connection. All costs for construction are to be borne by the owner. All
costs for such construction shall be borne by such person and shall be
paid to the WPCA immediately upon notice of the amount of such costs.
[Amended effective 7-26-1989]
D. The Superintendent and other duly authorized representatives of the
WPCA bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the Town holds an easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the
sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on said easement shall be done in accordance with the
terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved.
E. The WPCA, or its duly authorized agent, may seek any other remedy or
means of enforcement provided by law, including an order from a court
of competent jurisdiction enjoining further violation of any provision
of this article. Any person who fails to pay any amount due under
this article shall, in addition to such amount, be liable to the Town
of Ellington for the costs of collecting the amount due, including
reasonable attorney fees. Enforcement under this section shall be in
addition to and not in lieu of any penalties imposed under § 143-16 of
this article. [Added effective 7-26-1989]
§ 143-18. Appeals.
An appeal may by taken to the WPCA by any person aggrieved by any order,
requirement, or decision made by an official charged with the enforcement
of this article. Said appeal shall be taken within 30 days after notification
of the aggrieved person of the order, requirement, or decision. An appeal
shall stay all proceedings in the action appealed from, unless the official
from whom the appeal has been taken certifies to the WPCA that, by reason
of fact, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. Said WPCA
shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of any appeal and give due notice
thereof to the parties. Said WPCA shall decide such appeal within 65 days
after the hearing. Said WPCA may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify any order, requirement, or decision appealed from and shall make
any such order, requirement, or decision as in its opinion should be made in
the premises.
§ 143-19. Construction of sewers by developers. [Added effective
9-18-1985]
A. The Water Pollution Control Authority, hereinafter referred to as
"WPCA," is authorized to enter into agreements on behalf of the Town of
§ 143-17 ELLINGTON CODE § 143-19
143:140
Ellington with developers or other owners of land, hereinafter referred
to as "developers," for the construction of sewers, which may become
part of the public sewer system under the conditions hereinafter
stipulated. The WPCA is empowered to make, from time to time, any
necessary regulations stipulating the terms and conditions of said
agreement not inconsistent with the provision of this article. For the
purposes of this section, a developer is one who is required pursuant to
Article VII, § 230-22 of the Zoning Regulations16 of the Town of Ellington
to submit a site development plan or any person, firm or corporation who
or which shall subdivide and develop land.
B. The terms and text of a standard form of agreement for work under
this article or any variations of said standard form to apply to any
particular project thereunder shall be as approved by the Town Attorney.
Prior to any such agreement and construction pursuant thereto, the
developer shall have the development site approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission of the Town of Ellington. No construction shall
commence until the developer has secured approval of construction
plans and specifications for the proposed sewers. Approval from the
WPCA does not relieve the developer of the obligation to obtain any
other authorizations required by law.
C. Such agreements shall provide that the full cost of construction of
the sewer and all expenses incidental thereto shall be borne by the
developer. The developer, upon application to the WPCA for approval
of plans and specifications, shall deposit with the Finance Officer of
the Town of Ellington a sum deemed by the WPCA to be sufficient
to defray the cost of work to be performed by the Town prior to or
during construction or during any maintenance period stipulated. Such
work shall include but not be limited to preliminary surveys, preparation
of designs and plans, other expenses of preliminary engineering,
inspection, supervisory engineering, grade staking, measuring, and
testing. Such agreements shall also provide that, in case said deposit
proves to be insufficient at any time during the progress of the work,
further deposit shall be made upon notification by the Finance Officer
of said Town and that, upon acceptance of the sewer, any unexpended
portion of said deposit shall be returned to the developer. The developer
is further subject to payment of an assessment under the Sewer Benefit
Assessment Policy of the WPCA.
D. The WPCA may require as part of said agreement that adequate bond or
other surety acceptable to the Town be submitted to insure completion
and maintenance of the work.
E. Such agreements shall require, whenever the work is not in a duly
accepted public highway, that adequate rights-of-way be conveyed to
the Town prior to the acceptance of the sewer, the terms of conveyance
being subject to the approval of the Town Attorney.
F. All designs for developer sewers shall be accomplished by a licensed
professional engineer in the State of Connecticut. The sewer system
shall be properly designed in accordance with Guides for the Design of
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 143-19 SEWERS § 143-19
143:141
Wastewater Treatment Works, latest edition, as prepared and published
by the New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission and
in strict conformance with all requirements of the State of Connecticut
and Town of Ellington. The design of sewers must anticipate and allow
for flows from all possible future extensions or developments within the
immediate drainage area, the drainage area being that area which can
be easily sewered by gravity. Construction plans and specifications for
sewer extensions shall be submitted to, and approval obtained from, the
WPCA before construction may proceed. A report presenting the basis
of design of the proposed sewers shall be submitted by the developer
to the WPCA for approval of the WPCA prior to approval of the final
construction plans and specifications.
G. The installation of the sewers must be subject to the inspection of the
Town Building Official, the WPCA or the WPCA's engineer, and the
expenses for this inspection shall be paid for by the developer. The
sewer as constructed must pass the infiltration/exfiltration test required
in Subsection H before it is used.
H. Upon completion of construction of any sewer extension, but before
final acceptance by the WPCA, the sewer system shall be tested for
infiltration and exfiltration of both sewer lines and manholes under the
direction and inspection of professional engineer registered in the State
of Connecticut and in the presence of the WPCA's designated agent.
When the sewers have passed tests to demonstrate that they meet
the standards presented in the Guides for the Design of Wastewater
Treatment Works, then the Engineer shall certify in writing to the
Authority as to the nature of the tests and results thereof and the fact
that the tests meet acceptable standards.
I. Upon completion of construction and acceptance by the WPCA of the
infiltration/exfiltration test results, the developer shall submit as-built
record drawings of the completed sewer project. As-built record
drawings shall meet the requirements contained in the WPCA Policy
on Procedures for Review, Acceptance and Construction of Developers'
Sewers.17 Said policy is available from the office of the Ellington
Building Official.
J. The WPCA may, by resolution, incorporate said sewers into the Ellington
sewer system, to become effective as specified in such resolution upon
the following events:
(1) Acceptance of the as-built record drawings by the Authority;
(2) Expiration of the maintenance period fixed in the agreement;
(3) Proper restoration of all roadways, curbs, walks and other surfaces
and appurtenances disturbed by the work; and
(4) The furnishing of adequate security by bond or otherwise to assure
such restoration.
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 325, Sewer Construction and Acceptance.
§ 143-19 ELLINGTON CODE § 143-19
143:142
Chapter 147
SMOKING
§ 147-1. Smoking restricted. [Adopted 2-9-2015, effective 3-4-2015]
No person shall use, carry or smoke a lighted cigarette, cigar, cigarillo
or pipe, or use cannabis-type substance including marijuana, as defined
in Connecticut General Statutes Section 21a-240, in any form in or upon
any building, park, playground, recreation area, athletic facility, trail, beach
or area of assembly owned, leased or controlled by the Town of Ellington
as may be specifically designated by the Ellington Board of Selectmen;
provided however, that signs are posted in the area such as to reasonably
warn persons that the area is subject to this No Smoking chapter.
§ 147-2. Penalties for offenses.
Violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction as defined in
Connecticut General Statutes § 51-164n and/or may be punishable by a fine
of not more than $90 pursuant to the Citation Ordinance of the Town of
Ellington.18
§ 147-3. Enforcement.
Members of the Ellington Police Department shall be charged with the
enforcement of this chapter and may issue an infraction summons or a
citation under the Ellington Citation Ordinance. Additionally, agents and
employees of the Town of Ellington and coaches or officials participating in
any athletic event in or upon any Town-owned athletic or recreation facility
are authorized to enforce this chapter through the exclusion of the violator
from the athletic event or recreational facility.
§ 147-4. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective 21 days following publication of a notice of
adoption by Town Meeting pursuant to Charter Section 505.
Chapter 149
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 74, Art. II. Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 116.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 46, Citations.
§ 143-19 SOLID WASTE § 147-4
149:143

ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted effective 1-1-1991]
§ 149-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APARTMENT — A building or set of buildings which contains three or more
apartment units in which residents live and which is owned by a single
owner (partnership or corporation).
CARDBOARD — Corrugated boxes and similar corrugated and kraft paper
materials which have a minimum of contamination by food, liquid or other
material.
COMMINGLED — Source-separated, nonputrescible recyclable materials
that have been mixed at the source of generation (i.e., placed in the same
container).
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those recyclable materials
designated by the Town of Ellington to be source-separated. The term
includes, but is not limited to, newspaper, glass and metal food containers,
car batteries, cardboard, office paper, scrap metal, waste oil, and leaves.
GLASS FOOD CONTAINER — A glass bottle or jar of any size or shape
used to package food or liquid products suitable for human or animal
consumption.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — All solvents, acids, pesticides, herbicides, oils,
chemicals and other toxic or hazardous materials.
INTERMEDIATE PROCESSING CENTER — A facility which can recycle an
item or items and market or deliver for reuse the resulting material or
product or products.
METAL FOOD CONTAINER — An aluminum, bimetal, steel, tin-plated steel,
or other metallic can, plate or tray of any size or shape used to package food
or liquid products suitable for human or animal consumption.
NEWSPAPER — Used or discarded newsprint of the type distributed daily
or weekly which has a minimum of contamination by food or other material.
OFFICE PAPER — Used or discarded high-grade white paper and manila
paper, including but not limited to paper utilized for file folders, tab cards,
writing, typing, printing, computer printing, and photocopying, which is
suitable for recycling and which has a minimum of contamination. Office
paper generated by households is excluded.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Materials which otherwise would become solid
waste, which can be separated, collected and processed and returned to
economic use in the form of raw materials or products, and shall include
items listed in § 149-4A, B and C hereof.
§ 149-1 SOLID WASTE § 149-1
149:145
RECYCLING — Any process by which materials which would otherwise
become solid waste are separated, collected and processed and returned to
economic use in the form of raw materials or products.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — Specifically marked plastic containers
provided by the contractor or the Town to each dwelling unit in the Town.
RESIDENT — Any human being residing within the Town of Ellington on a
temporary or permanent basis.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Property used as a place of residence by any
resident.
SCRAP METAL — Used or discarded items made of ferrous metals,
aluminum, brass, copper, lead, chromium, tin, nickel or alloys thereof,
including but not limited to white goods and metal food containers.
SOLID WASTE — All refuse normally placed in containers by occupants of
residential, commercial and industrial property for disposal by the refuse
collector or the Town.
SOURCE-SEPARATE — To separate recyclable materials from the solid
waste stream at the point of waste generation.
STORAGE BATTERY — Lead acid batteries or other batteries used in motor
vehicles, such as, but not limited to, automobiles, airplanes, boats,
recreational vehicles, and tractors.
WASTE OIL — Crankcase oil that has been utilized in internal combustion
engines.
§ 149-2. Effective date.
This article shall become effective on January 1, 1991.
§ 149-3. Recycling program established.
A. Commencing on the effective date set forth above, it shall be mandatory
for all residents of residential property (including condominiums and
apartments) and occupants of business and industrial property and of
private, public and governmental institutions and buildings to engage in
recycling as provided hereafter.
B. Materials designated as recyclable for this program in accordance with
this action shall consist of the following materials:
(1) Newspaper.
(2) Glass food containers.
(3) Metal food containers.
(4) Cardboard.
(5) Scrap metal.
(6) Car batteries.
(7) Waste motor oil.
(8) Leaves.
(9) Other recyclable materials as designated by the Board of Selectmen
of the Town of Ellington 30 days after designation and publication of
notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the area.
§ 149-1 ELLINGTON CODE § 149-4
149:146
§ 149-4. Separation of recyclable material.
A. Residential property. On and after January 1, 1991, it shall be mandatory
for all persons who are occupants of residential property (including
condominiums) to separate cardboard, glass food containers, metal food
containers, newspaper, scrap metal, storage batteries, and leaves as
herein defined from all other solid waste generated by such residence
for collection and ultimate recycling of said material.
B. Business and industry. On and after January 1, 1991, it shall be
mandatory for all occupants of business and industrial property and
of private, public and governmental institutions and buildings (where
the number of occupants exceeds one, the chief executive officer of
the entity occupying said property, institution or building) to separate
cardboard, glass food containers, metal food containers, newspapers,
office paper, scrap metal, and leaves from all other solid waste generated
by said nonresidential establishments for collection and ultimate
recycling of said material.
C. Apartments. On and after January 1, 1991, it shall be mandatory for
all apartment owners or managers to separate cardboard, glass food
containers, metal food containers, newspaper, office paper, scrap metal,
and leaves from all other solid waste generated by the tenants of said
apartments for collection and ultimate recycling of said material.
D. Additional recyclable materials. There shall be added to the list of
recyclable materials described in Subsections A, B, and C above those
items which are hereafter added to the list of recyclable materials
contained in Chapter 446D of the Connecticut General Statutes and the
regulations of the State of Connecticut Department of Environmental
Protection in accordance therewith and/or as designated by the
Ellington Board of Selectmen as specified in § 149-3B(9).
§ 149-5. Residential collection.
A. Containers and fees. Prior to the effective date of this article the Town
will furnish each residential property with a recycling container is lost,
stolen or misplaced, then a replacement container shall be furnished to
the resident at the expense of the resident. If the quantity of recyclable
materials separated for pickup exceeds the capacity of the container, the
resident shall purchase a second container. Replacement or additional
containers shall be obtained from the contractor at a price which the
Selectmen establish from time to time.
B. Transporting of recyclable materials.
(1) The Town will contract with a licensed firm (contractor), which will
pick up the recyclable material on a designated day by separating
the recyclable materials and transporting said materials to the
designated recycling facility.
(2) The contractor will leave the empty recycling container at the
curbside, and the resident shall be responsible for the safekeeping
of the container. This service will be provided to the residence at no
additional charge.
C. Schedule for pickup of recyclable materials.
§ 149-4 SOLID WASTE § 149-5
149:147
(1) Recycling containers. The contractor shall pick up the recyclable
materials left in the containers on a weekly basis. The Selectmen
shall establish a schedule for collection of said recyclable materials
and shall publicly advertise said schedule.
(2) Batteries. Car batteries shall be delivered by the resident or owner
to a central location and on the days and times established. The
location and hours of operation shall be established by the Selectmen
and may be changed by said Selectmen.
(3) Scrap metal and bulky waste. Scrap metal and bulky waste shall
be picked up at the curbside twice a year pursuant to a schedule
published by the Selectmen.
(4) Waste motor oil. Waste motor oil shall be transported by each
resident to the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority (CRRA)
landfill during the hours established by the Selectmen.
(5) Leaves. Leaves shall be picked up from the curbside according to a
designated schedule as set forth by the Selectmen.
§ 149-6. Nonresidential collection.
The Town will not provide containers or pickup service for the
nonresidential establishments as set forth in § 149-4B and C above. It shall
be the responsibility of each of these establishments or its agent to have
said recyclable material source-separated and collected and to enter into
a private agreement with a contractor to have the recyclable material
properly transported to the recycling facilities as later established by the
Town.
§ 149-7. Preparation of recyclables for collection.
A. Weekly recycling collections. The following recyclables placed by
residents for collection pursuant to the program established in
accordance with this article shall be prepared for collection as follows:
(1) Uncontaminated newspapers and cardboard shall be separated and
placed into the recycling container provided by the Town or its
contractor.
(2) Glass and metal food containers shall be separated from other refuse
and placed into the recycling container. These recyclables shall be
rinsed free of food contaminants. The caps, tops and rings of glass
food containers shall be removed. The labels shall be removed from
the metal containers.
(3) On the day designated for collection of the recyclable materials, each
resident, including condominium owners, shall place the recycling
containers at the curbside of the road fronting his residence for
the purpose of permitting the contractor to collect the recyclable
material.
(4) If the recycling container is not large enough to hold all of the
materials to be recycled, any excess shall be stored in standard
nonplastic grocery shopping bags or corrugated containers and
placed on top of or beside the recycling container.
B. Special recycling collections.
§ 149-5 ELLINGTON CODE § 149-7
149:148
(1) Scrap metal shall be placed at the curb on a twice-a-year basis as
provided by the schedule published by the Town.
(2) Leaves shall be picked up by the Department of Public Works during
the fall pickup schedule and shall not be part of the scheduled
recyclable pickup program.
C. Recycling requiring delivery by residents.
(1) Car batteries shall be delivered by the residents to the central
collection location established by the Town during the days and
times as later set by the Town.
(2) Waste oil shall be delivered to the CRRA landfill in a clean, leakproof,
capped plastic container.
D. All occupants of business and industrial property and of private, public
or governmental institutions and buildings and apartments shall prepare
recyclables for collection as follows:
(1) The owner or occupant of business and industrial property and of
private, public and governmental institutions and buildings shall
separate the recyclable materials from all other solid waste and
contract with an approved waste collector for the proper
transporting of said recyclable materials.
(2) Where the building, institution or property contains two or more
entities, then the chief executive officer or manager of said building,
institution or property shall establish a recycling program with all
occupants and contract with an approved waste collector for the
collection and proper transporting of the recyclable materials.
(3) The owner or manager of an apartment complex shall establish
with all tenants a procedure for the separation and storage of all
recyclable material and shall contract with an approved waste
collector for collection and proper transporting of the recyclable
materials.
§ 149-8. Waste haulers.
A. All waste haulers and collectors shall register with the Department of
Public Works and gain Town approval for hauling recyclable material
prior to any transporting or collecting of any recyclable materials. The
Selectmen shall adopt and implement application forms to identify the
waste hauler, his address, name of the responsible person, mailing
address, telephone number, emergency telephone number, and evidence
of insurance for general liability for operation of a motor vehicle and
contamination resulting from improper handling of waste material in the
Town.
B. All waste haulers or collectors operating within the Town of Ellington
shall notify the Town's Director of Public Works of those persons,
partnerships or corporations that have discarded recyclable material as
defined in § 149-3B of this article with other solid waste.
C. No waste haulers or collectors shall knowingly mix recyclable material
with other solid waste.
D. Any waste hauler or collector who or which violates this article shall
be subject to the penalties provided herein as well as those penalties
provided by the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 149-7 SOLID WASTE § 149-9
149:149
§ 149-9. Implementation.
The Selectmen are hereby granted the authority to adopt regulations,
policies or procedures to implement the following:
A. The method and time of residential pickup of recyclable material.
B. Amendments to the list of items subject to recycling.
C. Changes in the location of any collection centers.
D. Regulations to identify, qualify, and assure financial and general
compliance of waste haulers with this article.
§ 149-10. Unlawful acts; penalties for offenses.
A. It shall be unlawful to combine recyclable materials or hazardous wastes
with refuse. Refuse which has recyclable materials commingled with
it shall not be collected, and recyclable material that has refuse
commingled with it shall not be collected.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident to segregate properly the
uncollected waste and either store or dispose of it at his own expense.
C. Allowing refuse to accumulate shall subject a resident to a citation for
violation of the Town Sanitary Code.
D. Failure to recycle is a violation of this article.
E. The recycling container shall be kept clean and stored in such a location
as not to constitute a nuisance or otherwise be objectionable.
F. No person having custody or control of residential premises from which
recyclables are collected for disposal by the Town of Ellington shall
permit or cause any recyclables within his custody or control to become
a hazard to public travel, health or safety or become a nuisance of any
sort.
G. No person or corporation shall separate, recover, collect, remove, store
or dispose of recyclable material within the Town of Ellington or the
provisions of this article.
H. No person, partnership, firm or corporation, other than the authorized
agents of the Town or employees of the Town acting in the course of their
employment, shall collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked
up such recyclable material. Each and every such collection or pickup
in violation of this subsection shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
I. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any
provision of this article or any of the rules and regulations promulgated
pursuant hereto shall be guilty of an infraction as provided by the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, and the fines established
pursuant thereto. This article and the regulations pursuant thereto may
be enforced by police officers of the Ellington Resident Trooper's Office
by citation issued by the same.
J. In addition to any other penalty provided herein, occupants of business
and industrial property that is considered a commercial establishment
under the provisions of Public Acts 90-249 and 90-220 shall, for a
violation of this article, be subject to a penalty not to exceed $500 for
each violation as provided in said public acts.19
19.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 22a-241i.
§ 149-9 ELLINGTON CODE § 149-10
149:150
K. Any person who illegally disposes solid waste at a landfill located in the
Town shall be subject to the following penalties:
(1) For the first offense, a fine of $1,000.
(2) For the second offense, a fine of $2,000.
(3) For the third or subsequent offense, a fine of $3,000.
§ 149-11. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable. If any provision of this article or
its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, said invalidity
shall not offset any other provision or application of this article which can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application of this article.
§ 149-10 SOLID WASTE § 149-11
149:151

ARTICLE II
Collection and Disposal
[Adopted effective 7-15-1993]
§ 149-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APARTMENT — A building or set of buildings which contains four or more
apartment units in which residents live in and which is owned by a single
owner (partnership or corporation).
BULKY WASTE — Includes, but not by way of limitation, discarded large
household appliances, furniture, carpets, mattresses and similar large items
which cannot be placed in a covered container and which are acceptable at
the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority (CRRA) facility in Hartford.
CARDBOARD — Corrugated boxes and similar corrugated and kraft paper
materials which have a minimum of contamination by food, liquid or other
material.
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY — Any and all property within the
Town of Ellington used for any commercial or industrial purpose as defined
in the Ellington Zoning Regulations as the same exist or may be amended
from time to time.20
COMMINGLED — Source-separated, manipulators recyclable materials
that have been mixed at the source of generation (i.e., placed in the same
container).
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those recyclable materials
designated by the Town of Ellington to be source-separated. The term
includes, but is not limited to, newspaper, glass and metal food containers,
car batteries, cardboard, office paper, scrap metal, waste oil, leaves,
designated plastics and such other items designated as recyclable from time
to time by CRRA.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste material, except by-product material,
source material or special nuclear material as defined in Connecticut
General Statutes § 22a-151, which may pose a present or potential hazard
to human health or the environment when improperly disposed of, treated,
stored, transported, or otherwise managed, including:
Hazardous waste identified in accordance with § 3001 of the Federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. § 6901 et
seq.);
A.
Hazardous waste identified by regulation by the Department of
Environmental Protection; and
B.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 149-12 SOLID WASTE § 149-12
149:153
INTERMEDIATE PROCESSING CENTER — A facility which can recycle an
item or items and market or deliver for reuse the resulting material, product
or products.
METAL FOOD CONTAINER — An aluminum, bimetal, steel, tin-plated steel,
or other metallic can, plate or tray of any size or shape used to package food
or liquid products suitable for human or animal consumption.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE or SOLID WASTE — Includes all putrescible and
nonputrescible solid or semisolid wastes, including smattered or wet wastes
with insufficient moisture and other liquid contents to be free flowing,
garbage, rubbish, ashes, demolition and construction wastes and other
discarded materials resulting from domestic operations and activities, but
does not include solids or dissolved materials in domestic sewage or other
significant pollutants in water resources. "Solid waste" shall not include or
refer to bulky waste, special wastes, and recyclables.
NEWSPAPER — Used or discarded newsprint of the type distributed daily
or weekly which has no contamination by food or other material.
OFFICE PAPER — Used or discarded high-grade white paper and manila
paper, including but not limited to paper utilized for file folders, tab cards,
writing, typing, printing, computer printing, and photocopying, which is
suitable for recycling and which has no contamination. Office paper
generated by households is excluded.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Materials which would otherwise become solid
waste, which can be separated, collected and processed and returned to
economic use in the form of raw materials or products.
RECYCLING — Any process by which materials which would otherwise
become solid waste are separated, collected and processed and returned to
economic use in the form of raw materials or products.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — Specifically marked plastic containers
provided by the contractor or the Town to each dwelling unit in the Town.
RESIDENT — Any human being residing within the Town of Ellington on a
temporary or permanent basis.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any building and/or structure, or portion thereof,
which is used for residential housing purposes, irrespective of whether
the resident therein is transient, temporary or permanent, and having
three or fewer distinct living units. Condominium units shall be considered
residential units whether or not a building or complex contains more than
three units. Multifamily complexes or more than three units under a single
ownership are specifically not included in this definition.
SCRAP METAL — Used or discarded items made of ferrous metals,
aluminum, brass, copper, lead, chromium, tin, nickel or alloys thereof,
including but not limited to white goods.
Polychlorinated biphenyls in concentrations greater than 50 parts per
million (C.G.S. § 22a-115).
C.
§ 149-12 ELLINGTON CODE § 149-12
149:154
SPECIAL WASTE — Flammable waste, countenanced waste (e.g., drum,
barrel, portable tank, box, pail, etc.), waste transported in a bulk tanker,
liquid waste, sludge waste, residue and debris from the cleanup of a spill or
release of chemical substances, commercial products or any other special
wastes, contaminated soil, waste, residue, debris and articles from the
cleanup of a site or facility formerly used for the generation, storage,
treatment, recycling, reclamation or disposal of any other special wastes,
dead animals, manure, explosive substances, radioactive materials,
materials which have been exposed to highly infectious or contagious
diseases, hazardous materials, tires and yard waste.
SOURCE-SEPARATE — To separate recyclable materials from the solid
waste stream at the point of waste generation.
STORAGE BATTERY — Lead acid batteries or other batteries used in motor
vehicles, such as, but not limited to, automobiles, airplanes, boats,
recreational vehicles, and tractors.
WASTE OIL — Crankcase oil that has been utilized in internal combustion
engines.
§ 149-13. Effective date.
This article shall become effective July 15, 1993.
§ 149-14. Solid waste collection program established.
Commencing on the effective date set forth above, the Town shall provide
curbside collection of solid waste for all residents of residential property
(including condominiums but excluding apartments).
§ 149-15. Residential unit collection.
A. Containers. Each residential unit owner or occupant will furnish
containers at his expense for collection of waste.
B. Transporting of solid waste materials. The Town will contract with a
licensed firm (contractor) which will pick up the solid waste material
on a designated day and transport said materials to the designated
disposal facility or transfer station. The contractor will leave the empty
containers at the curbside, and the resident shall be responsible for the
safekeeping of the container.
C. Schedule for pickup of solid waste materials.
(1) Municipal solid waste. The contractor shall pick up the solid waste
materials left on a weekly basis. The Selectmen shall establish a
schedule for collection of said materials and shall publicly advertise
said schedule. The schedule shall be the same as used for collection
of recyclables.
(2) Bulky waste. The contractor shall pick up bulky waste once a month.
The Selectmen shall establish a schedule for collection of said
materials and shall publicly advertise said schedule.
§ 149-12 SOLID WASTE § 149-16
149:155
§ 149-16. Nonresidential unit collection.
The Town will not provide collection service as set forth in § 149-15B
and C above for nonresidential units or establishments. It shall be the
responsibility of each of these establishments or its agent to have said
solid waste material collected and to enter into a private agreement with
a contractor to have the material properly transported to an approved
disposal site or transfer station.
§ 149-17. Preparation of solid waste for collection.
A. Weekly recycling and municipal waste collections. The following
recyclables and municipal solid waste placed by residents for collection
pursuant to the program established in accordance with this article shall
be prepared for collection as follows:
(1) On the day designated for collection of the solid waste materials
and recyclables, each resident, including condominium owners, shall
place all municipal solid waste in appropriate containers curbside or
as close as practicable to the collection vehicle's route by 6:00 a.m.
on the designated collection day. "Curbside" refers to that portion of
the right-of-way adjacent to paved or traveled roadways.
(2) The contractor may decline to collect any solid waste or recyclables
not so placed and not contained within bins, containers or bags or
neatly bundled or bagged. Where the contractor has reason to leave
solid waste uncollected at a residence, he or his agents shall inform
the resident by written notice left with the uncollected municipal
solid waste as to why the solid waste was not collected, i.e.,
contaminated with recyclables, hazardous waste, or bulky waste,
unapproved containers or bundles, or improper placement, etc.
B. Special waste. The contractor is not required to provide such collection,
transportation and disposal services for special wastes if contracted to
do so by customers under separate written contracts negotiated between
the contractor and the customer generating such special waste.
§ 149-18. Waste haulers.
A. All waste haulers and collectors of any type of solid waste, special waste,
bulky waste or recyclable waste shall register with the Department
of Public Works and gain Town approval for hauling material prior to
any transporting or collecting of any materials. The Selectmen shall
adopt and implement application forms to identify the waste hauler, his
address, name of the responsible person, mailing address, telephone
number, and evidence of insurance for general liability for operation of
a motor vehicle and contamination resulting from improper handling of
waste material in the Town. A fee for such registration shall be set by the
Board of Selectmen.
B. No waste hauler or collector shall knowingly mix recyclable material or
special waste with other solid waste.
C. Any waste hauler or collector who or which violates this article shall
be subject to the penalties provided herein as well as those penalties
provided by the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 149-16 ELLINGTON CODE § 149-19
149:156
§ 149-19. Implementation.
The Selectmen are hereby granted the authority to adopt regulations,
policies or procedures to implement the following:
A. The method and time of residential pickup of waste material.
B. Amendments to the list if items included within any category or
definition of waste.
C. Changes in the location of any collection centers.
D. Regulations to identify, qualify and assure financial and general
compliance of waste haulers with this article.
E. Setting fees payable by each residential unit owner to cover the cost of
this service and prescribing the methods of billing and collection.
F. Any claim or debt due for such a service charge shall bear interest from
the due date at the rate and in the manner provided by the General
Statutes for delinquent property taxes if such service charge is not
paid within 30 days of the due date. Each addition of interest shall be
collectible as a part of such service charge. Any such charge which
has become delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the property against
which the charge was assessed and may be collected by the Collector
of Revenue or other person designated by the Board of Selectmen in
accordance with the provisions of the General Statutes for the collection
of property taxes. Each such lien may be continued, recorded and
released in the manner provided by the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut for continuing, recording and releasing tax liens. Each such
lien shall take precedence over all other liens and encumbrances, except
taxes, and may be foreclosed in the same manner as a lien for property
taxes. Any such charge may also be collected by the Town against the
property owner in an action at law, together with the cost of collecting
the same. [Added 1-29-2007, effective 10-15-2007]
§ 149-20. Unlawful acts; penalties for offenses.
A. It shall be unlawful to combine recyclable materials or hazardous wastes
with solid waste refuse. Solid waste which has recyclable materials
commingled with it shall not be collected, and recyclable material that
has refuse commingled with it shall not be collected.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident to segregate properly the
uncollected waste and either store or dispose of it at his own expense.
C. Allowing refuse to accumulate shall subject a resident to a citation for
violation of the Sanitary Code as enforced by the North Central Health
Agency.
D. The waste containers shall be kept clean and stored in such a location
as not to constitute a nuisance or otherwise be objectionable.
E. No person having custody or control of residential premises from which
municipal solid waste is collected for disposal by the Town of Ellington
shall permit or cause any waste within his custody or control to become
a hazard to public travel, health or safety or become a nuisance of any
sort.
F. No person or corporation shall separate, recover, collect, remove, store
or dispose of any waste material within the Town of Ellington, except as
§ 149-19 SOLID WASTE § 149-20
149:157
specifically authorized by the Town of Ellington or the provisions of this
article or related ordinances.
G. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any
provision of this article or any of the rules and regulations promulgated
pursuant hereto shall be guilty of an infraction as provided by the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, and the fines established
pursuant thereto. This article and the regulations pursuant thereto may
be enforced by police officers of the Ellington Resident Trooper's office
by citation issued by the same.
H. Any person who illegally disposes of bulky, hazardous, special and/or
solid waste at a location in the Town of Ellington except as permitted
under this article shall be subject to the following penalties:
(1) For the first offense, a fine of $1,000.
(2) For the second offense, a fine of $2,000.
(3) For the third offense, a fine of $3,000.
§ 149-21. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable. If any provision of this article or
its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, said invalidity
shall not offset any other provision or application of this article which can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application of this article.
§ 149-20 ELLINGTON CODE § 149-21
149:158
Chapter 154
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 36.
Fire zones — See Ch. 74, Art. I.
Road Improvement Fund — See Ch. 80, Art. I.
Sidewalk Improvement Fund — See Ch. 80,
Art. III.
Sewers — See Ch. 143.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 172.
Extension of water mains — See Ch. 180, Art.
I.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 225.
§ 149-21 SOLID WASTE § 149-21
149:159

ARTICLE I
Drainage on Town Highways
[Adopted effective 4-22-1966; amended effective 3-23-1968]
§ 154-1. Approval required.
On and after the effective date of this article, approval of the First
Selectman shall be required before any person, firm or corporation shall:
A. Move, alter or disturb any existing drainage ditch or culvert upon any
public highway which the Town is obligated to maintain or which drains
such highway;
B. Excavate any ditch or trench for any purpose upon such highway; or
C. Install or change any driveway connecting with or draining upon such
highway.
§ 154-2. Performance bond.
The First Selectman may require the person, firm or corporation to whom
or to which approval is granted under § 154-1 hereof to post a performance
bond or other security acceptable to said First Selectman to guarantee the
proper functioning of the installation or change of said facility.
§ 154-1 SOLID WASTE § 154-2
149:161

ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice Removal from Sidewalks
[Adopted 10-7-2002, effective 11-2-2002]
§ 154-3. Definitions.
The following words shall, unless the context requires otherwise, be
construed and understood as follows:
SIDEWALK — Any portion of the street, usually lying on either side thereof,
between the curb and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of
pedestrians by virtue of having been improved by pavement, whether of
asphalt, concrete or stone.
STREET — Includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes,
viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all of the public
thoroughfares in the Town and means all that part thereof from property
line to property line of the premises abutting thereon.
§ 154-4. Removal of snow and ice required.
A. Duty to remove. Any fall of snow or sleet upon any sidewalk in the Town
or any ice upon such sidewalks shall be removed by the owner, occupant
or person having the care, maintenance or rental of the land, building
or premises adjoining or fronting upon such sidewalk or connected
therewith.
B. Time within which snow is to be removed. Such removal of snow or sleet
as provided for in Subsection A above shall be made within 24 hours
following the cessation of the fall of snow or sleet.
§ 154-5. Unremovable snow or ice to be made safe.
If snow, sleet or ice cannot be wholly removed as provided in § 154-4 above,
the owner, occupant or person having the care, maintenance or rental of
such premises shall remove so much thereof as is reasonably possible and
sprinkle sufficient sand or other proper substance in such quantity over the
entire surface of the unremovable snow, sleet or ice remaining upon such
sidewalk as may be required to keep the same in safe condition for public
travel at all times.
§ 154-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates or refuses or neglects to comply with the provisions
of the preceding sections shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$25 for a first violation, $100 for a second violation and $100 for each
subsequent violation. Each day of failure to comply with the requirements
of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 154-7. Removal by Town; recovery of expenses.
A. Town to clear sidewalks at owner's expense. In addition to any other
penalty provided by law, if any owner or occupant fails to comply with
the provisions of §§ 154-4 and 154-5 above, the Department of Public
§ 154-3 SOLID WASTE § 154-7
149:163
Works and its employees may clean and remove all snow and ice from
such sidewalks. The expense of such removal shall be a lien upon the
premises adjoining and abutting on such sidewalks, and the Board of
Selectmen may cause a certificate of lien therefor to be recorded in the
Town Clerk's office within 60 days after such removal.
B. Foreclosure of lien. The expense of cleaning and removal of snow and ice
by the Department of Public Works as provided in Subsection A above
and the cost of the lien therefor may be entered in the next succeeding
rate bill for taxes against the owner of the premises with the tax assessed
upon such premises, and if such expense and such cost of lien are paid
with such taxes, the lien shall be discharged; if not so paid, the lien may
be foreclosed in the manner provided by law for the foreclosure of other
liens for local improvements.
§ 154-8. Liability of sidewalk abutter.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 13a-149 of the Connecticut General
Statutes or any other general statute or special act, the Town of Ellington
shall not be liable to any person injured in person or property caused
by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk unless the Town
of Ellington is the owner or person in possession and control of land
abutting such sidewalk, other than land used as a highway or street,
provided that the Town of Ellington shall be liable for its affirmative acts
with respect to such sidewalk.
B. The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public
sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presence
of ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the sidewalk
abutting his property as the municipality had prior to the effective date
of this article adopted pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut General
Statutes § 7-163a and shall be liable to persons injured in person or
property where a breach of said duty is the proximate cause of said
injury. If the Department of Public Works clears the sidewalk of snow,
sleet or ice pursuant to § 154-7A hereof, it shall be deemed the agent
of the abutter responsible for said clearing and none of such work shall
constitute an affirmative act of the Town under Subsection A of this
section.
C. No action to recover damages for injury to the person or to property
caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk against a
person who owns or is in possession and control of land abutting a public
sidewalk shall be brought but within two years from the date when the
injury is first sustained.
§ 154-7 ELLINGTON CODE § 154-8
149:164
ARTICLE III
Right-of-Way Permit
[Adopted 9-21-2015, effective 10-14-2015]
§ 154-9. Working within the public right-of-way; scope and purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to regulate any excavation or placement
of obstructions within the limits of the public right-of-way, including but
not limited to curbs, sidewalks, driveways, drainage installations and to
establish responsibility for such excavations and obstructions until they are
restored or removed.
§ 154-10. Permit required.
Except as otherwise provided, no person, firm, corporation, public utility
or public agency other than the Town or its agent shall excavate any part
of any street or highway under the control of or maintained by the Town,
or dig below the surface thereof, or place any obstruction thereon except
customary United States Postal Service mailbox(es) and their support(s),
or construct a driveway entrance from any street without first obtaining
a permit therefor from the Director of Public Works or his authorized
representative.
§ 154-11. Application for permit.
No permit required by § 154-10 shall be issued until after the receipt of
an application, to be made in writing on forms provided by the Director of
Public Works and signed by the applicant or his authorized representative.
§ 154-12. Surety bond.
No permit required under § 154-10 shall be issued until after the applicant
has deposited with the Town a surety bond or other security acceptable to
the First Selectman guaranteeing that any excavation or obstruction made
under such permit will be restored or removed as required as the case may
be without cost to the Town. Such bond shall be in an amount and for a
period of time determined to be appropriate by the Director of Public Works
and shall be issued by a surety company licensed to do business in and
having a place of business in the state.
§ 154-13. Liability insurance.
No permit required by § 154-10 shall be issued until after the applicant
has filed with the Town a certificate of insurance naming the Town as an
additional insured, in form and amount as determined to be appropriate by
the Director of Public Works. Furthermore, the applicant shall indemnify
and save harmless the Town, its officers and employees and the Director of
Public Works and his agents from all suits and actions of every name and
description, including reasonable attorney's fees, brought against the Town
or any officer or employee of the Town for or on account of any injuries
§ 154-9 SOLID WASTE § 154-13
149:165
or damages received or sustained by any persons in consequence of or
resulting from any work performed by the applicant, his servants or agents
or of or from any act or omission of said applicant, his servants or agents.
§ 154-14. Fee for permit.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to set a reasonable fee for permits
issued under the provisions of this article and may update the fee as
necessary. Such fee shall be waived in the case of any firm, corporation or
agency that, by special charter or franchise, is legally authorized, in the
course of its normal activities to make excavations or place obstructions in
the limits of public highways in the Town.
§ 154-15. Issuance of permit.
Upon the filing of an application, payment of the required application fee
and submission of all required documentation, the Director of Public Works
shall cause to be issued, on forms provided by him, a permit specifying the
nature and location of the work to be done; the terms and conditions of such
work, which terms and conditions shall be based upon the requirements of
the public welfare and safety; and the time within which the work is to be
completed, which shall not be longer than one year from the date of the
permit.
§ 154-16. Inspection by Director.
A. The Director of Public Works or his authorized representative is
empowered to inspect, or cause to have inspected, at any time any or all
work being performed under a permit issued under the provisions of this
article.
B. If, in the opinion of the Director, the public safety and welfare so
warrant, or if the work is not satisfactory or not in accordance with
Town standards, he may direct the permittee to restore any excavation
or remove any obstruction within 12 hours of such notice; and, if such
excavation is not restored or such obstruction removed within that
period, he may cause such work to be done, and the permittee shall be
responsible for the full expense of such work.
§ 154-17. Penalty for violation.
The violation of this article shall be unlawful and the fine for such offense
shall be not more than $100. Each day any such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 154-13 ELLINGTON CODE § 154-17
149:166
Chapter 160
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Budget and finance — See Ch. 28.
§ 154-17 SOLID WASTE § 154-17
149:167

ARTICLE I
Reimbursement to Tax-Exempt Organizations
[Adopted effective 3-23-1968]
§ 160-1. Effective date of property tax exemption.
Any property tax exemption authorized to any organization by Subdivisions
(7) to (16) inclusive of § 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision
of 1958, as amended, shall be effective as of the date of acquisition of the
property to which the exemption applies.
§ 160-2. Application for reimbursement.
Any tax-exempt organization, upon written application to the Board of
Selectmen, together with supporting proof of claim satisfactory to said
Board, shall be entitled to reimbursement for any property tax properly paid
to the Town of Ellington by said organization for a period subsequent to date
of acquisition and to reimbursement for any such tax properly paid by the
prior owner for a period subsequent to said date of acquisition for which
said organization reimbursed the prior owner on transfer of title to such
property.
§ 160-3. Date of acquisition.
Date of acquisition, as used in §§ 160-1 and 160-2 herein, shall mean the
date of recording the instrument transferring title to the eligible tax-exempt
organization on the Land Records of the Town of Ellington.
§ 160-1 SOLID WASTE § 160-3
149:169

ARTICLE II
Exemption for Solar Energy or Cooling Systems
[Adopted effective 3-10-1977]
§ 160-4. Exemption granted.
The Town of Ellington, by the adoption of this article, exempts from taxation
any building or addition to a building, the construction of which is
commenced on or after October 1, 1976, and before October 1, 1991, which
is equipped with a solar energy heating or cooling system, to the extent of
the amount by which the assessed valuation of such real property equipped
with the conventional portion of the heating or cooling system, exclusive
of any portion of such system related to solar energy, provided that this
exemption shall apply only to the first 15 assessment years following
construction of such building or addition, in the manner of and as provided
in § 12-81(56)(a), (b) and (c) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 160-4 SOLID WASTE § 160-4
149:171

ARTICLE III
Exemption for Ambulance-Type Vehicles
[Adopted effective 8-1-1983]
§ 160-5. Exemption granted.
Any ambulance-type motor vehicle used exclusively for the purpose of
transporting any medically incapacitated individual, excepting any such
vehicle used to transport any such individual for payment, is hereby exempt
from personal property taxation.
§ 160-6. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of § 12-81c of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 160-5 SOLID WASTE § 160-6
149:173

ARTICLE IV
Abatement for Historic Properties
[Adopted effective 8-1-1983]
§ 160-7. Findings.
A. Pursuant to § 12-127a of the Connecticut General Statutes, it is hereby
found that the structures located on real property at 70 Main Street,
Ellington, Connecticut, owned by the Ellington Historical Society, Inc.,
are of historical or architectural merit.
B. Further, it is hereby found that real property taxes on the Grand List
of October 1, 1981, payable January 1, 1983, and on the Grand List of
October 1, 1982, payable on July l, 1983, and January 1, 1984, assessed
against said real property are a material factor which threatens the
continued existence of the structures located on said real property,
necessitating either their demolition or remodeling in a manner which
destroys their historical or architectural value.
§ 160-8. Real property taxes abated; conditions.
Said real property taxes are hereby abated; provided, however, that if after
such abatement such structures are demolished or remodeled in a way
which destroys their architectural or historic value, the then owner shall
pay to the Town an amount equal to the total amount of taxes which have
been abated.
§ 160-7 SOLID WASTE § 160-8
149:175

ARTICLE V
Exemption for Blind Persons
[Adopted effective 3-17-1986]
§ 160-9. Statutory authority; additional exemption granted.
Pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 85-165,21 any person entitled to the
exemption from property tax applicable to the assessed value of property up
to the amount of $3,000 as provided under Subdivision (17) of § 12-81 of the
Connecticut General Statutes shall be entitled to an additional exemption
from such tax in an amount up to $2,000 of such assessed value, provided
that the total of such person's adjusted gross income as determined for
purposes of the federal income tax plus any other income of such person
not included in such adjusted gross income, individually, if unmarried, or
jointly, if married, in the calendar year ending immediately preceding the
assessment date with respect to which such additional exemption is allowed
is not more than $14,000 if such person is married or not more than $12,000
if such person is not married.
§ 160-10. Application for exemption.
Any person submitting a claim for the additional exemption as provided
under § 160-9 of this article shall be required to file an application, on a
form prepared for such purpose by the Assessor, not later than the date
of the assessment list with respect to which such additional exemption is
claimed. Each such application shall include a copy of such person's federal
income tax return or, in the event a return is not filed, such evidence related
to income as may be required by the Assessor for the tax year of such
person ending immediate prior to the approval of a claim for such additional
exemption.
21.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 12-81j.
§ 160-9 SOLID WASTE § 160-10
149:177

ARTICLE VI
Minimum Refund
[Adopted 11-13-2000, effective 12-12-2000]
§ 160-11. Tax Collector authorized to retain excess payments.
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to retain payments received in
excess of the amount of taxes, interest and lien fees which have accrued and
are due from a taxpayer, provided that the excess payment is less than $5.
Pursuant to this authorization the Tax Collector is authorized to decline to
process any request for rebate of such minimal excess payment.
§ 160-12. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to authorize the Tax Collector
to refuse to make change to permit the tender of the correct amount.
§ 160-13. Crediting of excess payments.
Any such excess payments shall be credited to the over/short account.
§ 160-11 SOLID WASTE § 160-13
149:179

ARTICLE VII
Exemption for Farm Equipment
[Adopted 10-7-2002, effective 11-2-2002]
§ 160-14. Purpose; exemption granted.
The Town of Ellington wishes to foster its heritage as a farming community
and to encourage the same hereby grants an additional exemption from
property tax for farm machinery and equipment to the extent of an
additional assessed value of $100,000 pursuant to Connecticut General
Statutes § 12-91(b), in addition to the exemption of $100,000 provided
under Connecticut General Statutes § 12-91(a), for a total possible
exemption of $200,000, and subject to all of the same limitations as
provided under Connecticut General Statutes § 12-91(a) as well as the
application and qualification process provided in Subsection (d) of said
statute.
§ 160-14 SOLID WASTE § 160-14
149:181

ARTICLE VIII
Exemption for Veterans
[Adopted 6-21-2004, effective 7-16-2004]
§ 160-15. Statutory authority; additional exemption granted.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Connecticut General Statutes § 12-81f,
any veteran entitled to an exemption from property taxes in accordance
with Subdivision (19) of § 12-81 shall be entitled to an additional exemption
applicable to the assessed value of property up to the amount of $5,000,
provided that the total of such veteran's adjusted gross income as
determined under the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes § 12-81l,
as the same may be amended from time to time, for purposes of the federal
income tax plus any other income of such veteran not included in such
adjusted gross income, individually, if unmarried, or jointly, if married, in
the calendar year ending immediately preceding the assessment date with
respect to which such additional exemption is allowed is not more than the
guidelines established by the Office of Policy and Management pursuant to
Connecticut General Statutes § 12-170aa.
§ 160-16. Exemption for surviving spouse.
Any veteran's surviving spouse entitled to an exemption from property tax
in accordance with Subdivision (22) of § 12-81 of the Connecticut General
Statutes shall be entitled to an additional exemption applicable to the
assessed value or property up to the amount of $5,000, provided that
the total of such spouse's adjusted gross income as determined under the
provisions of Connecticut General Statutes § 12-81l, as the same may be
amended from time to time, for purposes of the federal income tax plus any
other income of such spouse not included in such adjusted gross income in
the calendar year ending immediately preceding the assessment date with
respect to which such additional exemption is allowed is not more than the
guidelines established by the Office of Policy and Management pursuant to
Connecticut General Statutes § 12-170aa.
§ 160-17. Application for exemption.
Any such veteran or spouse submitting a claim for such additional
exemption shall complete such application forms and provide such
supporting information as may be required by the Assessor under the
applicable statutes.
§ 160-18. Applicability.
A. This article shall become effective on the 21st day after publication
following its passage and shall be applicable with respect to the
assessment year commencing October 1, 2004, and each assessment
year thereafter.
B. Any veteran or spouse who has submitted an application and been
approved for the additional veteran's exemption under § 12-81g of the
Connecticut General Statutes shall be entitled to such exemption.
§ 160-15 SOLID WASTE § 160-18
149:183

ARTICLE IX
Waiver of Interest on Taxes Due from Property Owners Serving in
Iraq
[Adopted 2-6-2006]
§ 160-19. Qualification for waiver; term of waiver; applicability.
Any person who is domiciled with and the spouse of a member of the armed
services of the United States or of any state or of any reserve component
thereof who has been called to active service in the armed forces of the
United States for military operations that are authorized by the President
of the United States that entail military action in Iraq, and who is serving
in the Middle East on the final day that payment of such property tax or
installment or part thereof is due, shall not be charged any interest for a
period of one year on any property tax or installment or part thereof that is
payable for real property assessed on the 2003 Grand List.
§ 160-20. Proof of status.
The Tax Collector is authorized to require written proof of the abovedescribed
status in order to implement the above-described waiver of
interest.
§ 160-21. When effective.
This article shall be effective for real property accrued on the 2003 Grand
List.
§ 160-19 SOLID WASTE § 160-21
149:185

ARTICLE X
Exemption for Farm Buildings
[Adopted by Town Meeting 12-10-2012, effective 1-3-2013]
§ 160-22. Statutory authority; amount of exemption; applicability;
application requirements; appeals.
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by Connecticut General Statutes,
§ 12-91(c), that gives the Town the option to provide an additional
exemption for farm buildings, the Town hereby provides that the
Assessor shall grant a reduction on the property tax assessment for any
building used actually and exclusively in farming, as defined in C.G.S.
§ 1-1, or for any building used to provide housing for seasonal employees
of such farmer in an amount not to exceed $100,000 in the assessed
value of each eligible building.
B. The exemption shall not apply to any residence except for a building
used exclusively as a residence for seasonal employees.
C. On or before the first day of November on which the Assessor's office
is open, the owner shall make written application, on forms prescribed
by the Commissioner of Agriculture or as adopted by the Assessor,
identifying each building for which this exemption or reduction in
assessment is claimed, listing the then current assessed value of the
building and the claimed exemption. The application shall include a
notarized affidavit certifying that the owner derived at least $15,000
in gross sales or incurred at least $15,000 in expenses related to such
farming operation, with respect to the most recently completed taxable
year of such farmer prior to the commencement of the assessment year
(October 1) for which such application is made.
D. In the event the farm is owned by one person or entity and leased to
another who actually farms, then the lessee shall also file the financial
affidavit, and it is the lessee's income or expenses that must meet
the minimum amount. Any rental expense shall be a lessee expense,
except rent paid to an immediate family member or entity owned by an
immediate family member. The owner shall file an affidavit attesting to
the identity of the lessee.
E. Failure to file the application on or before the first day of November on
which the Assessor's office is open shall be considered a waiver of the
right to such exemption for the assessment year.
F. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Assessor shall have the same
rights and remedies for appeal and relief as are provided in the General
Statutes for taxpayers claiming to be aggrieved by the doings of the
Assessor.
§ 160-22 SOLID WASTE § 160-22
149:187
Chapter 172
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ambulance service — See Ch. 13.
Public assemblies — See Ch. 17.
Fire zones — See Ch. 74, Art. I.
§ 160-22 ELLINGTON CODE § 160-22
172:188
ARTICLE I
Parking on Public Highways
[Adopted 11-13-2000, effective 12-12-2000]
§ 172-1. Overnight parking; parking during winter conditions.
On and after the effective date of this article, no person shall park any
vehicle on any public highway within the Town of Ellington between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. or during and after any period of
snowfall or icy condition while said highways are hazardous to traffic and/
or the Department of Public Works is attempting to clear snow and ice from
the public highways.
§ 172-2. No-parking zones.
The Ellington Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to establish noparking
zones on areas where it finds the public safety of the motoring
public, pedestrians or emergency equipment requires it.
A. Before designating a no-parking area, the Traffic Commission shall give
the abutter(s) notice by certified mail of the proposed no-parking zone
not less than 10 days before the meeting at which the matter will be
discussed and afford the abutter the opportunity to be heard on the
issue.
B. Any no-parking zone shall be marked so as to give notice to the motorists
of the restriction.
§ 172-3. Impoundment of vehicles.
Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in a place where parking is not
permitted under § 172-1 of this article, a summons or citation may be issued
and such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by or under the direction of
a police officer or constable, by means of towing the same or otherwise, to
a vehicle pound maintained by a licensed towing service. Before the owner
or person in charge of such vehicle shall be permitted to remove the same
from such vehicle pound, he shall furnish to the towing service evidence of
his ownership or right of possession and shall sign a receipt for the same,
and he shall pay the costs of removal plus the costs of storage to the towing
service.
§ 172-4. Declaration of nuisance; penalties for offenses.
The parking of vehicles in places and at times when and where parking
is prohibited is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Any person, firm or
corporation who or which shall violate any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof in the Superior Court, be guilty of a violation of
Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148 and shall be fined as provided therein
for each such violation.
§ 172-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 172-4
172:189
Chapter 180
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 32.
Sewers — See Ch. 143.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 154.
Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch.
210.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 225.
Water Pollution Control Authority — See Chs.
305 to 330.
§ 172-4 ELLINGTON CODE § 172-4
180:190
ARTICLE I
Extension of Water Mains
[Adopted effective 11-5-1985]
§ 180-1. Administration.
The Board of Selectmen shall have the powers and duties to administer any
extension of water mains as provided for by § 7-137c of the General Statutes
of the State of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, as amended, after and in
the event the legislative body of the Town has approved such extension.
The Town Tax Collector shall be the collection agency of any assessments
made by the Board of Selectmen by virtue of action taken under § 7-137c or
7-137d of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 180-2. Assessments.
Any assessment levied by the Board of Selectmen shall comply with the
statutory requirements of § 7-137c of said General Statutes, and the
assessments against each owner of property which abuts such water main
shall not exceed the special benefit to such property. Such assessments may
be levied at any time and shall be due and payable immediately upon filing
of a lien for benefits assessed; provided, however, that said Board may allow
such assessments to be paid in installments over a period not exceeding 15
years or such lesser period as the Board shall determine, and said Board
shall fix the rate of interest to be paid on the outstanding balance of said
installments. Said Board is hereby delegated the authority to determine
the particulars of such assessments and to determine the notices to be
given to such property owners against whom assessment are levied and for
providing for the payment and collection of such assessments.
§ 180-1 WATER § 180-2
180:191

ARTICLE II
Water Consumption Records
[Adopted effective 6-3-1993]
§ 180-3. Access to records by Water Pollution Control Authority.
The Ellington Water Pollution Control Authority is authorized pursuant
to Connecticut General Statutes § 7-258 to obtain from the Connecticut
Water Company and other water companies providing water service to the
residents of the Town all necessary records to determine the consumption
of water by customers of such companies, such records being deemed
necessary or desirable to the operation of the municipal sewer system.
The Water Pollution Control Authority may enter into such contracts and
agreements, including hold harmless agreements, for the release of
customer usage information as it deems necessary and appropriate with
such water companies for the purpose of obtaining access to the abovementioned
records.
§ 180-3 WATER § 180-3
180:193
Part II: Regulations
Chapter 210
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
Chapter 220
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town employees — See Charter, Ch. XII. Officers and employees — See Ch. 109.
§ 220-1. PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
§ 220-1.1. Purpose.
Created pursuant to Chapter XII, Section 1204 of the Town of Ellington
Charter, the contents of this handbook are the personnel policies and rules
of the Town of Ellington and are applicable to all employees provided
they are not in direct conflict with any collective bargaining agreements
or individual contracts and with the exceptions as noted below under
"Scope."22
§ 220-1.2. Contract disclaimer.
Since this handbook is only a summary of the Town's expectations compiled
for the convenience of its employees and supervisors, it is not intended to
cover all topics or circumstances. Additionally, the policies and procedures
in this handbook are not to be construed as an expressed or implied
contract of employment.
§ 220-1.3. Revisions.
In order to adapt to the Town's changing needs and to respond to specific
situations as they may arise, these policies may change from time to time.
As such, the Town, acting through the Board of Selectmen, reserves the
right to revise, discontinue, suspend, or modify any part(s) of this handbook
at any time with or without prior notice. The Town's actions, from time to
time, may also vary from the policies and procedures, or any subsequent
policies and procedures that may be implemented. This handbook replaces
(supersedes) any and all other or previous Town employee manuals and/or
personnel policies or practices, whether written or oral, which are contrary
to the policies contained herein.
22.Editor's Note: See § 220-1.4.
§ 180-3 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-1.4
180:194
§ 220-1.4. Scope.
A. The terms of these policies shall apply to all employees and elected
officials to all positions now or hereafter created in the Town of
Ellington, except the following:
(1) Employees of the Town of Ellington Board of Education;
(2) Volunteer personnel; and
(3) Independent contractors.
B. While the above categories of personnel shall not be eligible for any
of the benefits set forth in these policies, they will be expected to
comply with the Town's rules and regulations regarding conduct while
performing services for the Town.
§ 220-1.5. Application.
These policies shall serve as a guide to the administration of a personnel
system in keeping with basic merit principles. The policies are not allinclusive
and final discretion as to the interpretation or the appropriate
course of action concerning a particular personnel matter shall be that of
the First Selectman under the supervision of the Board of Selectmen. A
violation of these policies may, at the determination of the First Selectman
under the supervision of the Board of Selectmen, result in disciplinary
action up to and including dismissal.
§ 220-1.6. At-will employment.
None of the Town's policies, procedures or practices, whether expressed
here or elsewhere, whether oral or in writing, are to be viewed as creating
any promises about the nature and duration of employment and no
employee has a vested property right, constitutional or otherwise, or any
contractual rights of employment in a job or position with the Town, unless
as otherwise may be provided for by an applicable collective bargaining
agreement, an individual written employment contract or by applicable law.
Rather, the Town follows a policy of "at-will" employment, which means that
either the employee or the Town can terminate the employment relationship
with or without cause at any time, unless as otherwise may be provided for
by an applicable collective bargaining agreement, or an individual written
employment contract or by applicable law.
§ 220-2. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY STATEMENT AND
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.
§ 220-2.1. Equal employment opportunity statement.
A. The Town is an equal opportunity employer, dedicated to a policy of
nondiscrimination in employment on any basis prohibited by law. The
Town considers applicants for all positions without regard to race, color,
religion, gender, ethnicity, national origin, age, disability, marital status,
veteran status, military status, sexual orientation, genetic information,
gender identity/expression, ancestry, political belief or criminal record
or any other protected status, in accordance with the requirements
and any exceptions under applicable state or federal law. The Town is
§ 220-1.4 WATER § 220-2.1
180:195
committed to providing equal opportunities in terms of its recruiting
and hiring practices. The Town is also committed to providing equal
opportunities to its employees in all of its employment practices,
including but not limited to compensation, training, transfers and
promotions, and in the provision of all of its employee benefit programs.
B. The Town further pledges its strong commitment to ensure that all
contractors and subcontractors who do business with the Town provide
equal opportunities in employment to all qualified persons solely on the
basis of job-related skills, ability and merit.
C. The Town further pledges that all Town-sponsored training and social
and recreational programs will be administered without regard to any
legally protected status.
D. As part of its commitment to equal opportunities, the Town also expects
all of its employees to adhere to this policy of nondiscrimination. The
Town will take prompt action upon the receipt of a complaint of unlawful
discrimination and will take appropriate corrective action, including
disciplinary measures if necessary, to remedy any acts of unlawful
discrimination.
§ 220-2.2. Affirmative action.
A. The Town applies affirmative action to employ and advance in
employment employees and applicants for employment who are qualified
females, minorities, individuals with disabilities or individuals who are
qualified veterans. In furtherance of the Town's policy regarding
affirmative action and equal employment opportunity, the Town will
maintain a written affirmative action program which sets forth the
policies, practices and procedures which the Town has committed to
applying in order to ensure that its policy of nondiscrimination and
affirmative action for qualified females, minorities, individuals with
disabilities and veterans is accomplished. The objective of these policies
and programs is to attract and promote individuals who are qualified
and/or trainable for available positions by virtue of job related standards
or education, training and personal qualifications.
B. This policy has the full backing and support of the First Selectman and
the Board of Selectmen. The cooperation and support of all employees
is expected. Overall responsibility for directing and implementing this
policy has been assigned to the First Selectman, who serves as the
Affirmative Action Officer and Equal Employment Opportunity
Coordinator. In this capacity, the First Selectman shall, among other
things, annually review and examine the effectiveness of the Town's
affirmative action program and its compliance with applicable
affirmative action and antidiscrimination laws.
C. Employees and applicants shall not be subjected to harassment,
intimidation, threats, coercion or discrimination because they have
engaged in or may engage in any of the following activities: (1) filing a
complaint; (2) assisting or participating in an investigation, compliance
evaluation, hearing, or any other activity related to the administration of
the affirmative action provisions of Executive Order 11246, as amended,
the Vietnam Era Veterans' Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974, as
§ 220-2.1 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-2.2
180:196
amended (VEVRAA) or any other federal, state or local law requiring
equal opportunity for individuals who are qualified disabled veterans,
armed forces service medal veterans, recently separated veterans or
other protected veterans, or related to the administration of the
affirmative action provisions of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as
amended (Section 503), or any other federal, state or local law requiring
equal opportunity for qualified individuals with disabilities or any other
applicable affirmative action and anti-discrimination laws; (3) opposing
any act or practice made unlawful by Executive Order 11246, VEVRAA
or Section 503 or their respective implementing regulations or any
other federal, state or local law requiring equal opportunity for qualified
individuals with disabilities and qualified veterans or any other
applicable affirmative action and antidiscrimination laws; or (4)
exercising any other right made unlawful by Executive Order 11246,
VEVRAA or Section 503 or their implementing regulations in this part or
any other applicable affirmative action and antidiscrimination laws.
§ 220-2.3. Workplace accommodations.
A. The Town will provide reasonable accommodations to a qualified
individual with a disability, as defined under applicable law, who has
made the Town aware of his or her disability, provided that such
accommodation does not constitute an undue hardship on the Town.
Applicants or employees with a disability who believe that they need a
reasonable accommodation to perform the essential functions of their
job should contact their supervisor and/or the First Selectman.
B. On receipt of an accommodation request, the Town will review potential
reasonable accommodation(s) that the Town may be able to make to
enable employees to perform the essential functions of their job. The
Town will determine the feasibility of the requested accommodation
considering various factors, including, but not limited to, the nature
and cost of the accommodation, the Town's overall financial resources,
and the accommodation's impact on the Town's operations, including
its impact on the ability of other employees to perform their duties
and on the Town's ability to conduct business and provide services.
As part of this process, an applicant or employee may be required
to provide authorization to the Town to communicate with and obtain
documentation from his or her health care provider(s) regarding the
medical condition(s) for which reasonable accommodation is sought, and
may further be required to be evaluated by a doctor of the Town's choice.
All such medical information discussed and received will be treated as
confidential in accordance with and as allowable by applicable law.
C. The Town will not retaliate against any applicant or employee because
of a request for reasonable accommodation. If an applicant or employee
believes that he or she has been discriminated or retaliated against
because of his or her disability and/or has been unlawfully denied or
retaliated against for requesting a reasonable accommodation, he or she
should follow the reporting procedures outlined in the Town's policy
against workplace discrimination and harassment and the Town will
respond as detailed in that policy. An employee or applicant also has
§ 220-2.2 WATER § 220-2.3
180:197
the right to file a complaint for any claimed acts of discrimination or
harassment with the applicable state or federal agency.
§ 220-2.4. Pregnancy accommodation.
A. The Town will provide a reasonable accommodation to an applicant or
employee due to her pregnancy, childbirth or need to breastfeed or
express milk at work, unless doing so would pose an undue hardship
(e.g., the accommodation would require a significant difficulty or
expense in light of the circumstances). Depending on the circumstances,
reasonable accommodations may include: being permitted to sit while
working; providing more frequent or longer breaks; periodic rest;
assistance with manual labor; job restructuring; light duty assignments;
modified work schedules; temporary transfers to less strenuous or
hazardous work; time off to recover from childbirth; and break time and
appropriate facilities for expressing milk.
B. Applicants or employees who believe they need a reasonable
accommodation because of pregnancy, childbirth or other related
conditions should contact their supervisor and/or the First Selectman.
Any such request will be handled in the same manner as any other
request for a workplace accommodation.
C. The Town will not retaliate against any applicant or employee because
of a request for reasonable accommodation. If an applicant or employee
believes that she has been discriminated or retaliated against because
of her pregnancy, childbirth or other related conditions and/or has been
unlawfully denied or retaliated against for requesting a reasonable
accommodation, she should follow the reporting procedures outlined
in the Town's policy against workplace discrimination and harassment
and the Town will respond as detailed in that policy. An employee or
applicant also has the right to file a complaint for any claimed acts of
discrimination or harassment with the applicable state or federal agency.
§ 220-3. ADMINISTRATION OF PERSONNEL POLICIES.
§ 220-3.1. First selectman.
The First Selectman will administer all personnel policies and procedures of
the Town. The First Selectman may delegate the actual operations involved
in administering these policies to such person or persons as s/he deems
appropriate, including the department heads. The First Selectman, under
the supervision of the Board of Selectmen, shall have the authority to
impose discipline on Town employees, up to and including dismissal.
§ 220-3.2. Department heads.
The department heads shall have the responsibility to recommend the
selection, retention and promotion of employees within their departments.
Department heads shall be responsible to train employees within their
department and to properly administer all personnel policies and
procedures of the Town of Ellington. They are expected to supervise their
staff effectively as follows: to provide written performance evaluations; to
§ 220-2.3 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-3.2
180:198
notify the First Selectman of recommended changes in duties or personnel
status; and to recommend salary increases. Among other duties, all
department heads shall report directly to the First Selectman or immediate
supervisor, shall be required to attend department head meetings, shall
prepare an annual budget proposal for their departments, and shall
represent the Town in the resolution of employee grievances.
§ 220-3.3. Employees.
It shall be the responsibility of all employees to acquaint themselves
thoroughly with the material in this handbook and any subsequent revisions
hereto. Employees are encouraged to submit suggestions for changes in
personnel policy and procedures for improvement of Town personnel
administration as appropriate.
§ 220-4. RECRUITMENT, SELECTION AND APPOINTMENT OF
EMPLOYEES.
§ 220-4.1. Recruitment of employees.
A. Announcements. The First Selectman shall cause to be made known
all vacancies for all positions that s/he intends to fill by posting
announcements of such vacancies on a bulletin board in general
government buildings. At his/her discretion, the First Selectman may
publish job announcements in newspapers, on the Town website,
journals or other media outlets and in such places as s/he deems
advisable. Job announcements shall specify: the title of the position to
be filled; an initial wage or salary range for the position; a general
description of the nature of the work to be performed; minimum
qualifications for the position; a closing date for receipt of applications;
and any other information the First Selectman deems appropriate for
inclusion on the job announcement. When recruiting for positions that
will have a responsibility for carrying out policies established by elected
or appointed boards or commissions, the First Selectman may seek
the advice of such boards or commissions as to the qualifications of
candidates for these positions.
B. Recruitment area. Individuals shall be recruited from a geographic area
as wide as is necessary to assure obtaining well-qualified candidates for
the various types of positions. Nothing shall prohibit the First Selectman
from contacting individuals and encouraging such individuals to apply
for employment with the Town.
§ 220-4.2. Selection of employees.
A. Application. Applications are accepted only when there is an opening
and listed job vacancy which was previously approved by the Board of
Selectmen. Each candidate for employment with the Town shall make
application on the standard form prescribed and provided by the First
Selectman's office. Such information may be required as is deemed
necessary in order to judge the applicant's qualifications for services in
the Town. Each application shall be signed by the applicant. Applications
§ 220-3.2 WATER § 220-4.2
180:199
shall not be returned to an applicant but will remain on file for two years,
after which time such applications may be destroyed with appropriate
approval from the Connecticut State Library Public Records
Administration. In cases where the First Selectman shall determine
that prior service of a current Town employee properly qualifies for
promotion to a vacant position, the First Selectman may make a direct
promotional appointment with recommendation from the department
head and with the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
B. Disqualification. Failure to submit a signed and fully completed
application on the proper form may result in disqualification of the
applicant/candidate. Applications failing to reflect the minimum
qualifications for the position may be disqualified. Applications received
after the announced closing date for the receipt of applications may
result in disqualification of the application.
C. Competitive examinations. The First Selectman shall have the discretion
to administer competitive examinations to help determine the merit
and fitness for duty of qualified applicants. Examinations shall relate
to those matters that will test fairly the capacity and fitness of the
qualified applicants to discharge efficiently the duties of the position.
Examinations may include a rating of qualifications and experience,
written, oral, and physical or performance tests or any combination
thereof. Such examinations may take into consideration reasonable
factors such as education, experience, aptitude, knowledge, character,
physical fitness, or any other qualifications that, in the judgment of the
First Selectman, enter into the relative fitness of applicants.
D. References. As part of the pre-employment procedure, former
supervisors, employers and other references provided by candidates on
the standard application form may be contacted, as deemed necessary.
Any references and other investigation shall be documented and made
part of the applicant's file. Any reference checks shall be completed
prior to an offer of employment and the information be made part of
the applicant's file. All references are to be handled as confidential
information.
E. Physicals and substance abuse testing. In the event that an applicant
receives a job offer, s/he may also be required to submit to a medical
examination and/or drug and/or alcohol testing that must be successfully
completed before commencing work.
§ 220-4.3. Appointment of employees.
All vacancies that the Town chooses to fill shall be filled by regular
appointment, temporary appointment, promotion, demotion or transfer.
Only qualified candidates shall be considered for appointment. Appointment
to a vacancy and any changes regarding appointments shall be made by
the First Selectman, as authorized by the Board of Selectmen, from the
qualified candidates pursuant to the terms of Section 1201 of the Town
Charter. The First Selectman is authorized to appoint part-time and
temporary personnel and to advise the Board of Selectmen of such action.
§ 220-4.4. Categories of employment.
§ 220-4.2 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-4.4
180:200
A. All employees are classified as either "exempt" or "nonexempt" in
accordance with state and federal wage and hour laws. These
classifications govern wage and salary procedures.
EXEMPT EMPLOYEES — Individuals who are paid based upon an annual
salary which is intended as full compensation for all hours worked and
therefore, exempt employees are not eligible to receive overtime pay
for hours worked beyond 40 hours in any payroll week. Rather, exempt
employees will be expected to work pursuant to the operational needs
of the Town and to expend whatever effort is necessary to meet the
requirements of their position.
NONEXEMPT EMPLOYEES —
B. All employees are further classified as either regular full-time, regular
part-time, temporary, seasonal, per diem, or elected official. These
classifications govern eligibility for participation in the Town's leave and
benefit programs, in accordance with the terms and conditions outlined
in this handbook.
ELECTED OFFICIAL — Elected officials are elected by the citizens of
the Town of Ellington. Certain elected officials (i.e., First Selectman,
Registrar of Voters) are treated as employees for the purpose of salary
and benefits and will be guided by the Town's policies and/or Town
Charter relating to benefits.
PER DIEM — Per diem status is given to individuals who have accepted
placement on a per diem list and are available to work as a specific need
arises. Per diem employees are not eligible for employee benefits except
as required by applicable law.
Individuals who are paid an hourly rate for regular hours worked
and at the rate of 1 1/2 times their base rate for all hours worked in
excess of 40 hours in any payroll week. Any paid leave taken in any
payroll week will not be counted as hours worked when computing
weekly overtime for that week.
(1)
In addition, compensation for hours worked on weekends or on
holidays will be treated no differently than for any other workday
(e.g., nonexempt employees will be paid at their regular rate for all
hours worked under 40 in any payroll week or at the rate of 1 1/2
times their base rate for all overtime hours).
(2)
Nonexempt employees may be required to work overtime as
necessary to meet work needs or project schedules. Supervisors
will be responsible for scheduling overtime and will make every
effort to notify employees as far in advance as possible. Nonexempt
employees are expected to accept all requests to work overtime,
unless there is an unavoidable scheduling conflict. In addition,
except in emergencies, all overtime must be authorized and
approved by the First Selectman, as recommended by the immediate
supervisor in advance.
(3)
§ 220-4.4 WATER § 220-4.4
180:201
REGULAR FULL-TIME — An exempt or nonexempt employee with a
work schedule that is not less than 35 hours per week, which may
vary depending on operational needs. Full-time employees are eligible
to participate in all of the Town's current leave and benefits programs,
in accordance with the terms and conditions outlined in this handbook.
Full-time employees are eligible for any leave and benefits required by
applicable law.
REGULAR PART-TIME — An exempt or nonexempt employee who is
employed in a position as needed, less than 35 hours per week or 52
weeks per year. Regular part-time employees, except for grandfathered
regular part-time employees (hired prior to 2005), who work at least
20 hours per week are not eligible to participate in the Town's current
leave and benefits programs unless specifically designated in individual
employment agreements. Leave time for eligible regular part-time
employees will be prorated on the basis of the average fraction of the
standard work week. Regular part-time employees are eligible for any
leave and benefits required by applicable law.
SEASONAL — A nonexempt employee who is employed in a position as
needed less than 120 days in a calendar year. Seasonal employees are
not eligible for employee benefits except as required by applicable law.
TEMPORARY — An exempt or nonexempt employee who is employed in
a position established for a specific period of time or for the duration of
a specific project or group of assignments. Temporary employees are not
eligible to participate in the Town's current leave and benefits program
regardless of the number of hours they may work each week, unless
specifically designated in individual employment agreements.
§ 220-4.5. Probationary period.
A. Each new employee will receive a period of orientation into his/her
position from his/her supervisor upon hire or transfer which is referred
to as the employee's probationary period. The probationary period is
designed to explain and review Town policies and procedures as
necessary, including those that are contained in this handbook, and to
allow the employee an opportunity to gain a thorough understanding of
what is expected in his/her job duties. While each period of probation
will be unique to the needs of the individual and the functions to which
s/he has been assigned, this process will also ordinarily entail explaining
to the employee what his/her department does, its role in relation to the
total operation of the Town, and how the employee's job fits in with the
Town's operations.
B. The probationary period for new and transferred employees will
generally be 180 calendar days. If an employee is promoted, or
transferred to a new position within their department, the probationary
period shall be 90 calendar days. The probationary period shall exclude
all time not actually worked such as time lost for sickness, leaves of
absence and any other time lost from work due to occupational injury.
Throughout the probationary period, an employee's performance will
§ 220-4.4 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-4.5
180:202
be more closely reviewed to determine if performance expectations
are being met. Should the department head and/or First Selectman
determine that performance does not meet standards at any time during
the probationary period, at the First Selectman's discretion, various
measures may be implemented to improve performance or an employee
may be terminated from employment. Nothing about the existence or
implementation of the probationary period limits the First Selectman's
right to terminate the employment of probationary employees.
Probationary employees are not eligible to participate in the appeal
process in § 220-11.3.
§ 220-5. CLASSIFICATION AND PAY PLAN.23
§ 220-5.1. Classification plan.
A. The determination and payment of wages and salaries shall be made in
conformance with a classification and pay plan prepared and maintained by
the Finance Officer in accordance with annual budget appropriations. The
Finance Officer shall review the plan periodically and shall recommend to
the Board of Selectmen necessary revisions in it to reflect changes in the
area economic conditions and to attract and retain qualified personnel.
B. The Classification Plan shall contain a statement of the duties and
responsibilities of each position in the classified service of the minimum
qualifications necessary for appointment (as defined in Sections 1202 and
1203 of the Town Charter).
C. Exempt employees classification:
ClassificationEmployee
E-8 First Selectman
E-7 Finance Officer/Treasurer
E-6.5 Director Public Works/WPCA Administrator
E-6 Director of Public Works, Town Planner, Director of
Recreation
E-5 Assessor, Building Official, Director of Human Services,
Director of Hall Memorial Library, Assistant Finance Officer/
Deputy Treasurer, Fire Marshal
E-4 Tax & Revenue Collector, Town Clerk
E-3 Human Resources Coordinator/Executive Assistant,
Emergency Management Director, Executive Assistant/
Website & Social Media Coordinator, Children's Librarian
E-2 Executive Assistant
23.Except for exempt employees, classification and pay plan have not yet been completed as
of this printing.
§ 220-4.5 WATER § 220-5.2
180:203
§ 220-5.2. Pay plan.
The First Selectman and the Finance Officer prepare and submit to the
Board of Selectmen a pay plan for each grade in the classified service, in
accordance with Section 1205 of the Town Charter. The First Selectman
reviews the pay plan periodically with the Finance Officer and recommends
to the Board of Selectmen necessary revisions so as to reflect changes in
the area economic conditions and to attract and retain qualified personnel
in the classified service.
A. Exempt employees. Salary increases are based on merit performance. At
the time of their annual evaluation, exempt employees may receive an
increase, as determined by the First Selectman, in the appropriate salary
range and as provided in the Exempt Salary Increase Guideline Chart as
follows:
Exempt Employees Performance
Evaluation
Exempt Employee Merit
Performance Increase
Current Salary Position in Salary
Range
Rating Points
Minimum to
Midpoint
Midpoint to
Maximum
Excellent Not less than 7.0 6% 5%
Outstanding 6.0 to less than 7 5% 4%
Very effective 5.0 to less than 6 3.5-4% 3-3.5%
Effective 4.0 to less than 5 3% 2.5-3%
Marginal 3.0 to less than 4 No increase
Unsatisfactory 2.0 to less than 3 No increase
Unacceptable Less than 2 No increase
B. Payment above the maximum range. Merit performance increases for
exempt employees who are at the maximum rate for their range may be
made as determined by the First Selectman, and authorized by the Board
of Selectmen.
§ 220-5.3. Appointment rates.
When first appointed to a position, pay rates are established in accordance
with the Town's classification and pay plan and the following guidelines.
A. At hire. Normally, the starting rate of pay for a new employee upon
appointment is the minimum rate for the class. The Board of Selectmen
may approve initial compensation at a rate higher than the minimum
rate if, in the discretion of the Board, it is determined that:
(1) The qualifications of the applicant are outstanding in relation to
those of competing applicants or the applicant's qualifications are
substantially in excess of the requirements of the job; or
§ 220-5.2 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-5.3
180:204
(2) No other qualified applicants will accept employment at the
minimum rate of the range.
B. Promotion. Employees who are promoted are eligible for a promotional
increase. The new pay rate for a promoted employee will be set within
the pay range for the classification as deemed appropriate by the First
Selectman, and approved by the Board of Selectmen.
C. Transfer. If an employee is transferred to a position within the same
class, the rate of pay will remain within the pay range for the class.
D. Demotion. In case of demotion, the employee will be given an
appropriate rate of pay within the pay range for the classification of the
new position and the circumstances necessitating the demotion.
E. Certification payment. Regular full-time employees, who are required
in writing by the Town to be certified within their field of expertise
and who complete the requirements for and demonstrate receipt of
certification, shall have their wages increased by $2,000; the $2,000
wage increase will be prorated for regular part-time employees. Such
amount shall be broken down into an hourly or weekly rate increase,
where applicable. Employees shall be eligible for up to one such wage
increase for obtaining a certification required by the Town, unless
otherwise approved by the First Selectman.
§ 220-6. HOURS OF WORK AND PAY PRACTICES.
§ 220-6.1. Hours of work.
A. Unless otherwise determined by the First Selectman, the normal
workweek for full-time Town employees shall be between 35 and 40
hours per week. Department heads are expected to work as many hours
as necessary to complete their jobs, unless governed by collective
bargaining agreement.
B. Nonexempt employees may be granted permission by their department
head to adjust their daily schedule so that a portion of their weekly hours
are worked outside of normal office hours. Certain core hours which
must be worked each day may be set by the department head to service
customer needs. Generally, a regular schedule will be agreed to for some
period of time, but short-term arrangements may be agreed to.
C. Exempt employees are exempt from overtime payment, consistent with
state and federal laws. When attendance at meetings or other job-related
activities is considered a part of the responsibilities of the position,
the employee will exercise discretion and independent judgment in
scheduling his/her work to allow for attendance at the meeting,
performance of required duties and personal considerations. No
overtime shall be granted to exempt employees.
D. The Town reserves the right to adjust the hours of work for all employees
as necessary to meet the needs of the Town. Furthermore, individual
start and end times will be set by the First Selectman as necessary.
The First Selectman may adopt individual hours of work policies that
meet the needs of individual departments (e.g., where services to the
public are required on a seasonal or twenty-four-hour basis), subject to
the approval of the Board of Selectmen. Therefore, all employees are
§ 220-5.3 WATER § 220-6.1
180:205
subject to work schedule changes as the needs of Town service require.
In addition, all employees must submit, in writing, requests for special
arrangements to their regular work schedule which shall include the
reason for the accommodation and the length of time needed for such
accommodation.
§ 220-6.2. Meal breaks.
All nonexempt Town employees who work seven consecutive hours or more
in a workday shall have an unpaid meal break at a time to be determined
by their Supervisor. The meal break shall be 30 minutes per day unless
otherwise determined. All employees who leave their workstations for a
meal break should notify their supervisors of their departure and return.
§ 220-6.3. Reporting hours worked.
A. All nonexempt employees will be required to record their hours worked
each day, including when they start work, when they leave and return
from lunch, when they leave for the day and if they return to work for
a meeting or other job-related activity (and any other non-work time
during the day, e.g., vacation, sick, etc.).
B. Nonexempt employees must submit their hours worked for approval by
his/her supervisor. Supervisors must forward approved time sheets every
Monday by 12:00 noon to the Finance Department.
C. All exempt employees are not required to submit their hours worked;
however, said employees must submit a request for leave time for
approval by their Supervisor when taking time off (e.g., vacation, sick,
other leaves, etc.).
D. All supervisors who approve hours worked are responsible for ensuring
that the time submitted is accurate, prior to forwarding to the Finance
Department.
§ 220-6.4. Pay period and paychecks.
Employees are paid biweekly on Fridays. From each paycheck, the Town
will deduct any and all withholdings required by law, including federal
and state income taxes, social security taxes, and wage garnishments. In
addition, upon an employee's written authorization, the Town will make
other lawful deductions from each paycheck, including for purposes of
insurance premium payments. All employees hired on or after July 1, 2013,
are required to have their pay directly deposited into a bank account of their
choosing by providing the necessary information to the Town to allow for
such direct deposit.
§ 220-6.5. Absenteeism and punctuality.
Absenteeism detracts from service and causes an undue burden for those
employees who must fill in for absent employees. As such, consistent
attendance and punctuality is necessary to the operations of the Town and
to each employee's own individual performance.
§ 220-6.1 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-6.5
180:206
A. Being on time for each scheduled workday means more than being
physically present. It means being ready to begin work at the assigned
time. Accordingly, employees are expected to report to work and to be
ready to work at the beginning of their regularly assigned shift.
B. Tardiness will not be tolerated. Tardiness impairs workplace efficiency
and is a burden to fellow employees. If an employee is going to be
late for work, his/her supervisor should be notified immediately of the
anticipated arrival time.
C. The Town recognizes that there will be occasions when unscheduled
time off due to illness or for other personal matters will be necessary. All
employees are expected to notify their supervisor at least one hour prior
to the start of their shift to explain the reason(s) for such unscheduled
time off, and to provide an estimate of the number of days before
they are expected to return to work. Failure to do so may result in
disciplinary action, unless the employee can demonstrate that it was not
practicable to provide such notice. Notification is necessary so that job
duties can be reassigned. All employees must submit a request for leave
time for approval by their supervisor. When there is no notification, the
absence will be considered unexcused and the employee will be subject
to disciplinary actions. If an employee fails to report his/her absence
for three consecutive days, s/he may be deemed to have resigned from
employment; and therefore, not subject to the appeal process.
D. Any deviation from this policy and/or repeated occurrences of
unscheduled time off or unexcused absences could lead to disciplinary
action, up to and including termination of employment.
§ 220-6.6. Overtime.
Personnel shortages, peak workloads and other emergency situations may
make it necessary for an employee to work beyond his/her regularly
scheduled workweek, as prescribed by the First Selectman or his/her
authorized designee. Hours of work over 40 hours in a payroll week by
nonexempt employees shall be considered as overtime.
§ 220-6.7. Administration of overtime.
A. Positions exempt from overtime. Because certain executive, professional
and administrative personnel are considered exempt under applicable
law, they are not eligible to be paid for overtime work.
B. Overtime authorization. Except in emergency conditions, as determined
by the department head, all overtime must be authorized and approved
by the immediate supervisor and the First Selectman in advance. Failure
to gain approval prior to working overtime will result in disciplinary
action.
C. Overtime compensation. When an employee who is eligible for overtime
compensation is required to work in excess of the normal workweek, s/
he will be paid his/her regular rate for all hours worked up to 40 hours
each payroll week and at the rate of 1 1/2 times the regular hourly rate
for all hours actually worked over 40 hours in any such payroll week.
Paid time off (sick time/holiday/vacation, etc.) taken in any payroll week
§ 220-6.5 WATER § 220-6.7
180:207
will not be counted as hours worked when computing weekly overtime
for that week.
D. Callback time. When an employee who is eligible for overtime
compensation after departing from his/her regularly scheduled shift is
officially ordered to return to work for emergency service, s/he shall be
compensated from the time of his/her assignment for all hours worked
at the rates set forth above or two hours pay at his/her regular rate,
whichever is greater.
E. Exempt employees. In the case of exempt personnel, attendance at
meetings of Town agencies and other after-hours work activities shall be
considered part of the duties of the position and not ordinarily eligible
for compensation in equivalent time or pay. The First Selectman may, at
his/her discretion, grant compensatory time off to an exempt employee
who has worked substantial extra hours. The First Selectman shall
determine the appropriate amount of compensatory time to be taken and
shall determine dates and duration of such leave to ensure that there are
no adverse effects on Town operations.
§ 220-6.8. Compensatory time.
Compensatory time may be granted at the discretion of the immediate
supervisor to an eligible nonexempt employee. Upon approval of the
immediate supervisor, compensatory time off, in lieu of overtime payment,
may be taken for all hours worked up to 40 hours each payroll week and
at the rate of 1 1/2 hours for every hour worked over 40 hours in a payroll
week. Approved compensatory time must be taken within two months of the
overtime period worked, or as otherwise directed by the First Selectman
and/or his/her authorized designee.
§ 220-6.9. Emergency closings.
A. All offices and facilities of the Town will be open on schedule for the full
workday unless employees are specifically notified otherwise via phone,
text, e-mail, television or radio news. The decision to close, based upon
local conditions, will be made by the First Selectman or a designated
Town official. The closing will apply to all Town facilities, except for
public safety facilities or any other facility as deemed appropriate by the
First Selectman. The Superintendent of Schools will be responsible for
school closings and delayed openings.
B. Employees who are classified as "emergency essential employees" may
be required to work during the emergency period. Emergency essential
employees are department heads, public safety employees and
supervisors; all employees in the Department of Public Works; and other
employees as required by the First Selectman and department heads for
specific emergency duties.
C. Employees who are not required to work during an emergency closing
will be paid for their regular hours of work on any day or portion of a
day in which the Town facilities are closed due to emergency unless:
(1) they did not report for work for any portion of the day in which the
Town facilities were open; or (2) the employee was absent due to a preapproved
vacation or other paid or unpaid leave day.
§ 220-6.7 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-6.9
180:208
D. Emergency essential employees who are required to work during an
emergency period shall be paid in accordance with individual collective
bargaining agreements, contracts and/or as approved by the First
Selectman.
§ 220-7. EMPLOYEE DEVELOPMENT AND SEPARATION.
§ 220-7.1. Job duties.
The Town will instruct employees about their job duties upon hire and
throughout their employment, and reserves the right to change those duties
as may be necessary for operational needs. One way to communicate job
duties of a particular position to employees may be through a written job
description, which the Town may implement and change from time to time.
In any event, employees will be expected to devote their best efforts to the
Town and to perform in good faith all duties that may be assigned.
§ 220-7.2. Personnel records.
A. The Town maintains a separate personnel file for each employee. A
current employee may inspect his/her personnel file within seven days
following a written request made to the office of the First Selectman,
where such files are maintained. A designated member of the Town will
be present during any such review, and the Town reserves the right to
charge a fee for any copies of documents requested.
B. The Town shall provide employees with a copy of any documentation
of any disciplinary action imposed on that employee not more than
one business day after the date of imposing such action and shall
immediately provide an employee with a copy of any documented notice
of termination of employment. The Town shall include a statement in any
documented disciplinary action, notice of termination or performance
evaluation that the employee may submit a written statement explaining
his or her position to be maintained as part of the personnel file, should
the employee disagree with any of the information contained in any such
documents.
C. It is important to keep personnel records up-to-date. Accordingly,
employees are required to promptly notify their immediate supervisors,
Finance Department and the First Selectman's office of any changes
in the following information: name, address or telephone numbers, and
persons to notify in cases of an emergency. In addition, promptly notify
the Finance Department of any changes in marital status, names of
beneficiaries, dependents listed on your insurance policy and any
changes to your tax withholdings. Failure to notify the above-noted
departments as soon as any of the above changes takes place could
result in a loss of benefits or create personnel-related complications.
§ 220-7.3. Communications and problem solving.
A. The Town employs numerous forms of communicating its expectations
of employees and its policies and procedures to employees, including
through this handbook, written memoranda and verbal instruction. The
§ 220-6.9 WATER § 220-7.3
180:209
Town also uses the bulletin boards in general government buildings to
communicate such information to its employees, including information
on safety, meeting notices and job openings. Employees are encouraged
to periodically review such bulletin boards and to read the information
that is posted. Employees may not post any notices on these bulletin
boards that are not work-related. All work-related notices must be
approved by the First Selectman prior to posting.
B. The Town also encourages all employees to bring forward their
suggestions and ideas about how the Town can be made a better place to
work, how our work can be improved, and how our service to residents
can be enhanced or provided more efficiently. Please bring any such
suggestions and comments to your supervisor.
C. Whenever an employee has a problem or complaint, the Town expects
that employee to speak up and communicate directly. In such cases,
employees are encouraged to take the following steps:
(1) First talk to your immediate supervisor within five business days of
the event. Your supervisor is most familiar with you and your job, and
is, therefore, in the best position to assist you.
(2) If your supervisor cannot help you resolve the matter, you can speak
to the First Selectman who will address your problem or complaint
and render a written decision within five business days of receipt.
(3) In the event you are not satisfied with the First Selectman's
response, you may follow the appeal process in § 220-11.3.
D. When warranted in the Town's judgment, efforts will be made to address
employee concerns and/or to take corrective action. Personal problems
between employees are not to be acted on at work. In addition, if there
is a work-related problem with a co-worker, and direct requests to cease
that behavior have been ignored, then it is the employee's responsibility
to bring the conduct at issue to the attention of his/her supervisor.
§ 220-7.4. Performance review process.
A. Each employee's performance will be reviewed at least annually,
generally at or around the time the employee is normally considered
for a salary review. Employee performance may be formally reviewed
at other times as circumstances warrant. Performance reviews will be
conducted by an employee's supervisor and/or other Town personnel, as
is appropriate in each case based on the Town's assessment of day-today
working relationships and reporting responsibilities.
B. Performance reviews will generally be conducted to assist the employee
in identifying strong points and/or for illustrating areas that need
improvement. These reviews will further be focused on delivered
achievements, not promised potential results; on qualifications, not
longevity.
C. Employees are encouraged to discuss their thoughts about their
performance and career development at any time during the year,
including at the time of any performance review, and to provide any
constructive comments they may have about their goals and
performance objectives, or the Town's operations, policies and
management practices.
§ 220-7.3 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-7.5
180:210
§ 220-7.5. Salary review.
Salaries are generally reviewed on an annual basis coinciding with an
employee's performance review but may be reviewed at other times as
circumstances warrant. Unless otherwise awarded by the Board of
Selectmen on an "across-the-board" basis, salaries are typically adjusted,
if at all, based on merit in addition to other factors such as salary ranges
for the position, market conditions and operational needs. There is no
guarantee of a salary increase for any employee at any time. Employees will
have the opportunity to understand the basis for any salary adjustment in
discussions with their supervisors.
§ 220-7.6. Training and development.
The Town encourages employees to further their training and education
within their respective positions. The First Selectman may authorize leave
with or without pay and the reimbursement of expenses incurred by an
employee in furtherance of his or her education or professional
development in accordance with the provisions of this section.
A. Types of training and development. Training and development for which
the Town may make compensation can take a number of forms. Included
are courses, seminars and conferences, both noncredit and for-credit
toward a scholastic degree, sponsored by a professional organization, a
college, or a graduate, vocational or other school.
B. Prior approval. Employees considering enrolling in courses, seminars,
conferences etc., for which they plan to seek Town reimbursement, must
acquire the approval of the First Selectman prior to registration. Leave
with or without pay for training sessions may be authorized by the
First Selectman upon the recommendation of the employee's department
head.
C. Town-initiated training and development.
(1) The Town shall reimburse the employee 100% for all direct expenses,
including travel, incurred in acquiring any Town-initiated training.
Town-initiated training shall include that which is required by the
Town or state, or suggested by the Town. Funds to cover the cost
shall be included in the department's operating budget. It shall not
include training required by the Town as a minimum qualification for
a position in the Town service unless specifically authorized by the
First Selectman. Leave with pay shall be granted to employees to
attend Town-initiated training and development sessions. Training is
completed successfully if a certificate is issued, or a "passing" grade
is achieved.
(2) In the event the employee fails the Town-initiated training, such
employee may be subject to disciplinary action.
D. Employee-initiated training and development. Training and development
not required by the Town or state and/or not otherwise necessary for the
employee's job shall be considered employee-initiated and the employee
may be compensated for such training (if funds are available in the
Town's education budget) as follows:
§ 220-7.5 WATER § 220-7.6
180:211
(1) Only regular full-time employees with at least one year of continuous
service are eligible to participate in employee-initiated training and
development.
(2) Provided that Town budgetary limitations permit, reimbursement of
expenses shall only be made for training successfully completed.
Training is completed successfully if a certificate is issued, a grade
of "C" or better is achieved if the course is graded or a mark of
"passing" is achieved if the course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
(3) Reimbursement.
(a) Upon submittal of the proper receipts, the Town may reimburse
up to:
[1] 50% for a grade of "C"; or
[2] 75% for a grade "B" or better; or
[3] 75% for a passing grade if course is graded on a pass/fail
basis.
(b) Reimbursement includes the cost of tuition and/or fees of any
training (books and other supplies are not subject to
reimbursement), to a maximum of $2,500 per employee per fiscal
year, which is judged by the First Selectman and department
head to be of direct value to the employee in performing his or
her present or potential job duties.
(4) Leave with or without pay may be granted to an employee for
employee-initiated training and development sessions held during
the employee's regular working hours.
(5) Employees must remain employed with the Town for one year after
completing any employee-initiated training and development. If the
employee separates employment prior to one year, the tuition and/or
fees paid by the Town must be repaid by the employee.
E. Professional meetings and conventions. Employees must acquire the
approval of the First Selectman prior to registration for a professional
meeting, conference or convention. The First Selectman shall grant
leave with or without pay for, and approve the reimbursement of, costs
incurred by an employee attending a professional meeting, conference
or convention provided the funds to cover expenses are included in the
department's operating budget.
§ 220-7.7. Promotion.
The Town encourages employees to develop new skills, expand knowledge
of their work, assume greater responsibilities and make known their
qualifications for promotion to more responsible positions.
A. An employee may apply for a vacant position in any Town office or
department that affords a promotional or new opportunity, if the
employee has held his/her current position for a minimum of six months,
has performed his/her duties satisfactorily and otherwise meets the
requirements of the position.
B. To assure that employees are afforded opportunities for promotion,
vacancies will be advertised in general government buildings. Current
employees are encouraged to apply for any vacancy for which they meet
the requirements of the position.
§ 220-7.6 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-7.7
180:212
C. When the First Selectman determines that an insufficient number of
well-qualified employees are available from within the classified service,
the First Selectman will consider outside applicants along with Town
employees in order to provide an adequate number of candidates for
consideration.
§ 220-7.8. Transfer.
Transfer of an employee from one position to another, which does not
constitute either a promotion or a demotion as defined herein, may occur
when:
A. The employee meets the qualification requirements;
B. The transfer is in the best interests of the Town;
C. Further training and development of an employee in another position
would be beneficial to the future potential of the Town; or
D. The transfer meets the personal needs of the employee and is consistent
with Subsections A and B above.
§ 220-7.9. Demotion.
An employee may be demoted to a position of a lower grade, for which s/he
is qualified, for any of the following reasons:
A. As an alternative to layoff when a position is eliminated;
B. The position is reclassified to a lower grade;
C. The program for which the position was created is terminated;
D. The employee requests the demotion;
E. The return to work from authorized leave of another employee to such
position, or
F. When unsatisfactory service is rendered or for disciplinary reasons.
§ 220-7.10. Separation.
Separation is the termination of an employee from employment by the Town
through resignation, disability, death, retirement, involuntary dismissal or
layoff.
A. Conditions of separation. At the time of separation, all records, assets
or other items of Town property in the employee's custody shall be
returned by the employee to his/her supervisor. A non-department head
employee who voluntarily separates from Town service after giving at
least a 14 calendar-day notice and who has returned all records, assets,
or other items of Town property will be considered to have resigned in
good standing. Department heads are required to give a 30 calendar-day
notice.
B. Payment upon separation. Employees who separate from the Town
service in good standing, or who are laid-off, or who die while employed
by the Town, or separate employment due to a disability, shall receive
payment for all earned salary and vacation days accrued to date of
the separation. An employee who does not separate from the Town
service in good standing (as determined in the sole discretion of the
Town, and includes without limitation, a termination due to performance
§ 220-7.7 WATER § 220-7.10
180:213
or misconduct-related issue) shall only receive payment for all earned
salary (but not any compensation for accrued vacation days), subject
to the lawful deduction for any unreturned Town property, records, or
assets.
C. Resignation. A non-department head employee resigns in good standing
if a written statement of reasons for the resignation is received at least
14 calendar days prior to the effective date of the resignation and if
such employee returns all Town property, records, and assets before
departure. Department heads are required to give a 30 calendar-day
notice. The supervisor may permit a shorter period of notice because
of extenuating circumstances. The resignation shall be forwarded to
the First Selectman with a statement by the supervisor as to pertinent
information concerning the reasons for resignation. The First Selectman
is authorized to accept the resignation of Town employees and to advise
the Board of Selectmen of such resignations.
D. Disability.
(1) An employee may be terminated from his/her employment with the
Town when s/he cannot perform the essential functions of his/her
position with or without a reasonable accommodation because of
physical or mental impairment.
(2) The Town may require an examination at the Town's expense by a
physician of its choice to determine an employee's fitness for duty as
well as any reasonable accommodations that may be made to allow
the employee to perform the essential job functions.
E. Death. Separation shall be effective as of the date of death. All
compensation due shall be paid to the estate of the employee.
F. Retirement. Retirement is the separation of an employee in accordance
with the provisions of the Town retirement system under which the
employee is eligible to receive benefits.
G. Dismissal. Dismissal is an involuntary separation of an employee for
any legitimate reason. An employee may be dismissed upon the
recommendation of a department head and/or upon the initiative of the
First Selectman with the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
H. Layoff. Layoff is an involuntary separation of an employee resulting from
a reduction in workforce due to lack of funds or work or because the
employee's position has been eliminated or for other legitimate reasons.
The department head shall submit a report to the First Selectman,
together with a recommended list of the employee(s) to be laid off.
(1) The Board of Selectmen shall determine the order of layoff of
employees on the basis of the relative suitability for the jobs that
remain and length of continuous service with the Town, except
that no regular full-time or regular part-time employee shall be
separated while there is an employee who has not completed his/her
probationary period in any job class in that department performing
duties for which the regular employee is at least equally qualified
and applies. In the event of a layoff, the Town will use its best efforts
to provide as much notice as is reasonably possible to all affected
employees.
§ 220-7.10 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-7.10
180:214
(2) If certified as having rendered satisfactory service, the name of the
employee laid off shall be placed on the appropriate re-employment
list. Such employees shall be subject to recall to a vacant position
for which they are qualified for a period of one year from the date
last worked for the Town. Employees on the re-employment list who
decline re-employment or do not respond within one week to an offer
of re-employment will be removed from the list. Time spent on the
re-employment list does not constitute a break in continuous service,
if the employee is rehired.
§ 220-7.11. References.
All requests for information about current or former employees shall be
referred to the First Selectman. Unless the Town receives a written
authorization from a current or former employee to release personnel
information about that individual to a third party and is inclined to do so, or
is otherwise legally obligated to release personnel information pursuant to
the Freedom of Information Act or other applicable law, the First Selectman
(or his/her authorized designee) shall only confirm in writing the employee's
dates of employment and job title, in response to any request for personnel
information or for a reference.
§ 220-8. EMPLOYEE LEAVE.
§ 220-8.1. General policy.
Leave is any authorized absence during regularly scheduled work hours
that is approved by the employee's supervisor. Leave may be authorized
with or without pay subject to these rules on the basis of the work
requirements of the departments.
§ 220-8.2. Holidays.
A. The Town recognizes the following days as holidays for regular full-time
employees (and grandfathered regular part-time employees referred to in
§ 220-4.4) to be granted with pay, subject to change as published by the
First Selectman:
New Year's Day Labor Day
Martin Luther King Day Columbus Day
Presidents' Day Veterans' Day
Good Friday Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day Day After Thanksgiving
Independence Day Christmas Day
(1) A one-half day holiday shall be granted the day before Thanksgiving
Day.
(2) A one-half day holiday shall be granted the day before Christmas Day
(only if Christmas Day falls on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or
Friday).
§ 220-7.10 WATER § 220-8.2
180:215
(3) In addition to the holidays enumerated in this section, holidays shall
include any specially declared holidays or days of mourning declared by
the First Selectman.
(4) Holiday pay is the employee's regular rate of pay for the number of
hours in the normal work day. Any paid holiday will not be counted as
hours worked when computing overtime for that week.
(5) When a holiday falls on a Saturday, it shall be observed on the preceding
Friday; when a holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be
observed.
B. Absences before or after holidays. Holiday pay is granted to any eligible
employee for established holidays on which the employee would normally
have been scheduled to work and is available for such work. To be eligible
to receive holiday pay, an employee is required to work his/her regularly
scheduled hours on both the workday preceding and the workday following
the holiday. Exceptions to this policy may be approved when an individual
is on: (a) military leave; (b) jury duty; (c) vacation leave; (d) bereavement
leave; (e) one day of illness either before or after the holiday, but not
both unless otherwise authorized by the First Selectman or immediate
supervisor; (f) previously approved personal days off either before or after
the holiday, but not both; (g) other leave as approved by the First Selectman
at his/her discretion. Employees who are off-duty on the holiday by reason
of sick leave or vacation shall not be charged for a sick day or vacation but
will be paid for the holiday.
§ 220-8.3. Vacation.
A. Eligibility. Regular full-time employees (and grandfathered regular parttime
employees referred to in § 220-4.4) who have completed six months of
continuous employment are eligible for vacation leave. Vacation days shall
accumulate on a biweekly basis and shall be added to the employee's leave
time balance after the successful completion of the probationary period of
employment.
Length of Continuous
Service
Annual Balance of Accrued Vacation
Days
0 to 12 months 5 days
1 year but less than 5 years 10 days per year
5 years but less than 10
years
15 days per year
10 years or more 20 days per year
B. Use of vacation leave.
(1) An employee may take vacation leave with proper advance authorization
in hourly increments, consistent with the needs of the Town and subject
to the approval of an employee's supervisor. The vacation period shall
be between July 1 and June 30 of each fiscal year.
(2) Any paid vacation leave will not be counted as hours worked when
computing overtime for that week.
§ 220-8.2 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-8.3
180:216
C. Vacation approval. Employees must provide their immediate supervisor with
notice of their request to take vacations for periods of one to two weeks
at least 30 days in advance, and can only take vacation upon the approval
of their supervisors. Supervisors must approve or deny the request within
two weeks of receipt. Vacation requests for periods in excess of two weeks
require at least 60 days advance notice. Under all circumstances, employees
will only be allowed to take vacations in accordance with the operational
needs of the Town. Length of service will govern in the selection of
vacations, insofar as it is practicable and consistent with current operating
conditions. Employees who fail to submit their vacation schedule by the
required time shall relinquish any rights of seniority in selecting their
vacation.
D. Vacation accrual and accumulation. An employee may accumulate vacation
up to the total amount earned during a two year period. All unused vacation
in excess of such maximum accrual shall be forfeited.
E. Prior part-time service credit. Effective January 1, 2005, regular part-time
employees, working less than 1,040 hours per year without benefits, who
advance to regular full-time employment with the Town, will be given
proportionate service credit based upon their hours worked as a regular
part-time employee with continuous, unbroken service, in relation to a fulltime
work schedule for purposes of determining the employees' years of
service with the Town for use in computing vacation and longevity eligibility.
F. Break in service. The length of continuous service shall determine vacation
leave. For purposes of computing leave time, employees who leave Town
employment and are later rehired shall be considered as new employees.
Employees who are laid-off and later rehired shall not be affected by the
break in service; however, time on layoff shall not be considered as
accumulated service.
G. Transfers. An employee who is transferred between departments shall
retain all accrued vacation credit.
H. Advanced vacation. No employee may take vacation leave beyond the
amount earned.
I. Holiday celebrated during vacation leave. Observed holidays established by
these rules shall not be considered as part of the vacation leave.
J. Payment upon termination. Employees will not be compensated for any
amount of accrued but unused vacation time upon termination of
employment at any time for any reason, except as otherwise indicated in the
notice of resignation procedures in § 220-7.10.
§ 220-8.4. Sick leave (regular full-time employees / grandfathered
regular part-time employees).
A. Eligibility.
(1) The Town provides paid sick leave to all regular full-time employees
(and grandfathered regular part-time employees referred to in
§ 220-4.4) for medical-related reasons. In order to qualify for sick
leave, the employee must have completed at least 680 hours of work
following date of hire.
(2) All regular full-time employees (and grandfathered regular part-time
employees referred to in § 220-4.4) shall receive sick leave in the
§ 220-8.3 WATER § 220-8.4
180:217
amount of 12 sick days per year at the beginning of each fiscal
year. Sick days are calculated based on the number of hours in
the employee's normal workweek. Sick days may be prorated for
new employees depending on the conclusion of his/her probationary
period. Sick leave may be taken in hourly increments and must be
approved by the supervisor. An employee whose available sick leave
has been exhausted may use available vacation or personal time.
B. Use of sick leave.
(1) Sick leave is provided for the following purposes:
(a) Personal illness, physical incapacity or bodily injury or disease.
(b) Illness or physical incapacity in the employee's immediate family
requiring his/her personal attention. For this purpose, immediate
family is defined as employee's current spouse/civil union
partner, mother, step-mother, father, step-father, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, grandparents, brother, sister, child, step-child,
daughter-in-law, son-in-law or grandchild.
(c) Medical and dental appointments or for other preventive care
issues.
(d) Medical care or other reasons related to being a victim of family
violence or sexual assault (such as to obtain services from a
victim services organization; to relocate due to the violence and/
or assault; or to participate in any civil or criminal proceedings
related to the violence and/or assault).
(2) Any paid sick leave will not be counted as hours worked when
computing overtime for that week.
(3) Sick leave cannot be used for absence due to any injury that is
compensable under the Workers' Compensation system (except
when any waiting period is required).
C. Carryover and payment upon termination. Employees may not carry over
any unused sick leave to any subsequent year. Employees will not be
compensated for any amount of unused sick time upon termination of
employment at any time for any reason.
D. Notification and documentation of illness.
(1) The Town requires employees to provide at least seven days notice
of the need to take paid sick leave if the need for leave is foreseeable
(such as for preventative medical care issues). If the leave is not
foreseeable, then the employee must give notice as soon as
practicable. In this regard, an employee is expected to notify his/
her immediate supervisor or the department head at least one hour
before the start of each workday that he/she will be absent and to
provide the reason for such absence. Employees must notify their
supervisor or the department head each day they are absent unless
otherwise authorized by their supervisor or the department head.
Failure to report absences may result in discipline up to and
including termination of employment, unless the employee can
demonstrate that it was not practicable to provide such notice. The
supervisor or the department head must receive the notification
directly from the employee, unless the employee can demonstrate
that it was not practicable to provide such notice.
§ 220-8.4 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-8.4
180:218
(2) An employee who has been absent for three or more consecutive
days due to illness, injury or health condition, or for preventative
medical care, of the employee or his/her immediate family member
will be required to provide a note from the applicable health care
provider establishing the need for the time off. The note must state
the length of the illness and (as applicable) whether the employee
is able to return to full duty without restrictions, or if the employee
has any restrictions, the nature of those restrictions and how long
the restrictions may need to be in place. If necessary, the Town may
require the employee to see a physician paid for by the Town to
determine fitness for duty. The Town may further require a court
record or documentation from a victim services organization or the
police or counselor for leave taken due to family violence or sexual
assault issues.
(3) If an employee takes more than 40 hours of paid sick leave in
any fiscal year, she/he may be required to provide a health care
provider's note under additional circumstances as well. Examples of
additional circumstances when a note may be required include when
there has been frequent or questionable absenteeism, or when the
employee calls out sick the day before or after a holiday or vacation
day, or for absences of less than three consecutive days.
(4) If the Town determines that an employee is abusing the sick leave
program, that employee will be subject to appropriate disciplinary
action. However, the Town will not take any retaliatory or other
adverse employment action or otherwise discriminate against any
employees because they request or use paid sick leave in accordance
with Town policy and applicable law or file a complaint with the
Connecticut Department of Labor regarding sick leave matters.
§ 220-8.4.1. Sick leave (regular part-time employees).
This policy applies to all eligible regular part-time employees of the Town
(as further defined below) who do not otherwise qualify for paid sick leave
under a collective bargaining agreement, individual employment contract
or the Town of Ellington's Personnel Rules and Regulations. Eligible regular
part-time employees who are covered by any such documents are entitled
to the benefits provided there under and this policy does not diminish,
preempt or override the terms of any such documents.
A. Any regular part-time employee paid on an hourly basis or classified as
nonexempt is eligible to take paid sick leave after they have completed
680 hours of employment after hire and if they have worked at least an
average of 10 or more hours per week for the Town in the most recent
calendar quarter prior to requesting sick leave. Temporary, per diem and
seasonal workers are not eligible for part-time sick leave.
B. Regular part-time employees will be entitled to accrue sick leave at a
rate of 0.025 hours for each hour worked, up to a maximum of 40 hours
of paid sick leave for each fiscal year. Employees who do not use their
entire allotment of paid sick leave in one fiscal year may carry over
up to 40 accrued hours to the next fiscal year but may not use more
§ 220-8.4 WATER § 220-8.4.1
180:219
than 40 hours of paid sick leave in any fiscal year. Upon termination of
employment, accrued sick leave benefits will not be paid out.
C. Sick leave can be taken for any of the reasons identified in § 220-8.4
above.
D. Any paid sick leave taken in any payroll week will not be counted as
hours worked when computing weekly overtime for that week.
E. Sick leave cannot be used for absence due to any injury that is
compensable under the workers' compensation system (except when any
waiting period is required).
F. Sick leave may be taken in hourly increments and must be approved by
the supervisor.
G. The Town requires employees to provide at least seven days notice of
the need to take paid sick leave if the need for leave is foreseeable (such
as for preventative medical care issues). If the leave is not foreseeable,
then the employee must give notice as soon as practicable. In this
regard, an employee is expected to notify his/her immediate supervisor
or the department head at least one hour before the start of each
workday that he/she will be absent and to provide the reason for such
absence. Employees must notify their supervisor or the department
head each day they are absent unless otherwise authorized by their
supervisor or the department head. Failure to report absences may
result in discipline up to and including termination of employment,
unless the employee can demonstrate that it was not practicable to
provide such notice. The supervisor or the department head must
receive the call directly from the employee.
H. An employee who has been absent for three or more consecutive days
due to illness, injury or health condition, or for preventative medical
care, of the employee or his/her immediate family member will be
required to provide a note from the applicable health care provider
establishing the need for the time off. The note must state the length of
the illness and (as applicable) whether the employee is able to return
to full duty without restrictions, or if the employee has any restrictions,
the nature of those restrictions and how long the restrictions may need
to be in place. If necessary, the Town may require the employee to see
a physician paid for by the Town to determine fitness for duty. The
Town may further require a court record or documentation from a victim
services organization or the police or counselor for leave taken due to
family violence or sexual assault issues.
I. If the Town determines that an employee is abusing the sick leave
program, that employee will be subject to appropriate disciplinary
action. However, the Town will not take any retaliatory or other adverse
employment action or otherwise discriminate against any employees
because they request or use paid sick leave in accordance with Town
policy and applicable law or file a complaint with the Connecticut
Department of Labor regarding sick leave matters.
§ 220-8.5. Personal time.
A. Eligibility.
§ 220-8.4.1 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-8.5
180:220
(1) In order to qualify for personal leave, the employee must have
completed his/her probationary period.
(2) All regular full-time employees (and grandfathered regular part-time
employees referred to in § 220-4.4) will be eligible for four paid
personal days during each fiscal year of employment. Personal days
are calculated based on the number of hours in the employee's
normal workweek. Personal days may be prorated for new employees
depending on the conclusion of his/her probationary period. Personal
time may be taken in hourly increments.
(3) A father shall be granted an additional two personal days with pay
for the birth of his child.
B. Approval. Employees may take personal time upon the approval of their
supervisors. Under all circumstances, employees will only be allowed to
take personal time in accordance with the operational needs of the Town.
Length of service will govern in response to requests for personal time,
insofar as it is practicable and consistent with operating conditions.
C. Carry over and payment upon termination. Employees may not carry
over any unused personal time to any subsequent year. Employees will
not be compensated for any amount of unused personal time upon
termination of employment at any time for any reason.
§ 220-8.6. Bereavement leave.
If there is a death in the employee's immediate family, all regular full-time
employees (and grandfathered regular part-time employees referred to in
§ 220-4.4) will be eligible for an appropriate period of paid bereavement
leave not to exceed four regularly scheduled working days. Immediate
family includes and is limited to the employee's current spouse/civil union
partner, mother, step-mother, father, step-father, mother-in-law, father-inlaw,
grandparents, brother, sister, child, stepchild, daughter-in-law, son-inlaw,
grandchild or legal ward or guardian. An eligible employee shall further
be allowed up to one day with pay to attend a funeral for the death of other
members of the employee's family not listed above. The First Selectman
and/or the department head will give favorable consideration to eligible
employees for requests for vacation leave or leave without pay for deaths of
friends, or for extension of the paid bereavement leave provided. The Town
reserves the right to request verification of the deceased and the person's
relationship to the employee.
§ 220-8.7. Jury duty.
Regular full-time and regular part-time employees required to serve jury
duty shall be paid the difference between the employee's normal rate of pay
for regular scheduled work days and the fee received for serving as a juror.
Jury duty pay will be given only for time lost on regularly scheduled working
days. Employees are expected to report for work during scheduled hours
whenever jury services are not required. An employee called for jury service
shall furnish the Town with a notice to serve, evidence of attendance and
compensation fee.
§ 220-8.5 WATER § 220-8.8
180:221
§ 220-8.8. Military leave.
A. Military training leave, not to exceed 30 days in a calendar year, shall be
granted to regular employees when required to serve a period on active
reserve or National Guard duty. During this period, the employee shall
be paid the difference between his/her military pay, including holiday
pay. Employees called to military training leave shall furnish the Town
with a notice to serve and evidence of compensation amount. Upon
activation for state or federal emergency service, the Board of Selectmen
may extend this period.
B. Any regular employee who leaves service of the Town to join the military
forces of the United States of America, during the time of war or other
national emergency, or who is inducted by the Selective Service, shall
be entitled to a leave of absence, accumulation of seniority and reemployment
rights in accordance with applicable state and federal law.
C. For a period of time not to exceed two years, regular full-time employees
who have been called up for full-time active military reserve or full-time
National Guard duty will be granted a pay differential, if one exists,
between their regular full-time pay and military pay; medical insurance
and pension contributions made by the Town to the regular full-time
employee's account will continue to be made. The employee will continue
to pay his/her share of the medical insurance premiums. Failure of the
employee to pay the premium may result in loss of coverage.
§ 220-8.9. Leave of absence.
Leaves of absence for reasons not covered elsewhere in this handbook
may be granted at the sole discretion of the First Selectman based on an
employee's individual circumstances and the business needs of the Town.
Leaves of absence are considered voluntary time off without pay. Since the
purpose of an unpaid leave of absence is to enable an employee to maintain
his/her ability to continue employment with the Town, such an employee
may not work elsewhere while on such leave unless previously approved by
the First Selectman or unless otherwise required by applicable law.
A. To be eligible for a leave of absence, an employee must have been
continuously employed regular full-time (and grandfathered regular
part-time employees referred to in § 220-4.4) for a one-year period prior
to the leave period requested. A request for an unpaid leave of absence
must be submitted in writing 30 days in advance (unless it is an
emergency) to the First Selectman stating the purpose and expected
duration. The First Selectman will review each such request on a caseby-
case basis to determine whether to approve the request, and if
approved, to determine the duration of leave time that can be provided.
The Town can require, at its discretion, medical certification for any
leave requested for medical reasons.
B. Because a leave of absence is unpaid, employees must use all of their
accrued vacation, sick (if the reason for the leave makes this benefit
applicable) and personal time before any unpaid leave can begin.
Vacation, personal and sick time (if applicable) so used will be counted
as part of the total leave time allotted. The employee will not accrue
vacation time, will not be credited with any sick or personal leave time
§ 220-8.8 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-8.9
180:222
and will not receive holiday pay during their leave of absence. Once an
employee returns to work, sick and personal leave time will be prorated,
if applicable. Leave time will not count toward seniority during a leave of
absence. During a personal unpaid leave of absence, medical insurance
and retirement contribution will not be made by the Town to the eligible
employee's account. Employees may continue participation in the Town's
medical and dental plans by reimbursing the full premium cost to the
Town by monthly payments in advance.
C. Within a reasonable period of time prior to the expiration date of a
leave, or in any event, at least one week prior to the expiration date,
employees must contact the First Selectman to confirm whether they are
able to return. If the leave time allowed has expired, and the employee
has made no contact with his/her supervisor, the leave of absence will
cease and employment will be terminated. If an employee confirms that
s/he will be able to return to work upon the expiration of the leave,
the Town will attempt to restore that employee to the same or similar
position. However, employees should recognize that when they are ready
to return from an unpaid leave of absence, there is a risk that the same,
similar or any position may not be available. As such, job placement
following a return from an unpaid leave of absence is not guaranteed,
except as required by law.
§ 220-8.10. Family and medical leave.
In accordance with the Federal Family and Medical Leave Act (hereinafter
referred to collectively as "FMLA"), eligible employees may take a leave
of absence for certain designated reasons. This policy presents a general
overview of FMLA entitlements and requirements. If this policy conflicts
with applicable law, applicable law controls.
A. Employee eligibility. Employee must have worked for the Town for a
minimum of 12 months, and must have worked at least 1,250 hours
during the twelve-month period prior to the start of the FMLA leave.
Only hours actually worked — regular worked time plus overtime —
count towards this requirement. Paid leave (such as vacation, sick leave,
and holidays) and unpaid leave, including FMLA leave, are not included.
B. Reason for leave. Unpaid family and/or medical leaves may be granted
for the following reasons:
(1) Serious health condition of employee, employee's child, parent or
spouse/civil union partner.
(a) "Child" may be a biological child, foster child, adopted child,
stepchild, legal ward or child of person standing in loco parentis
(in place of parent), who is under the age of 18, or over the age
of 18 and unable to care for himself/herself because of a mental
or physical disability.
(b) "Parent" must be a biological parent, foster parent, adoptive
parent, stepparent, legal guardian, or individual who stood in
loco parentis to an eligible employee.
(c) An eligible employee's spouse may be a husband, wife or civil
union partner.
§ 220-8.9 WATER § 220-8.10
180:223
(d) To be considered a serious health condition, the condition must
be an illness, impairment or physical or mental condition that
involves inpatient or outpatient care. Inpatient care generally
involves treatment at a hospital, hospice, or residential medical
care facility. Outpatient care generally requires continuing
treatment by a health care provider.
(2) Birth, adoption or foster care placement. A family leave of absence
will be provided upon the birth, adoption, or foster care placement
of a child by an eligible employee.
(3) To serve as an organ or bone marrow donor.
(4) Serious injury or illness of a covered service member/covered
veteran.
(a) An employee who is a spouse, son, daughter, parent or next of kin
of a covered service member or a covered veteran is eligible to
take family leave to care for the serious injury or illness of such
individual.
(b) An eligible employee's spouse is either a husband or wife or civil
union partner.
(c) "Son" or "daughter" may be a biological child, foster child,
adopted child, stepchild, legal ward or child of person standing
in loco parentis (in place of parent), who is under the age of
18, or over the age of 18 and unable to care for himself/herself
because of a mental or physical disability.
(d) "Parent" must be a biological parent, foster parent, adoptive
parent, stepparent, legal guardian, or individual who stood in
loco parentis to an eligible employee.
(e) "Next of kin" means the nearest blood relative of the eligible
employee.
(f) To be considered a covered service member, the individual must
be either: (1) a current member of the Armed Forces (including
a member of the National Guard or Reserves) who is undergoing
medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy; or is otherwise in
outpatient status; or is otherwise on the temporary disability
retired list, for a serious injury or illness; or (2) a covered veteran
who is undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy
for a serious injury or illness and who was a member of the
Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or
Reserves) and was discharged or released under conditions
other than dishonorable at any time during the five-year period
before the date on which the employee must commence leave to
care for the covered veteran.
(5) Because of a qualifying exigency. An employee whose spouse, son,
daughter or parent is on covered active duty or call to covered active
duty status (or has been notified of an impending call or order to
covered active duty) in the Armed Forces (including a member of the
National Guard or Reserves) is eligible to take family leave for the
following qualifying exigencies:
(a) Short-notice deployment;
(b) Military events and related activities;
§ 220-8.10 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-8.10
180:224
(c) Childcare and school activities;
(d) Financial and legal arrangements;
(e) Counseling;
(f) Rest and recuperation;
(g) Post-deployment activities;
(h) Parental care; and
(i) Other activities which arise out of the covered military member's
covered active duty or call to covered active duty status that the
employer and employee agree qualify as an exigency and agree
as to the timing and duration of such leave.
C. Employee obligations. Employees are required to use their available paid
vacation, sick and other time off during a family or medical leave of
absence for any reason. That portion of the leave of absence that is used
under these conditions will be with pay according to Town policies.
(1) While as stated above all accrued paid vacation, sick and other
time off must be used in accordance with Town policy before an
employee is eligible to utilize any unpaid family or medical leave, an
employee will not be required to utilize any such paid leave during
an FMLA leave if she/he is simultaneously receiving payments
under the Town's disability insurance plan or workers'
compensation laws.
(2) The maximum amount of family and medical leave allowed, whether
it includes paid and/or unpaid leave or whether it includes time off
during which an employee is receiving payments under either the
Town's disability insurance plan or the workers' compensation laws,
will not exceed the maximum leave entitlement as described below.
(3) Since the purpose of leave under this policy is to enable employees
to maintain their ability to continue employment with the Town, an
employee may not work elsewhere while on FMLA leave, unless
otherwise required by applicable law.
(4) When planning medical treatment or seeking intermittent leave,
the employee must consult with the Human Resources Department
and must make a reasonable effort to schedule the treatment or
intermittent leave so as to avoid unduly disruptive effects on the
Town's operations.
(5) Employees needing FMLA leave must, at a minimum, follow the
Town's usual and customary call-in procedures for reporting an
absence, absent unusual circumstances.
(6) Whenever an eligible employee's medical or family leave is
foreseeable based upon an expected birth, placement for adoption
or foster care, or planned medical treatment, or to care for others,
the employee must provide at least 30 days' advance written notice
to the Human Resources Department. If such prior notice is
impossible, as in the case of an unforeseen medical emergency
or qualifying exigency, an eligible employee must provide notice
as soon as practicable after s/he learns of the need for the leave
(typically within one or two working days of learning of the need for
leave). Failure to comply with these notice rules is grounds for, and
may result in, deferral or denial of the requested leave.
§ 220-8.10 WATER § 220-8.10
180:225
(7) All leaves due to a serious health condition of an eligible employee,
or an eligible employee's son/daughter, parent or spouse/civil union
partner, or due to a serious injury or illness of a covered service
member, must be accompanied by the Certification of Health Care
Provider form provided by the Town from the appropriate health
care provider identifying, among other things, appropriate medical
facts regarding the condition and its probable duration. Such
medical certification must be provided before the leave begins,
or in any event, within 15 days after the leave begins, unless
the employee can demonstrate that it is not practicable to do so
despite his/her good faith efforts. Failure to comply with these
medical certification requirements is grounds for, and may result
in, deferral or denial of the requested leave.
(8) Subsequent medical recertification will be required as necessary,
but no more than once every 30 days after receipt of the initial
medical certification.
(9) All leaves due to a qualifying exigency must be accompanied by a
certification as has been prescribed by the Secretary of Labor.
(10) In response to a request for leave necessitated by the serious health
condition of the employee or others, the Town may require the
employee to obtain a second opinion from a health care provider
selected and paid for by the Town.
(11) While on leave, employees are, at a minimum, required to report
on the 1st day of each month to the Human Resource Department
regarding the status of the family or medical condition(s) and their
intent to return to work.
(12) Under Town policy, employees are required to provide at least two
weeks of advance notification of the date they intend to return to
work from a leave of absence.
D. Maximum leave entitlement.
(1) The maximum FMLA leave entitlement for employees eligible under
this policy is 12 weeks in the one-year period measured from the
date of the employee's first day of FMLA leave due to:
(a) The serious health condition of the employee or the employee's
child, parent or spouse/civil union partner;
(b) Birth, adoption or foster care placement;
(c) Service as an organ or bone marrow donor; or
(d) A qualifying exigency.
(2) The maximum FMLA leave entitlement for employees eligible under
this policy due to the serious injury or illness of a covered service
member is 26 weeks in the one-year period measured from an
employee's first day of FMLA leave taken.
(3) The maximum amounts of FMLA leave stated herein do not afford
eligible employees the ability to take more leave if they have
multiple qualifying reasons than they otherwise would be entitled
to take for a single qualifying reason during the applicable time
period.
§ 220-8.10 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-8.10
180:226
(4) Any absences that qualify as FMLA leave runs concurrently with
an absence under the Town's disability insurance plan or Workers'
Compensation laws.
(5) Any time spent performing "light duty" work does not count against
an employee's FMLA leave entitlement, whether such "light duty"
work has been required by the Town or requested by the employee.
Therefore, any employee's right to restoration of his or her job is
held in abeyance during the period of time (if any) the employee
performs light duty (or until the end of the applicable FMLA leave
period).
(6) When a husband and wife or civil union partners are both eligible
employees of the Town, they are each individually eligible to
receive the maximum leave time allowable for their own serious
health condition or the serious health condition of a son/daughter
or spouse/civil union partner, or to serve as an organ or bone
marrow donor. For purposes of leave due to a qualifying exigency,
married employees are each individually eligible to receive the
maximum leave time allowable for each. For purposes of family
leave taken due to the birth, adoption or placement of a son/
daughter or for the serious health condition of a parent, married
persons are eligible for the maximum leave allowable to one
individual eligible employee. For purposes of leave taken due to the
serious injury or illness of a covered service member or covered
veteran (or for a combination of leave taken for this reason and
any other qualifying reason), married employees are eligible for the
maximum leave allowable to one individual eligible employee.
(7) An eligible employee may take intermittent leave or leave on a
reduced schedule (up to the amount of the maximum leave
entitlement) when medically necessary due to the employee's own
serious health condition, or the serious health condition of the
employee's son/daughter, parent or spouse/civil union partner, or
due to the serious injury or illness of a covered service member
or covered veteran. An eligible employee may further take
intermittent leave or leave on a reduced schedule (up to the amount
of the maximum leave entitlement) due to a qualifying exigency or
to serve as an organ or bone marrow donor. Employees seeking to
take intermittent leave or leave on a reduced schedule are subject
to the same notice, medical certification and other employee
obligations identified above. In addition, if such intermittent or
reduced schedule leave is requested, the Town reserves the right
to temporarily transfer the employee to an available alternative
position with equivalent pay and benefits (but not necessarily
equivalent duties) that better accommodates this type of leave.
(8) Intermittent or reduced schedule leave may not be taken upon
the birth, adoption or foster care placement of an employee's son/
daughter unless agreed to by the employee and the Town.
(9) Since the purpose of a FMLA leave is to enable an employee to
maintain his/her ability to address family and/or medical issues,
such an employee may not work elsewhere while on such leave
§ 220-8.10 WATER § 220-8.10
180:227
unless previously approved by the First Selectman or unless
otherwise required by applicable law.
(10) There is no obligation under the FMLA to guarantee an employee's
original job or an equivalent position beyond the maximum period
specified above.
E. Maintenance of health benefits. An eligible employee's medical benefits
will continue during a leave of absence up to the maximum amount
of leave afforded under this policy. While on paid leave, the Town will
continue to make payroll deductions to collect the employee's share of
the medical insurance premiums. While on unpaid leave, the employee
must continue to pay his/her share of the medical insurance premiums,
either in person or by mail. The payment must be received as directed
by the Town. Failure of the employee to pay the premium may result in
loss of coverage.
(1) Employees have a thirty-day grace period in which to make required
premium payments. If payment is not timely made, health insurance
coverage may be cancelled, if the employee has been notified in
writing at least 15 days before the date that coverage would lapse.
At the Town's option, the Town may pay the employee's share of the
premiums during FMLA leave if the coverage were to lapse due to
failure of the employee to make timely payments, and then recover
such payments from the employee upon return to work.
(2) Should an employee's health insurance lapse due to nonpayment
while on FMLA leave, the Town will again provide health insurance
benefits according to the applicable plans when the employee
returns from the leave of absence.
(3) If an employee does not return to work following FMLA leave for
a reason other than: (1) the continuation, recurrence, or onset of a
serious health condition (or serious injury or illness in the case of a
covered service member or covered veteran) which would otherwise
render the employee eligible for FMLA leave; or (2) other
circumstances beyond the employee's control, the Town reserves
the right to seek reimbursement from the employee for its share of
health insurance premiums paid on the employee's behalf during the
employee's FMLA leave.
F. Rights upon return from leave. If an employee is considered a "key
employee" as defined in the FMLA, restoration to employment may be
denied following FMLA leave if restoration will cause substantial and
grievous economic injury to the Town.
(1) If an employee is not a "key employee" as defined in the FMLA, upon
the conclusion of an FMLA leave (or the expiration of the maximum
family or medical leave provided by law, whichever occurs first), s/he
may return to work with all seniority, retirement or fringe benefits s/
he had at the commencement of such leave. There will be no accruals
of such benefits (including paid time off) during an FMLA leave.
(2) If an employee is not a "key employee" as defined in the FMLA, upon
the conclusion of an FMLA leave (or the expiration of the maximum
family or medical leave provided by law, whichever occurs first), s/he
will be reinstated to the same position s/he held prior to such leave
§ 220-8.10 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-8.10
180:228
or to an equivalent position with equivalent pay, benefits, and other
terms and conditions of employment. If an employee is medically
unable to perform his/her prior job, s/he will be offered work suitable
to his or her physical condition, if such work is available, at the pay
rate appropriate to that job.
(3) If an employee cannot return to work at the expiration of the
maximum FMLA leave allowed, the Town has no obligation under the
FMLA to restore an employee to any position. An employee on leave
or returning from leave has no greater right to reinstatement or to
other benefits and conditions of employment than if the employee
had been continuously employed during the leave period.
G. Fitness for duty certification. In accordance with applicable law and
Town policy governing returns to work after a medical absence,
employees returning to work after a medical leave due to their own
serious health condition (other than an employee taking intermittent
leave or leave on a reduced schedule) must present a fitness-for-duty
certification from their health care provider to the Human Resources
Department prior to their return to employment.
(1) If there are any medical restrictions upon an employee's return to
work, the health care provider should state these restrictions in the
certificate provided. It is the employee's responsibility to notify the
Human Resources Department prior to his/her return to work and
make them aware of any restrictions.
(2) Employees will not be eligible to return to work after a medical
leave without being medically cleared to do so. In addition, the
Town reserves the right to have its own health care provider and/
or the Human Resources Department contact the employee's health
care provider for purposes of clarification of the employee's fitness
to return to work certification. Under no circumstances will an
employee's direct supervisor make contact with the employee's
health care provider for purposes of determining fitness for duty (or
any other medical certification issue pertaining to FMLA).
§ 220-8.11. Occupational injury leave.
A. If an employee suffers an accident or injury that occurred while the
employee was engaged in the performance of his/her duties and has
made an approved Workers' Compensation claim, the Town shall
continue to pay the employee through payroll so that the employee will
receive his/her normal base pay/holiday pay during injury leave for as
long as the employee remains employed or for the first six months,
whichever period is shorter. Lost time under injury leave for the first six
months shall not be charged to sick or vacation leave, but sick time and
vacation time will not accrue while an employee is out on injury leave.
B. When an employee is on occupational injury leave, medical insurance
and retirement contributions will be made by the Town to the eligible
employee's account. The employee must continue to pay his/her share
of the medical insurance premium. Leave time will not count toward
seniority when an employee is on occupational injury leave.
§ 220-8.10 WATER § 220-8.11
180:229
C. If the employee continues to be eligible for payments under the Workers'
Compensation Act after the six-month period, then the employee can
choose to utilize their available sick leave to equalize the monetary
difference between said employee's weekly straight time wages and the
benefits payable to him/her under the Workers' Compensation Act.
§ 220-9. EMPLOYEE BENEFITS.
§ 220-9.1. Introduction.
Provided below is a general description of the employee benefits currently
offered by the Town to eligible employees and retirees. Because the exact
provisions of these benefits, particularly insurance coverage, change from
time to time, the detailed descriptions of each benefit and the conditions
of enrollment and specific benefit plan terms are set forth in specific plan
documents that are available upon request in the Finance Office. The Town
reserves the right to change or discontinue any of its insurance benefits as
well as the conditions for participation in such benefits plans in the sole
discretion of the Board of Selectmen. Furthermore, where the terms of this
handbook are inconsistent with the terms of any benefit plans maintained
by the Town, the terms of the more current benefit plans shall control.
§ 220-9.2. Insurance.
The Town offers regular full-time employees (and grandfathered regular
part-time employees referred to in § 220-4.4) medical, dental, life and
disability insurance benefits subject to any applicable waiting periods that
may apply. The following insurance benefits are offered to eligible
employees who choose, at the time of their hire or during open enrollment
periods, to participate in the plans, to fill out any required paperwork, and/
or to pay the employee's share of any insurance premiums involved.
A. Medical insurance: High Deductible Health Plan/Health Savings Account
(HDHP/HSA) Plan.
(1) Eligible employees may elect coverage under a HDHP/HSA Plan with
deductibles of $3,000 for a single coverage and $6,000 for twoperson
and family coverage. In and out-of-network benefits share
the same deductible. For out-of-network the member will have an
additional responsibility for 20% of the cost of services after
deductible until the cost share maximum ("CSM") reaches $5,000
single (includes deductible) and $10,000 family (includes
deductible). The CSM also includes prescription copays after
deductible.
(2) Effective January 1, 2019, the Town shall fund 75% of the deductible
cost into a health Savings Account (HSA) for each employee through
proportionate deposits in the first pay period in January 2019 and
first pay period in July 2019. In addition, 100% of the difference
between the original $2,500/$5,000 deductible cost and the new
$3,000/$6,000 deductible cost will be deposited to the employee's
Health Savings Account in the first pay period in January 2019.
§ 220-8.11 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-9.2
180:230
(3) Effective January 1, 2019, employees who elect benefits under the
HDHP shall contribute 15% of the premium cost for said insurance
for themselves and their dependents through biweekly payroll
deductions.
(4) For new employees and any employee who, due to a qualifying event,
enrolls in the HDHP after January of any given HDHP plan year,
the Town's contributions to an employee's HSA shall be prorated by
month to reflect the proportional number of months remaining in the
plan year. In addition, when written notice of employment separation
is received prior to the scheduled HSA deposit, the Town's
contribution to an employee's HSA shall be prorated accordingly.
Also, if an employee is on an unpaid leave of absence during the
scheduled HSA deposit, the Town's contribution to an employee's
HSA shall be prorated upon the return of the employee.
(5) The Town's annual contribution toward the funding of the HSA is not
an element of the underlying plan, but rather relates to the manner
in which the deductible shall be funded for employees. The Town
shall have no obligation to fund any portion of the plan for retirees
or other individuals upon their separation from employment.
(6) If the total cost of this group health plan triggers an excise tax
under Internal Revenue Code § 49801, and/or any other local, state
or federal statute or regulation, the Town may seek an alternative
insurance plan with a total combined cost that either reduces/
mitigates the excise tax or falls below the excise tax thresholds.
B. Life insurance. The Town provides life insurance in the amount of two
times the employee's base salary.
C. Dental insurance. The Town offers dental insurance with specific benefit
plan terms set forth in plan documents that are available upon request
in the Finance Office. The employee premium share contribution for
dental insurance shall mirror that of the medical insurance employee
contribution.
D. Accidental death and dismemberment insurance. The Town pays for
accidental death and dismemberment insurance, in an amount equal to
two times annual base salary for each insurance, to a benefit maximum
of $200,000 with a reduction in coverage to 50% at age 70. Coverage
includes an accelerated death benefit and a life conversion privilege, or
as stipulated in an applicable collective bargaining agreement.
E. Disability insurance.
(1) The Town provides short-term and long-term disability insurance for
accidents or illnesses not covered by workers' compensation. After
an approved seven-calendar-day period of extended sick leave, shortterm
disability insurance will provide a weekly payment for a limited
period of time, not to exceed 66.67% of the regular weekly pay
(which includes holidays), subject to limitations, in the event of a
nonoccupational accident or illness, for up to 26 weeks. The sevencalendar-
day waiting period may be waived when the absence is
due to an accident. In the event the employee does not have any
paid leave time available to satisfy the approved seven calendarday
period of extended sick leave provision, the employee must take
§ 220-9.2 WATER § 220-9.2
180:231
the time as unpaid. If the employee continues to be totally and
permanently disabled after 26 weeks, long-term disability insurance
may provide additional weekly payments.
(2) When an employee is on short-term or long-term disability leave, s/
he will not accrue leave time; however, leave time will count toward
seniority. Medical insurance contributions will be made by the Town
to the eligible employee's account up to 52 weeks and the employee
must continue to pay his/her share of the medical insurance
premiums, either in person or through payroll deduction. Retirement
contributions will not be made by the Town to the eligible employee's
account while on short-term/long-term disability leave.
F. Employee assistance program. Unexpected problems or issues during
employment may negatively impact job performance. These problems
may be related to work-related stress, alcohol or drug abuse, emotional
difficulties, marital or family difficulties or financial concerns.
Sometimes these problems are of such a serious nature that they require
outside professional help. The Town strongly supports the Employee
Assistance Program to help employees deal with such issues.
Information on participating in the Employee Assistance Program can
be obtained from the employee's immediate supervisor or through the
Human Resources Office.
§ 220-9.3. Longevity.
A. All regular full-time eligible employees (and grandfathered regular parttime
employees referred to in § 220-4.4) hired before July 1, 2013, shall
receive longevity payments in the first paycheck in July of each year as
follows:
Years of Service Amount of Payment
5 to 10 years of service $100
11 to 15 years of service $150
16 to 20 years of service $250
21 to 25 years of service $350
26 years of service and over $450
B. Prior part-time service credit (as described in § 220-8.3 will apply in
determining the employee's eligibility for longevity.
§ 220-9.4. Retirement plan.
A. All regular full-time employees (and grandfathered regular part-time
employees referred to in § 220-4.4), excluding employees covered by the
State of Connecticut Municipal Employees' Retirement System- CMERS,
are eligible for a retirement plan (Town of Ellington 401A Money
Purchase Plan).
(1) The Town will contribute 7.1% of pay and a matching provision up
to 3% of salary to the account of the employee with the following
feature highlights:
(a) Each employee is vested as soon as the contribution is made;
§ 220-9.2 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-9.4
180:232
(b) Normal retirement age is 65 while early retirement age may be
at age 55;
(c) Each employee may designate the investment vehicle into which
his/her contribution shall be made within the investment options
approved by the Trustee.
(2) Effective July 1, 2019, the matching provision will increase to 4.64%.
B. Retiree's health insurance.
(1) The "Rule of 75" is defined as regular full-time employees (and
grandfathered regular part-time employees referred to in § 220-4.4)
whose age plus years of service equal or exceed 75. Retirees who
meet the "Rule of 75" shall be eligible to participate in the Town of
Ellington Group Health and Dental Insurance Plan which includes
prescription drug coverage. When retirees reach the Medicare age,
the retirees shall be covered under Medicare A supplemental
coverage and Medicare B supplemental coverage at no cost to the
retiree. If under age 65, the retiree shall pay the premium share as
defined in § 200-9.2.
(2) The retiree pays 100% of the difference in premium rates applicable
for individual coverage and the elected dependent coverage.
(3) Employees hired by the Town of Ellington on or after July 1, 2013,
shall not be eligible for any Town contribution toward the cost of
continued medical insurance benefits (or Medicare) following their
retirement, notwithstanding the provisions set forth above.
C. Retiree's life insurance. Retirees who meet the "Rule of 75" shall be
eligible to participate in the Town of Ellington Life Insurance Plan. The
Town shall provide each retiree with a $10,000 life insurance policy,
subject to the provisions described in the current insurance booklet.
§ 220-10. EMPLOYEE CONDUCT.
§ 220-10.1. General policy.
Town employees are prohibited from engaging in any conduct that could
reflect unfavorably upon Town service. Town employees must avoid any
action that might result in or create the impression of using public office for
private gain or giving preferential treatment to any person.
§ 220-10.2. Outside employment.
A. Except as otherwise prohibited in this handbook, an employee may
engage in outside employment with prior notification to the immediate
supervisor and First Selectman. However, no regular full-time employee
may engage in other full-time employment outside the Town service, and
no employee's outside employment shall be in conflict of interest with
Town employment. Conflicts will be resolved at the sole discretion of the
First Selectman.
B. Any employee who engages in employment outside of his/her regular
working hours shall be subject to call to perform his/her regular Town
duties.
§ 220-9.4 WATER § 220-10.2
180:233
C. The Town shall in no respect be liable or grant sick leave in case of any
injury to an employee while s/he is engaged in outside employment nor
for any occupational illness attributed to that outside employment.
§ 220-10.3. Political activity.
All employees of the Town shall be free and encouraged to exercise their
rights as citizens, to cast their votes and express their opinions on all
political subjects. No employees of the Town, while on duty, shall solicit
any person to vote at any political primary, election or challenge, or in any
manner attempt to influence any voter in a Town election, Town Meeting or
referendum.
§ 220-10.4. Conflict of interest.
A. Any appointed/elected Town officer or employee who has or may have
a significant financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract,
transaction or decision or any agency, agent, officer, board or
commission of the Town shall immediately disclose the nature and extent
of that interest, in writing, to the Town Clerk, who shall record such
disclosure upon an official record filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
The Town Clerk shall then send a copy of such disclosure to the agency,
agent, officer, board or commission of the Town making such contract,
transaction or decision. A copy will also be provided to the First
Selectman.
B. Any such officer or employee shall be disqualified from any discussion,
action or vote on any such matter coming before an agency, agent,
officer, board or commission.
C. Such officer or employee of the Town shall not in any way condone,
promote, encourage, influence or otherwise attempt to affect action or
matters which will or may result in a conflict of interest between his
Town duties and responsibilities and his/her private affairs or which are
incompatible with the proper discharge of his/her other official duties
and, to that end, no appointed Town officer or employee shall grant any
special consideration, treatment or advantage to any person or entity
beyond that which is available to every other person or entity.
D. No employee shall solicit any gift. No employee shall accept any gift
having a value in excess of $100 from any person who, to his/her
knowledge, has an interest, directly or indirectly, in any manner
whatsoever in business dealings with the Town.
E. Violation of the provisions of this section shall be grounds for the
immediate dismissal of any such officer or employee. Any such violation
shall render such contract, transaction or decision voidable by the
agency, agent, officer, board or commission or employee making such
contract, transaction or decision.
F. The Board of Selectmen has established a Code of Ethics as a guideline
for the ethical conduct of elected officials, appointed officials and
employees in the proper discharge of their official responsibilities for the
prevention of the misuse of one's official position for personal finance
gain, unethical conduct, corrupting influence, illegal activities or other
behavior. The Town of Ellington Ethics Commission will review and
§ 220-10.2 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-10.4
180:234
evaluate allegations of unethical conduct levied against any person
subject to the Code of Ethics. The Code of Ethics is provided to all
employees in a separate document.
§ 220-10.5. Confidentiality.
During the course of employment with the Town, employees may have
access to certain confidential and proprietary information, including
protected health information. Such confidential information may include
information pertaining to the lives of Town residents and the business
interests in the community, as well as personnel, fiscal and legal matters
pertaining to Town employees or operations.
A. Violating confidentiality as it pertains to the Town's internal affairs or
the affairs of its residents and the business community, either during
the course of employment or thereafter, except as may be required in
connection with job duties, is strictly prohibited. All employees must hold
in confidence and not directly or indirectly disclose, make public, use, or
make copies of any confidential information, except as may be expressly
authorized by the Town or other applicable laws. Except as otherwise
required by law, all records must be kept secured and confidential and
not discussed with or released to anyone inside or outside the Town who
does not have a business need to know such information. All employees
must further agree to take all reasonable steps necessary to ensure
that all confidential information will not become known to third parties,
including other employees who do not need to know such information.
B. All records, files, documents, computer disks and other materials, or
copies thereof, containing confidential information shall be and remain
the sole property of the Town, shall not be removed from the Town's
premises or otherwise used except for bona fide business purposes
and shall be promptly returned to the Town upon request at any time
during employment and immediately upon termination of employment
with the Town, whether voluntary or involuntary. These nondisclosure
obligations shall remain in effect during the entire period of employment
with the Town and at all times after termination of employment, whether
voluntary or involuntary.
C. The Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requires the disclosure of many
public records, and the Town responds promptly to Freedom of
Information requests. However, the Act exempts certain types of
personal, proprietary and confidential information from disclosure.
Employees should not discuss confidential information. If a FOIA request
is received, the First Selectman's office must be notified immediately.
§ 220-10.6. Employment of relatives.
The Town neither prohibits nor favors the employment of relatives of an
employee. For purposes of this policy, a "relative" includes a parent, spouse/
civil union partner, child, brother, sister, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew,
grandparent and stepparent. In-law relationships to the same degrees and
other persons living in a household are also included in this policy.
Employment of relatives in the same work unit or department is permitted
§ 220-10.4 WATER § 220-10.6
180:235
provided that neither relative occupies a position which directs or controls
the work of the other; reports to the other; or has any review or sign-off
relationship with the other. The conditions of this policy also apply if two
employees are in a relationship or become related through marriage after
they are employed.
§ 220-10.7. Workplace privacy, monitoring and use of electronic
communications systems.
A. The Town's primary mission is to effectively and efficiently conduct its
business and meet or exceed service expectations. In order to do this,
the Town must be able to: (a) access business information at all times;
(b) provide a safe, productive work environment; and (c) supervise its
employees to be sure that they are acting consistently with business
objectives.
B. In order to prevent any misunderstandings, the Town believes that every
employee should be aware of the following policies on privacy,
monitoring and use of electronic communication systems in the
workplace so that they can conduct themselves in a professional manner
at all times and avoid any potentially embarrassing situations.
(1) The Town reserves the right to conduct monitoring to inspect
employees' work areas including, without limitation, employee
lockers, desks, file cabinets, workstations, and mail.
(2) Employees using personal locks on Town property must provide the
combination or key to their supervisor. The Town will also retain a
copy of any company keys issued to employees.
(3) The Town provides telephones and computers and other forms
of electronic communications to employees to facilitate efficient
and effective business operations. Employees given access to the
Town's Internet and intranet are required to agree and to adhere
to Town policies on Internet use and privacy. This policy applies to
all Town information technology resources regardless of location
(e.g., office, home, field locations, etc.). Electronic communications
includes without limitation information that is transmitted,
received, and/or stored via the telephone, the voice mail system,
the electronic mail (e-mail) system, the facsimile machines, the
Internet, intranet and other technology resources, such as the
Town's local area network, computer hardware and software. These
communication systems, as well as all electronic communications
transmitted, received, and/or stored on these systems, are property
of the Town. As such, employees shall use these communications
systems for Town business only, during working time. "Working
time" for purposes of this provision and other provisions in this
handbook is the time an employee is engaged or should be engaged
in performing his/her duties for the Town. Limited personal use
of these communications systems during non-working time is
permitted to the extent that such use does not interfere with the
Town's business operations or others who are working, does not
cause the Town to incur any additional expenses, and does not
otherwise violate any the Town policies or procedures or applicable
§ 220-10.6 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-10.7
180:236
laws. Excessive personal use of these communications systems is
prohibited. Employees who have been issued a Town e-mail address
must use the Town e-mail address to conduct all Town business.
It is prohibited to use the Town e-mail address to send or receive
personal communications. Employees and public officials should
keep in mind that electronic messages sent as part of their workday
are not private and are discoverable communications which may be
subject to Freedom of Information Act requests and are admissible
as evidence.
(4) To reduce the risk of unauthorized access, loss of, and damage to
information during and outside of normal business hours or when
workstations are left unattended, all sensitive and confidential
information must be properly locked away or disposed of when a
workstation is not in use. Whenever a workstation is unoccupied for
an extended period of time the following will apply:
(a) All sensitive and confidential paperwork must be removed from
the desk and locked in a drawer or filing cabinet.
(b) All waste paper which contains sensitive or confidential
information must be shredded. Under no circumstances should
this information be placed in regular waste paper bins.
(c) Computers or terminals should not be left unattended;
employees and public officials are required to log out or lock
their computer when leaving their workstations.
(d) Employees are responsible for keeping their passwords safe
and secure. Employees must never share their passwords or
place passwords in obvious places.
(e) Laptops, tablets, and other hardware devices must be removed
from the desk and locked in a drawer or filing cabinet.
(f) Keys for accessing drawers or filing cabinets should not be left
unattended at a desk.
(g) Printers and fax machines should be treated with the same
caution; any print jobs containing sensitive and confidential
paperwork should be retrieved immediately.
(5) The Town's policy prohibiting harassment and discrimination
applies to the use of these systems. Therefore, the creation,
transmission, receipt or downloading of inappropriate or offensive
comments or other images or information, such as disparaging
comments or pictures based on race, ethnicity, color, religion, age,
gender, national origin, ancestry, disability, sexual orientation,
marital status, military/veteran status, gender identity/expression,
genetic information or any other protected category, over any of the
Town's systems, is prohibited.
(6) Solicitation on Town premises is substantially disruptive to Town
operations, may materially interfere with the working relationship
between employees, and may affect the job performance of
employees. Accordingly, solicitation by one employee of another
is prohibited while either is on working time. Furthermore,
distribution of literature, candy sales, magazine subscriptions,
raffle tickets, etc., by an employee is not permitted in the work
§ 220-10.7 WATER § 220-10.7
180:237
areas at any time. While an employee may engage in solicitation
and distribution activities during rest and meal periods with others
who are not working at the time, the Town believes that selling
or collecting money for any purpose, or distributing literature that
is political or religious in nature, can be controversial and
problematic and urges all employees to discourage such activities.
Trespassing, soliciting or distributing literature by anyone not
employed by the Town is prohibited on Town's premises.
(7) World Wide Web access and use of the Internet is encouraged
where such use is appropriate for business and professional
objectives and is conducted lawfully. Web access or Internet use
through the Town's electronic communications systems should not
be for purposes of personal gain, solicitation of non-Town business
or advancement of individual views, nor should use of the Internet
disrupt the operation of the Town's electronic communications
systems or the networks of other users. In addition, each employee
is responsible for the content of all text, audio or images that s/he
places, sends, downloads or receives over the Internet. Accordingly,
web access or Internet use through the Town's electronic
communications systems may not involve the transmission, receipt
or use of fraudulent, harassing or obscene information, nor should
any messages sent over the Town's electronic communications
systems be inconsistent with or interfere with the Town's business
practices or principles. Furthermore, messages communicated over
the Town's electronic communications systems must not be
transmitted under an assumed name, and users may not attempt
to obscure the origin of any message. Confidential information
involving the Town's operations should be sent or received via the
Internet through a secure site and care must be taken at all times
to protect the confidentiality of the Town's intellectual property
assets.
(8) Software programs and materials, other than those that have been
properly licensed by the Town, may not be installed or downloaded
on the Town's computers. In addition, theft of software is a crime,
and is punishable by law. Users are not permitted to copy, transfer,
rename, add or delete information on programs belonging or
licensed to others unless given express permission to do so. No
employee may use the Town's electronic communications systems
in ways that are inconsistent with licenses or copyrights, or to
download or distribute pirated software or data. Furthermore, no
employee may use the Town's electronic communications systems
to propagate any virus, worm or trap door program code, or to
otherwise disable or overload any computer system or network,
or to circumvent any system intended to protect the privacy or
security of another user.
(9) Intrusions of privacy by any employee into the Town's business
affairs or the affairs of other employees or Town residents are
strictly prohibited. Employees are prohibited from accessing
§ 220-10.7 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-10.7
180:238
information or files at another employee's work area unless
expressly permitted to do so by authorized management personnel.
(10) The Town reserves the right to review, access, and intercept all
messages created, received, or sent over its electronic
communications systems at any time, without advance notice, for
such reasons as, without limitation: ensuring that the systems are
being used solely to conduct the Town's business; assisting in the
evaluation of employee work performance; maintaining the system;
preventing or investigating allegations of system abuse or misuse;
assuring compliance with software copyright laws; complying with
legal and regulatory requests for information; and ensuring that the
Town's operations continue appropriately.
(11) Employees are prohibited from gaining access to another
employee's computer or other electronic communications and must
not use unauthorized codes, passwords or other means to gain
access to another employee's computer or other electronic
communications systems, unless expressly permitted to do so by
authorized management personnel. Employees are prohibited from
accessing a file or retrieving any stored information on the Town's
e-mail, voice mail, and computer systems unless expressly
permitted to do so by authorized management personnel.
Employees should not create their own voice mail or other
electronic communications system passwords unless permitted to
do so by authorized management personnel. Employees must
provide all personal passwords (except e-mail passwords unless
otherwise required for business reasons) to the Town, so that the
Town may effectively conduct business at all times.
(12) Public records retention and Freedom of Information requirements
must be satisfied in the use of electronic communications systems
in accordance with the Town's policies and applicable law.
(13) Any employee who violates the Town's privacy, monitoring and
Internet use policy shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to
and including termination of employment. In addition, criminal
penalties and fines may apply where the employee's conduct
violates applicable state or federal laws.
(14) Any complaints regarding potential violations of this policy, and/
or any questions regarding an employee's use of these electronic
communication systems in accordance with this policy, should be
directed to the employee's department head/supervisor or the First
Selectman.
§ 220-10.8. Electronic monitoring.
A. The Town gives notice to all of its employees and to anyone else who
enters its premises or work locations of the potential use of electronic
monitoring in the workplace. "Electronic monitoring" means the
collection of information on the Town's premises and in connection
with the Town's equipment about the activities or communications of
employees and others by any means other than direct, personal
observation. Electronic monitoring includes the use of a computer,
§ 220-10.7 WATER § 220-10.8
180:239
telephone, wire, radio, camera, video-camera, tape or digital recording
device or any other type of electromagnetic, global positioning system
("GPS"), photo-electronic or photo-optical system.
B. The Town reserves the right in its sole discretion to engage in electronic
monitoring on its premises at any time for any lawful business purpose,
including without limitation, to: (a) access business information; (b)
provide a safe and secure work environment; (c) assist in the evaluation
of employee work performance; (d) supervise employees to be sure that
they are acting consistently with business objectives; (e) investigate
suspected misconduct; (f) assess compliance with the Town policies and
applicable law; and to (g) ensure that the Town's operations continue
appropriately. The Town will not engage in any electronic monitoring
that is prohibited by any applicable state or federal law, including,
without limitation, by monitoring activities in areas provided for
employee private, personal use (such as restrooms/locker rooms) and/
or by monitoring for the purpose of interfering with/restraining an
employee's rights to engage in protected concerted activities.
C. The following are examples of the specific types of electronic monitoring
that the Town may use on its premises and at its work locations:
(1) Monitoring of e-mail and other components of the computer system.
(2) Video surveillance.
(3) Telephone and voice mail monitoring.
(4) Monitoring of electromagnetic card access system.
(5) Monitoring using GPS tracking devices.
D. An individual consents to being electronically monitored by the Town for
any lawful business purpose by being employed by the Town, using the
Town equipment or vehicles and/or by being on the Town's premises.
E. Any employee who is determined to have engaged in any conduct that
is contrary to the Town's business as a result of information obtained
through the Town's use of electronic monitoring shall be subject to
disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. In
addition, criminal penalties and fines may apply where the employee's
conduct violates applicable state or federal laws.
§ 220-10.9. Personal electronic devices.
A. Employees are prohibited from attaching their personal devices to or
charging them on the Town's computers. Employees are not to plug in
any storage devices, USB drives, cell phones, cameras, DVD\CDs, media
cards or any other personal storage device into the Town's network or
Town-owned hardware. All charging of these personal devices should
always be done from a wall outlet.
B. An employee's use of any personal electronic devices (such as cell
phones, tablets, laptops, MP3 players, smartwatches, smartglasses,
etc.,) shall be kept to a minimum during working time. During nonworking
time, an employee's use of any personal electronic devices
must not be disruptive to others (including co-workers, members of the
public, etc.) or interfere with the work of the Town, and must not violate
the Town's policies (including standards of conduct; confidentiality;
acceptable IT use, etc.) or applicable law.
§ 220-10.8 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-10.10
180:240
§ 220-10.10. Recording devices.
A. To prevent harassment (as defined in our antiharassment policy),
maintain individual privacy, encourage open communication, avoid
unnecessary distractions and protect confidential information of the
Town from being improperly disclosed, employees are prohibited from
taking, distributing or posting pictures, videos or audio recordings while
on working time. Exceptions may be granted when participating in an
authorized Town activity or with permission from the First Selectman
for business-related purposes. For the same reasons as stated above,
employees who seek to take, distribute or post pictures, videos or audio
recordings of people while on the Town's premises (such as other
employees, residents or others doing business with the Town) while on
non-working time must notify and obtain permission from such other
individuals first.
B. At no time may an employee take, distribute or post pictures, videos or
audio recordings of any confidential information of the Town (as defined
in the Town's confidentiality policy) or in violation of any other Town
policy.
C. Employees also may not take pictures or make recordings of work areas
at any time. An exception to the rule concerning pictures and recordings
of work areas would be if the employee were engaging in any activity
protected by the National Labor Relations Act including, for example,
taking pictures of health, safety and/or working condition concerns, or of
strike, protest and work-related issues and/or other protected concerted
activities, as long as such pictures, videos or audio recordings do not
disclose any confidential information of the Town (as defined in the
Town's confidentiality policy).
§ 220-10.11. Social media.
A. Town employees are free to express themselves as private citizens on
social media and networking sites. When using social media, Town
personnel should be mindful that their online speech becomes part of
the worldwide electronic domain. However, any employee who chooses
to use social media needs to be aware of the following set of guidelines
for appropriate online conduct to avoid having the Town take adverse
action with respect to their employment.
(1) Any speech made pursuant to an employee's official duties is not
protected speech and may form the basis for discipline if deemed
detrimental to the Town's interests.
(2) Town employees are prohibited from posting information regarding
Town business, investigations or any confidential information or
divulge non-public information gained by reasons of his or her
employment; make any statements, endorsements or publish
materials that could reasonably be considered to represent the
views, opinions or positions of the Town, without prior written
approval from the First Selectman.
(3) Town employees are prohibited from speech involving themselves
or others reflecting behavior that would reasonably be considered
reckless or irresponsible. For example, speech containing obscene
§ 220-10.10 WATER § 220-10.11
180:241
or sexually explicit language, images, acts and statements or other
forms of speech that ridicule, malign, disparage or otherwise
express bias against any race, sex, disability, religion or any other
protected class.
(4) Town employees are prohibited from speech involving themselves
or others that could be viewed as malicious, obscene, threatening
or intimidating. Examples include, but are not limited to, posts that
could contribute to a hostile environment on the basis of race, sex,
disability, religion or any other status protected by law.
(5) Town employees should be aware that they may be subject to civil
litigation for:
(a) Publishing or posting false information that harms the
reputation of another person, group or organization.
(b) Publishing or posting private facts and personal information
about someone without their permission that has not been
previously revealed to the public, is not of legitimate public
concern or would be offensive to a responsible person.
(c) Using someone else's name, likeness or other personal
attributes without that person's permission for an exploitative
purpose.
(d) Publishing the creative work of another, trademarks or certain
confidential business information without the permission of the
owner.
(6) Town employees are prohibited from promoting misconduct or
violations of law, whether on or off-duty, through social media.
(7) Town employees should be aware that privacy settings on social
networking and/or media networking sites are constantly in flux
and they should never assume that personal information posted on
such sites is private.
(8) Town employees should expect that any information created,
transmitted, downloaded, exchanged or discussed in a public online
forum may be accessed by the Town at any time without prior
notice.
(9) The utilization of social media and social networking for personal
use while performing official duties, either on personally-owned
electronic equipment and/or personal-owned technology devices
and/or Town electronic equipment, technology devices, computers
and/or any Town electronic resources(s), is prohibited and any
proof that this has occurred on duty may result in discipline.
(10) Unless authorized in writing by a management representative (such
as when an employee's job is to send public messages on behalf of
the Town), employees do not have permission to speak on behalf of
the Town via social media.
(11) While communicating through social media, if an employee posts
any content that has something to do with the work they perform
for the Town or subjects or individuals associated with the Town's
business, employees must make clear that they are not speaking on
behalf of the Town by accompanying their posts with a disclaimer
§ 220-10.11 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-10.11
180:242
such as: "The postings on this site are my own and do not
necessarily represent the Town's positions or opinions."
B. When an employee's use of any social media violates the law or any
Town policies (including policies pertaining to confidentiality, employee
misconduct or job performance), appropriate discipline up to and
including termination of employment will be imposed, regardless of
when the information was posted or sent and regardless of the tools or
site used to post or send such information.
C. Nothing in this policy (or any other Town policy) will be implemented
or should be interpreted in any manner so as to prohibit or inhibit
employees from engaging in any lawful activities through social media,
including exercising any rights they may have to engage in protected
concerted activity or political activities.
§ 220-10.12. Workplace harassment and discrimination.
The Town will not tolerate verbal or physical conduct by any employee
that unlawfully discriminates against any coworkers, visitors, or others
associated with the Town, on the basis of any legally protected status,
or which unlawfully harasses, disrupts or interferes with another's work
performance or which creates an intimidating, offensive or hostile working
environment.
A. Discrimination or harassment can take many forms. It may be, but is
not limited to: words, conduct, adverse job action, signs, jokes, pranks,
intimidation, physical contact, or violence. While all forms of
discrimination and harassment based on an employee's legally protected
status are prohibited, including but not limited to any adverse job action
or intimidation based on race, color, age, religion, gender, national
origin, ancestry, disability status, marital status, military/veteran status,
genetic information, gender identity/expression or sexual orientation, it
is the Town's policy to emphasize that sexual harassment is illegal and
prohibited by both state and federal law.
B. In order to maintain a work organization that is free from any form of
sexual harassment, the Town puts all employees including executives,
managers and supervisors on notice that sexual harassment of
employees is unacceptable conduct.
(1) Specifically, it is contrary to the Town's policies for any employee to
sexually harass another employee by:
(a) Making unwelcome sexual conduct or requests for sexual favors
a condition of an employee's continued employment; or
(b) Using an employee's submission or rejection of such conduct as
the basis for making employment decisions (e.g., promotions,
raises); or
(c) Creating a work environment in which conduct of a sexual nature
substantially interferes with an individual's work performance
or creates an atmosphere intimidating, hostile or offensive to
employees.
(2) Although not an inclusive list, the following are examples of the type
of conduct prohibited by the policy against sexual harassment:
(a) Unwelcome sexual advances, propositions or flirtations;
§ 220-10.11 WATER § 220-10.12
180:243
(b) Unwelcome attention of a sexual nature such as degrading
comments, suggestive or lewd remarks, propositions, jokes,
tricks or noises;
(c) Unwanted hugs, touches, kisses or requests for sexual favors;
(d) The threat or suggestion that continued employment,
advancement, assignment or earnings depend on whether or not
the employee will submit to or tolerate harassment;
(e) Retaliation for complaining about sexual harassment.
(3) All employees are further advised that sexually explicit or sexually
offensive material has no place within the Town's facilities. Such
material may not be posted, displayed, or even possessed within
the facility. Possession of such material, even if it is not posted or
publicly displayed, will be considered a violation of Town policy and
will subject the individual to disciplinary action.
C. Any employee who believes that the actions or words of a supervisor
or fellow employee or any outside party in the workplace constitute
unwelcome harassment or unlawful discrimination has a responsibility
to report such conduct immediately to his/her immediate supervisor
should his/her direct requests that the conduct cease be ignored. If an
employee is uncomfortable raising his/her complaint with someone to
whom s/he reports, or if the complaint involves someone in his/her direct
line of command, then that employee should bring a complaint to the
department head, the First Selectman or any managerial representative
of the Town.
(1) Confidentiality at the time of reporting the incident will be preserved
to the maximum extent possible. However, all allegations of unlawful
harassment and discrimination must be investigated promptly. In
this regard, the reporting employee, the alleged harasser or
discriminator and any other employees aware of the incident are
expected to treat this information in a confidential manner so as not
to defame or invade the privacy of others.
(2) The Town will take prompt action upon the receipt of a complaint
of unlawful harassment or discrimination. Any employee determined
to have committed unlawful harassment or discrimination will be
subject to appropriate disciplinary action, up to and including
termination. Moreover, any individual who makes unwelcome
advances, threatens or in any way discriminates or harasses another
employee based on a legally protected status may be personally
liable for monetary damages for such actions and their
consequences.
(3) The Town will not tolerate the taking of any reprisal against an
employee who, in good faith, files a complaint of unlawful
harassment or discrimination or participates, in good faith, in the
investigation of such complaint.
§ 220-10.13. Drug and alcohol-free workplace.
To promote safe and efficient operation of the workplace and to comply with
applicable State and Federal laws, it is the policy of the Town to maintain a
work force that is free from the effects of illegal drugs and abuse of alcohol
§ 220-10.12 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-10.13
180:244
or prescription drugs. The health and safety of the Town's employees is of
serious concern. Employees have the right to work in an alcohol-free and
drug-free environment and to work with persons free from the effects of
alcohol and drugs. Employees who abuse alcohol or drugs are a danger to
themselves, to other employees, and to the Town's business interests.
A. It is a standard of conduct for employees of the Town not to use illegal
drugs and not to abuse alcohol or prescription drugs, either on or off
the job. No employees may use, sell, manufacture, receive, distribute,
dispense or possess alcohol or any illegal drug or be under the influence
of alcohol or any illegal drug, or abuse prescription or over the counter
drugs, while on Town property, while operating Town or personal
vehicles or equipment on Town business, or while off-premises where
such behavior compromises the Town's business interests, or
undermines the public confidence in or harms the reputation of the
Town, or adversely effects the employee's job performance, job safety
and/or ability to fulfill Town responsibilities.
B. It is against Town policy to report to work under the influence of alcohol
or drugs. Being under the influence of alcohol, an illegal drug, or abuse
of any prescribed or over the counter drugs on Town premises or while
performing Town business, in Town-supplied vehicles or during working
hours is absolutely prohibited.
C. Employees must notify the First Selectman of any criminal drug/alcohol
arrest no later than five days after such arrest. The Town will determine
whether to take appropriate disciplinary action against such employee,
and/or require the employee to participate satisfactorily in an approved
drug abuse rehabilitation program.
D. Employees who discover controlled drugs or alcohol on Town premises
shall notify the First Selectman.
E. Employees must report their use of over-the-counter or prescribed
medications to their supervisors if the use might impair their ability to
perform their job safely and effectively. Employees must further respond
to requests from their supervisors as to whether they are taking any
medications which might impair their ability to perform their job safely
and effectively. A determination will then be made as to whether the
employee may be allowed to continue to work.
F. The appropriate, legal use of over-the-counter or prescribed drugs
(except medical marijuana) is permitted at work or during work hours if
such use does not impair an employee's ability to perform the essential
functions of the job effectively and in a safe manner that does not
endanger or pose risk of injury to the employee, other individuals in
the workplace and/or the general public. Employees must keep all
prescribed medicine in the original container, which identifies the drug,
date of prescription, dosage and prescribing physician. Abuse, misuse or
inappropriate use of prescription drugs also violates this policy.
G. The Town shall not discipline an employee for the lawful use of medical
marijuana, if such use is: authorized by a health care provider and the
employee submits proof of such authorization to the Town as required;
not otherwise prohibited by any federal law applicable to the work the
employee performs for the Town; does not restrict the Town's ability to
§ 220-10.13 WATER § 220-10.13
180:245
obtain federal funding; and is strictly confined to lawful use outside of
the workplace and working hours that does not cause the employee to
be under the influence in the workplace or during work hours.
H. In compliance with applicable state and federal law and regulations,
any employee who operates a commercial motor vehicle requiring a
commercial driver license (CDL), or is an applicant for a driver position,
will be subject to alcohol and drug testing as further described in a
separate policy for all such affected individuals.
I. The Town may also test employees for drug and alcohol use when the
Town has reasonable suspicion to believe that an employee is unable to
perform or is deficient in performing their job responsibilities due to the
influence of drugs or alcohol. Generally, reasonable suspicion means, but
is not limited to, direct, individualized observation by a representative of
the Town of: employee use, possession, sale or distribution of controlled
substances, drug paraphernalia or alcohol; abnormal behavior by an
employee while at work; a noticeable or substantial change in work
performance; or physical symptoms or manifestations of being under the
influence of controlled substances or alcohol.
J. Town employees who have been designated in high-risk or safetysensitive
positions by the Connecticut Department of Labor will further
be subject to random testing for drug and alcohol use in accordance with
applicable law.
K. Failure or refusal of an employee or applicant to cooperate fully with any
portion of this policy, or to submit to or comply with any drug or alcohol
testing as may be lawfully required, will be grounds for disciplinary
action up to and including termination or denial of employment.
§ 220-10.14. Smoking.
In order to maintain a safe and comfortable working environment and
to ensure compliance with applicable laws, smoking in Town offices and
buildings is not allowed. Employees may be subject to disciplinary action for
violating this policy.
§ 220-10.15. Personal appearance and work habits.
A. All employees are representatives of the Town and are expected to
project a positive image of the Town to the public and to anyone
associated with the Town. As such, employees are expected to wear
appropriate business attire when at work. The wearing of revealing
or sexually provocative clothing will not be permitted. Moreover, the
following, without limitation, are examples of clothing which do not
present a businesslike appearance for those who have contact with the
public, and which, therefore, will not be permitted: jeans (exception:
jeans are permitted on "Dress Down Fridays"), tank-tops, T-shirts with
inappropriate slogans or messages, shirts which expose the midriff,
shorts/skirts which do not extend below the mid-thigh, off the shoulder
dresses/shirts/blouses/sweaters, sweats and exercise clothing, casual
footwear and all types of dirty or ripped/ragged clothes. Adjustments to
above-noted clothing may be made based on position and as approved by
the immediate supervisor.
§ 220-10.13 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-10.15
180:246
B. Any employee who seeks an accommodation due to religious reasons or
because of a disability to the standards above should schedule a meeting
with his/her supervisor and/or the Human Resources Department to
discuss possible accommodation options.
C. If an employee reports for work improperly dressed, his/her supervisor
will instruct the employee to return home to change clothes or will take
other appropriate corrective action. Employees will not be compensated
during such time they are away from work. Repeated violations of this
policy will be cause for disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal.
D. Employees are also expected to maintain good work habits at all times.
All work areas are to be kept neat and orderly at all times, to assure ease
in retrieval of necessary information. Employees should also maintain
professional posture at all times, and, for example, should not put their
feet up on any furniture while at work. In addition, telephone courtesy
at all times is essential. An employee answering the telephone should
state the department's name and then his/her own name, and should
be professional in dealing with the caller, and responsive to the caller's
needs.
§ 220-10.16. Personal telephone calls and personal mail.
The Town recognizes the need for occasional personal calls to be made or
received during business hours for situations such as checking on family
members' health or safety, child care, elder care, emergency transportation,
etc. The Town expects employees to keep the number of personal phone
calls to a minimum, to make and receive them during personal time (e.g.,
breaks or lunch), and to limit the duration of such phone calls. In addition,
when a long distance phone call must be made, the call must be billed to
the caller's personal phone number. Employees should not use the Town as
a personal mailing address and personal mail should not be put through
the Town's postage meter. Use of Town stationery for personal mail is
prohibited.
§ 220-10.17. Use of cell phones.
A. The use of personal cell phones, including text messaging, shall be kept
to a minimum during working hours as they create distractions in the
workplace, disrupt productivity, may present potential security and safety
hazards and may cause privacy concerns for employees. Personal cell
phones should only be used in areas where they do not interfere with the
work of other employees and when used, must be done so in accordance
with applicable federal, state and local laws. Personal cell phone abuse is
subject to disciplinary action.
B. Employees assigned Town of Ellington equipment (e.g., cell phones, pagers,
radios, etc.) are expected to protect the equipment from loss, damage
or theft. Upon resignation, termination of employment, or any time upon
request, the employee will be asked to produce the equipment for return
or inspection. Employees unable to present the equipment in good working
condition within a reasonable time period (24 hours) will bear the cost of a
replacement. Employees who separate from employment with outstanding
debt for equipment loss or unauthorized charges will be considered to have
§ 220-10.15 WATER § 220-10.17
180:247
left employment on unsatisfactory terms and may be subject to legal action
for recovery of the loss.
C. Cell phones that are purchased through the Town of Ellington are the
property of Town of Ellington. The primary use of the cell phone is for
work-related business. Personal use of a Town-owned cell phone should be
occasional.
NOTE: Under no circumstances should the assigned cell phone be used as
a replacement for a personal cell phone or residential landline phone.
D. Individuals to whom cell phones have been provided are responsible for
the security and maintenance of the phones and must promptly report any
damage, theft, or vandalism to the Finance Office.
E. Per state law, cell phone (Town-owned or personal) use is prohibited while
driving a Town-owned or personal vehicle. Should an employee need to
make or receive a call (including text messaging) while driving, s/he should
locate a lawfully designated area to park and make or receive the call or use
a hands-free speaking device.
§ 220-10.18. Employee safety.
A. The Town seeks to promote a safe and healthy physical environment for
all employees. These guidelines are designed with employee safety in
mind. In addition to complying with these guidelines and any directives
from supervisors, each employee should insure that no action s/he takes
endangers himself or herself or a fellow employee or results in the
destruction of property.
B. Every employee needs to be aware of and adhere to the following safety
precautions:
(1) Notify your supervisor of any emergency situation.
(2) If you are injured or become sick at work, no matter how slight,
inform your supervisor immediately.
(3) If you have an accident at work, immediately report it to your
supervisor, who will assist you in completing an incident report.
This incident report must be submitted within 24 hours of any
accident so that it can be filed with our Workers' Compensation
carrier, if necessary.
(4) Learn how to lift properly. Bend your knees and keep your back
erect. Get help when necessary.
(5) Keep work areas neat and arrange workstations so there are no
hidden safety or health hazards.
(6) Keep passageways clear at all times.
(7) Report unsafe working conditions immediately to your supervisor.
(8) Report damages or broken machines and equipment to your
supervisor.
(9) Practice safety awareness by thinking defensively, anticipating
risks and reporting unsafe conditions immediately.
(10) Know the locations, contents and use of first aid kits, Automated
External Defibrillators (AED), fire alarm pull stations and fire
extinguishers.
§ 220-10.17 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-10.18
180:248
(11) Become familiar with the Emergency Action Plan for Employees
and the procedures for reporting a fire/emergency.
(12) Become familiar with the Exposure Control Plan and procedures
to eliminate or minimize occupational exposure to blood-borne
pathogens.
§ 220-10.19. Workplace violence prevention.
The safety and security of its employees and residents is important to the
Town. Acts of intimidation, threats, threatening behavior, or acts of violence
against employees, visitors or others associated with the Town by anyone
on Town property or otherwise in the course of their relationship with the
Town will not be tolerated. Violations of this policy will lead to appropriate
action that may include discipline up to dismissal, arrest and prosecution.
A. The Town has a zero tolerance policy against any form of intimidation,
threats or violence in the workplace. Any form of intimidation, threat
or violent act is strictly prohibited. Violations of this policy include but
are not limited to: participating in, provoking or otherwise contributing
to any threat or violent act in the workplace; abuse, assault, battery,
oral or written threats, intimidation, and harassment; and possession
of any firearm(s) or any other type of weapon on any Town property
or work location(s) (unless authorized to carry weapons by the Town
or state). Because it is often difficult to distinguish between a real
threat and one made in jest, all threats will be treated as real and
therefore even threats of violence spoken only in a joking manner are
strictly prohibited by this policy. Any employee who makes a threat,
whether express or implicit, exhibits threatening behavior, or engages
in any violent act or other violation of this policy on Town property or
otherwise in the course of their employment with us, shall be removed
from the premises as quickly as safety permits, and shall remain off
Town property pending the outcome of an investigation. Depending on
the circumstances involved, the Town's response may include, but is not
limited to, reassignment of job duties, discipline up to and including
suspension and termination of employment, and/or criminal prosecution
of the person(s) involved.
B. All Town personnel are responsible for notifying their supervisors and
the First Selectman of any violation of this policy, including but not
limited to, any threats they have witnessed, received, or have been
told that another person witnessed or received. All reports will be
investigated fully and promptly. Any intentionally false or misleading
report will be grounds for disciplinary action.
C. Employees must notify the First Selectman if they have a restraining
order against someone and provide a copy of said order.
D. The Town's premises are restricted to individuals with a legitimate
business purpose. Any employee who observes any individual (including
current or former employees) loitering, or present on the premises
without an apparent business need to be there or otherwise interfering
with operations, should report the circumstances immediately to their
supervisor and the First Selectman.
§ 220-10.18 WATER § 220-10.20
180:249
§ 220-10.20. Unauthorized use of Town property.
Unauthorized employee use of any Town equipment and supplies for nonwork-
related purposes is strictly prohibited. Examples of equipment and
supplies that employees may not use without authorization include the
following: computers/printers, copiers, telephones, fax machines, postage
meter, and work supplies (pens, papers, tape, etc.). Unauthorized use or
negligence in the care and use of Town property shall subject an employee
to disciplinary action, up to and including termination. Employees may not
"borrow" Town equipment or supplies for personal use.
§ 220-10.21. Use of Town vehicles and personal vehicles for town
business.
Town employees who need transportation for the performance of their
duties will either have a Town vehicle assigned or available to them, or be
adequately reimbursed for the use of a privately owned vehicle when such
use is authorized. Personnel requiring transportation in the performance of
their official duties are expected to conform to the policies set forth herein.
It is the responsibility of the department head to assure that employees
under their supervision conform to this policy.
A. Assigned vehicles for on-call personnel: Personnel who are on-call for
emergencies are assigned Town vehicles (First Selectman, Director of
Public Works, Fire Marshal, Foreman, Assistant Foreman, and Animal
Control Officer). The assigned vehicles may be used for commuting to
and from work on a regular basis, used to obtain meals while on duty,
driven to evening meetings and used for out-of-town travel on Town
business. Under no circumstance shall any family member or any other
unauthorized individual be permitted to drive any Town vehicle.
B. Town vehicles: Personnel who use Town vehicles (except on-call
personnel) shall park them in the Town Hall parking lot overnight. Town
vehicles are to be used strictly to conduct Town business. Use of Town
vehicles to conduct personal business is prohibited.
(1) If an employee wishes to use a Town vehicle, the employee must
obtain authorization by the respective department head or the First
Selectman. A copy of the employee's driver license must be on file
in the Finance Office. The Town reserves the right to obtain a copy
of the employee's DMV driving record.
(2) Passengers, other than Town employees, are not allowed in Town
vehicles unless required to conduct Town business or authorized by
the First Selectman. Under no circumstances shall any unauthorized
individual be permitted to drive any Town vehicle.
C. Privately owned vehicles used to conduct Town business: A privately
owned vehicle may be used for transportation in the performance of
official Town business upon approval of the department head or the
First Selectman, when a Town vehicle is not available or under special
agreement approved by the First Selectman.
(1) Employees shall be compensated for privately owned vehicle usage
at the prevailing IRS rate per mile. No employee shall use a personal
vehicle on official Town business unless approved in advance and
§ 220-10.20 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-10.21
180:250
a certificate of insurance is first submitted to the First Selectman.
Employees are required to maintain liability insurance on privately
owned vehicles used on Town business at a level not less than
$100,000 per person/$300,000 each occurrence for bodily injury
and $50,000 property damage, or combined single limit of $300,000.
The Town carries limits of $1,000,000 with an additional
$10,000,000 in excess liability insurance. Proof of insurance will be
required for mileage reimbursement.
(2) Employees are personally responsible for insuring privately owned
vehicles for physical damage claims including but not limited to
glass, theft, vandalism and collision. The Town does not provide
any excess physical damage coverage; however, if an employee is
involved in an accident while on official Town business, the Town of
Ellington shall reimburse the employee for the policy deductible up
to a maximum payment of $500. Payment will be made upon receipt
of all documentation required including proof of payment from the
employee's insurance carrier.
D. Recordkeeping: Any employee who uses a Town vehicle on Town
business shall keep a record on a log, to be supplied by the Town, of
mileage, destination, time and purpose of trip. The record log, along
with the completed log forms, will be kept with the keys to the vehicle.
E. Financial responsibility:
(1) Employees operating Town automobiles are protected against
claims for property damage and/or bodily injury arising out of the
use of that vehicle when:
(a) The employee is acting in the performance of his/her duties and
within the scope of his/her employment; and
(b) The damage is not the result of a willful, malicious or intentional
act. Employees operating Town vehicles outside the
performance of their duties and scope of employment and
without the written permission of the First Selectman shall be
held responsible for property damage, including but not limited
to the reasonable value of wear and tear on the car, and/or
personal injury arising out of such unauthorized use.
(2) Employees using privately owned vehicles on official Town business
are provided liability coverage by the Town on an "excess" basis,
secondary to any other collectible insurance. This does not include
physical damage coverage to the employee's vehicle (comprehensive
and collision). Mileage reimbursement payments anticipate
insurance costs borne by the owner of the vehicle; therefore, any
privately owned vehicle used on business must be covered by
insurance with minimum limits as set forth herein. The mileage
reimbursement rate will be determined by IRS guidelines.
F. Conduct in the use of motor vehicles: Employees using Town or personal
vehicles shall use appropriate caution in their driving habits and abide
by all applicable laws governing both emergency and nonemergency
use. All Town employees are required to use seat belts when operating
a Town vehicle and when operating a privately owned vehicle in the
conduct of official Town business. Operation of a Town vehicle or a
§ 220-10.21 WATER § 220-10.21
180:251
personally owned vehicle without a valid driver's license is expressly
prohibited.
G. Markings: All Town vehicles shall be identified by a Town seal displayed
on each side of the vehicle except for vehicles assigned to the police
and First Selectman. All vehicles shall bear municipal license plates.
No private equipment, decorations, stickers or advertisements shall be
affixed to a Town vehicle.
H. Maintenance of Town vehicles: Mechanical problems of which the
operator becomes aware shall be reported to the Department of Public
Works immediately. Doors shall be locked and windows closed when
vehicles are not being used. Under no circumstance shall a privately
owned vehicle be fueled, maintained or otherwise serviced by the Town
of Ellington, even if the vehicle is being used for municipal purposes.
The Town reserves the right to charge individual drivers of Town
vehicles for costs of repairs due to carelessness and/or damages beyond
normal wear and tear. Employees are expected to leave the interior of
the vehicle in the same condition as they found it; remove all trash and
belongings.
I. Complaints: All complaints concerning Town vehicles, drivers or
passengers shall be immediately investigated by the Supervisor. The
results of the investigation shall be reported in writing to the First
Selectman. The report shall contain the following: Name, address and
phone number of the complainant; name and operator's license number
of the driver; summary of the complaint; findings of the investigation;
remedial action taken, if any.
J. Fines and charges: Parking fines and moving violations are the personal
responsibility of the vehicle operator. All such fines and charges must be
reimbursed to the Town if necessary. If any fines, charges or other bills
owed to the Town by the employee pursuant to this policy are not paid
within three months of the date they are incurred, the Town will request
authorization to deduct proper legal amount from the employee's
paycheck after one written warning to the employee.
K. Penalties and discipline: Employees with poor driving records may have
the privilege of using a Town vehicle revoked. Each employee using a
Town vehicle shall provide the Town with a copy of his or her driving
record annually, if requested by the Town.
L. Accident reporting procedures: Employees involved in an automobile
accident while conducting Town business must follow the following
procedures:
(1) Remain calm. Do not argue.
(2) If possible, move your vehicle out of harm's way. Stop the vehicle
and turn off the ignition.
(3) Make sure everyone is all right. Call for medical assistance if
necessary.
(4) Contact the police. By reporting the accident to the police and filing
a report, you will help protect the Town from potential liability
claims and legal action.
(5) Use the Town of Ellington Vehicle Accident Report Form to record
the following information: names, addresses, driver's license
§ 220-10.21 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-10.21
180:252
numbers and insurance company information. Note weather and
road conditions. Record the names and telephone numbers of any
witnesses.
(6) Take a photograph of the damage if a camera is available.
(7) Submit the Town Vehicle Accident Report form to the Finance Office.
The Finance Office will notify the Town of Ellington insurance
carrier.
M. Failure to comply with the provisions of the Use of Town Vehicle and
Personal Vehicles for Town Business Policy shall result in discipline, up
to and including termination.
§ 220-10.22. Return of Town property.
All records, files, documents, equipment and other materials, or copies
thereof, relating to the Town's business, shall be and remain the sole
property of the Town. These materials shall not be removed from the Town's
premises except when required in connection with the performance of an
employee's duties for the Town, and shall be promptly returned to the Town
and not retained by any employee upon request at any time and upon
termination of employment with the Town. Employees must return all Town
property in their possession by their last day of employment.
§ 220-11. DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS.
§ 220-11.1. Responsibility for discipline; reasons.
It is the responsibility of all employees to observe the policies and
regulations necessary for the proper operation of the Town's departments.
A. Department head responsibilities. Department heads are responsible for
the proper and efficient operation of their departments and for enforcing
Town policies and regulations. Department heads are authorized to apply
such disciplinary measures, as may be necessary, to enforce Town
personnel policies up to and including recommending dismissal to the
First Selectman.
B. Types of disciplinary action. The type of disciplinary action taken will
vary with the severity of the situation and may include the following
measures: oral or written reprimand, demotion, suspension, dismissal,
denial of pay increases or other discipline of employees for such reasons
as, but not limited to, those stated herein. The Town reserves the right
to determine the appropriate disciplinary action based on individual
circumstances.
C. Reasons for disciplinary action. All employees are expected to comply
with the Town's standards of behavior and performance. Disciplinary
action, up to and including dismissal, may be imposed upon an employee
for conduct or actions that interfere with or prevent the Town from
effectively and efficiently discharging its responsibilities to the public.
(1) The following shall be sufficient cause for disciplinary action;
however, the list is meant to be illustrative only and should not be
considered to include all reasons for disciplinary action:
§ 220-10.21 WATER § 220-11.1
180:253
(a) Engaging in activities in violation of the Town Charter, Code of
Ethics, Town ordinances or Town policies and procedures;
(b) Falsification of Town or employment records;
(c) Substandard or unsatisfactory job performance;
(d) Incompetence, inefficiency or negligence in the performance of
duties;
(e) Theft or misappropriation of funds;
(f) Fraud or dishonesty;
(g) Misuse of, or causing damage or harm to, the property of
the Town, co-employees, visitors, or others associated with the
Town;
(h) Insubordination, disobedience or refusal to comply with
supervisor's instructions;
(i) Sleeping or otherwise wasting time or loafing during working
hours;
(j) Physical or verbal abuse of co-employees, visitors or others
associated with the Town;
(k) Threatening or intimidating co-employees, visitors, or others
associated with the Town, including sexual harassment or
harassment or discrimination based on other protected
categories;
(l) Acts of violence, including bringing a weapon of any kind,
licensed or otherwise on Town property, or on Town business,
unless otherwise authorized to do so as part of job
responsibilities;
(m) Filing a false report or altering facts;
(n) Falsely accusing others of inappropriate conduct or altering of
facts when reporting on the conduct of others;
(o) Disorderly conduct or disruptive behavior, including
provocations or fighting with other employees, visitors, or
others associated with the Town on the premises or during
Town business;
(p) Use of profane or vulgar language while on Town premises or
during Town business;
(q) Use or possession of alcohol or being under the influence of
alcohol while at work;
(r) Use, sale, purchase, or possession of illegal drugs at work or
being under the influence of illegal drugs while at work;
(s) Abuse of prescription drugs at work;
(t) Unauthorized disclosure or use of privileged, proprietary or
confidential information;
(u) Unauthorized absence from work;
(v) Abuse of paid or unpaid time off;
(w) Excessive absenteeism or tardiness;
(x) Unauthorized use or destruction of Town property, equipment
or supplies;
(y) Conviction of a criminal offense while employed by the Town;
(z) Performing services for others during working hours;
§ 220-11.1 ELLINGTON CODE § 220-11.1
180:254
(aa) Action or conduct affecting or impairing the efficiency of the
Town service or that may bring the Town into disrepute;
(bb) Any other conduct that the Town deems is adverse to the best
interests of the Town.
(2) The foregoing list is nonexhaustive and is only intended to be
representative of the types of conduct for which discipline up to and
including dismissal may be imposed. This policy should be construed
as a guide for employees and supervisory personnel to illustrate the
Town's general philosophy on rules of conduct and discipline.
§ 220-11.2. Discipline procedure.
The Town reserves the right to determine what form of discipline, if any, is
appropriate for specific employee behaviors, given the particular facts and
circumstances present in each instance, and what outcome would be in the
best interests of the Town.
A. Whenever possible, if employee performance, attitude, work habits or
personal conduct falls below a desirable level, supervisors shall inform
the employee of the problem and give counsel and assistance. If
appropriate and justified, a reasonable period of time for improvement
may be allowed before initiating a disciplinary action. In some instances,
a specific incident may justify severe disciplinary action up to and
including dismissal; however, the action to be taken generally depends
on the seriousness of the incident and the whole pattern of the
employee's past performance and conduct.
B. The following are examples of the types of discipline the Town may
impose against employees at its discretion:
(1) Written reprimand. In situations where an oral warning has not
resulted in expected improvements or where more severe initial
action is warranted, the Supervisor may issue a written reprimand
with the approval of the First Selectman which shall be given to an
employee; a copy shall be placed in the employee's personnel file.
(2) Suspension. An employee may be suspended by the First Selectman
without pay for such reasons as misconduct, negligence, inefficiency,
insubordination, disloyalty, unauthorized absence or other lawful
reasons.
(3) Demotion. An employee may be demoted by the First Selectman to
a position of a lower grade for which s/he qualified as a form of
discipline.
(4) Dismissal. An employee may be dismissed upon the recommendation
of the First Selectman with the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
Prior to dismissal, an employee shall be provided with the
opportunity to challenge the action at a hearing before his/her
supervisor and the First Selectman. It is the policy of the Town not to
rehire former employees who have been dismissed, or who resigned
while charges were pending.
§ 220-11.3. Appeal process.
§ 220-11.1 WATER § 220-11.3
180:255
A. Should the employee desire to appeal the decision/discipline, the
employee must notify the First Selectman in writing five business days
following receipt of the decision/discipline.
B. Upon receipt of the written request to appeal, the First Selectman shall
attempt to resolve the issue by calling a meeting of the employee, who is
appealing the decision and the employee's Supervisor.
C. In the event the parties are unable to settle the issue, the First
Selectman shall bring the matter to the Board of Selectmen, to be
discussed under Executive Session, unless the employee requests the
matter be discussed in open session, in accordance with Freedom of
Information Laws.
D. The appeal shall be heard by the Board of Selectmen at its next regularly
scheduled meeting or at mutually agreed time and the First Selectman
shall give the employee written notice of the time and place of the
hearing.
E. At such hearing, the employee may be represented by counsel/union
representative, may present any witnesses or evidence relevant to the
appeal, and shall have the right to cross-examine all witnesses against
him/her.
F. The Board of Selectmen shall decide such appeal and render its written
decision within 30 business days after the close of the hearing.
Chapter 225
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Chapter 230
ZONING
Part III: Water Pollution Control Authority
Chapter 305
CRYSTAL LAKE SEWERAGE SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 143.
Sewer line extensions — See Ch. 325.
User charges — See Ch. 330.
§ 305-1. Purpose and scope.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to outline the methodology employed by
the Ellington Water Pollution Control Authority (WPCA) in determining
the sewer benefit assessments levied against those commercial and
§ 220-11.3 ELLINGTON CODE § 305-1
180:256
residential property owners especially benefited by the installation of a
sanitary sewer system serving the Crystal Lake area.
B. The Crystal Lake sewerage system was constructed to eliminate the
public health hazards of undersized on-lot disposal systems and raw
wastewater discharges which occurred in this area. The construction
of the sewerage system was determined by the WPCA to be the only
feasible alternative to correcting this problem due to a large degree to
the density of the dwelling units in the community.
C. The sewer system has and will preserve the quality of Crystal Lake as
well as the health and safety of the individual properties of which provide
a special additional benefit to each property served. The density and
existing lot sizes, in most cases, precluded the repair, replacement, or
construction of new on-lot systems. These same factors necessitated the
development of a benefit assessment policy unique to the Crystal Lake
area.
§ 305-2. Determination of benefit assessments.
A. In determining the factors to be used in the determination of the benefit
assessments, the WPCA evaluated the factors which it considered unique
to the Crystal Lake area. Among these factors the following were
considered to be significant:
(1) The Crystal Lake sewerage system was constructed to serve
residential and, to a small extent, commercial uses around Crystal
Lake. Permitted uses of property in the sewer service area, as
determined through the application of the Town of Ellington's Zoning
Regulations,24 are for the most part single-family residential and,
in a limited area, Lake Residence Zone. The Lake Residence Zone,
as defined in § 230-11 of the Town of Ellington Zoning Regulations,
permits year-round single-family dwellings and seasonal use of
single-family dwellings. The WPCA has assumed that the permitted
use of the property has to be taken into account in the determination
of the assessed value of the property by the Tax Assessor.
(2) The topography of the area necessitated the construction of a
sewerage collection system which used both gravity sewers and lowpressure
(grinder pump) sewers. Slightly more than 1/3 of all of the
initial units served by the system required grinder pump service.
(3) The nature of the Crystal Lake community was initially that of
several lakeside associations of summer cottages. Many of these
dwelling units were constructed on lots of minimal size with little or
no frontage on private roads. Over the years many of these cottages
have been converted to year-round use.
B. Given the above factors, the WPCA has determined that the following
items shall be used in the determination of sewer benefit assessments:
(1) A unit charge for each dwelling unit served by the sewerage system.
(2) A value charge based on the assessed value of each property served
by the sewerage system.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 305-1 WATER § 305-2
180:257
(3) A connection charge which shall reflect the benefit of a Towninstalled
lateral connection to the collection system.
§ 305-3. Calculation of residential charge. [Amended 1-22-2008]
A. The sewer benefit assessment charge for residential property shall be
the sum of the following two factors:
(1) Unit charge. New single-family and multifamily dwellings shall be
assessed $3,125 per bedroom; additions shall be assessed $3,125 per
bedroom for increased bedrooms of four or more, or as set by the
WPCA after a public hearing.
(2) Connection charge. In addition to and in recognition of the further
benefit conferred upon property where a connection has been joined
to the sewer line to serve the property, a connection charge of $1,000
per connection shall be made.
(a) In the event of a future connection to the system, whether by
gravity or pressure system, the connection charge shall be levied
only if the future user connects to a lateral installed as part of
the original construction of the system. No connection charges
shall be levied against future users who construction their own
connection to the main lines of the system.
(b) Multiple-dwelling-unit structures shall be charged one
connection charge for each connection to the sewerage system.
§ 305-4. Calculation of commercial charge.
A. Hotels, motels, rooming houses and bed-and-breakfast operations. All
properties classified as commercial or mixed use (residential/
commercial) by the office of the Ellington Tax Assessor shall be assessed
through the application of the previously presented residential property
formula [see § 305-3A(1), (2) and (3)] plus 1/4 of the existing residential
unit charge for each additional unit.
B. Commercial properties. This classification is intended to include all
commercially classified properties with the exception of restaurants,
hotels, motels, rooming houses, and bed-and-breakfast operations.
(1) Commercial properties shall be assessed a value charge, connection
charge and a unit charge. Value charge: in addition and in
recognition of the greater benefit conferred upon larger more
valuable structures, an assessment of 3.75% of the cost of
construction, as determined by the Building Department using the
cost factors for building permits, shall be made. Connection charges
shall be as stated in § 305-3A(2). Commercial unit charges shall be
$2,200 for the first unit and ½ of the commercial unit charge for
each additional commercial unit or fraction thereof. For the purpose
of this assessment formula, a commercial unit is defined as 2,500
square feet of commercial space. [Amended 1-22-2008]
(2) In the case of mixed-use properties (residential/commercial), the
residential formula shall be applied to the property first, with the
commercial unit charge(s) applied subsequently.
C. Restaurants.
§ 305-2 ELLINGTON CODE § 305-4
180:258
(1) All properties classified as restaurants shall be assessed a value
charge and connection charge(s) as presented within the residential
section of this chapter [see § 305-3A(1), (2) and (3)] plus a restaurant
unit charge of $2,200 for the first unit plus 1/2 of the restaurant unit
charge for each additional unit or fraction thereof. For the purpose
of this assessment formula, a restaurant unit is defined as each block
of 12 persons the restaurant is permitted to seat as defined by the
permit issued by the Ellington Fire Marshal.
(2) In the case of mixed-use properties (residential/restaurant) the
residential formula shall be applied to the property first, with the
restaurant unit charge(s) applied subsequently.
§ 305-5. Vacant land.
Vacant land shall not be assessed by the WPCA until such time as it is built
upon and derives a direct benefit from the sewerage system. Owners of
vacant land may approach the WPCA and request the option of having a
sewer benefit assessment levied against said vacant land based upon the
application of this chapter. For the purposes of this type of assessment levy,
the average (mean) residential assessment of $72,582 shall be used for the
determination of the value charge portion of the sewer benefit assessment
formula. The value charge portion of sewer benefit assessments levied in
this manner shall be adjusted at the issuance of a certificate of occupancy,
and any increased amount due shall be subject to appreciation charges as
described below and shall be due and payable at the time of levy.
§ 305-6. Other assessments.
A. The WPCA reserves the right to review and reassess properties if
improvements thereto result in assessed value greater than 50%, the use
or classification of the property changes, the property converts to yearround
use from seasonal use or other reason which, in the opinion of
the WPCA, directly results in the increased value of property due to the
special benefit of the availability of public sewers. Reassessments made
in response to improvements in residential structures are intended to
reflect the value added due to new construction initiated by the property
owner and not intended to include land values. No new assessments
shall be made in response to increased property values relating to Townwide
reevaluations. Any reassessment based on increased property value
shall reflect the aforementioned fifty-percent increase over the value
computed in the most recent grand list and shall not be retroactive to
any previous property value.
B. The property owner against which an additional assessment has been
levied shall have the option of paying the assessment in full at the time of
levy or adding the additional assessment to the owner's existing payment
plan for the initial assessment levy. In no case shall the payment of
the additional assessment extend beyond the original term of the initial
assessment levy.
C. The WPCA reserves the right to adopt other classifications and methods
of assessment should they be deemed in the best interest of the WPCA.
§ 305-4 WATER § 305-6
180:259
D. Any change in assessment classification, assessment method or
reassessment shall be subject to all statutory hearing and levy
requirements as presented in C.G.S. Ch. 103, §§ 7-249 through 7-254.
§ 305-7. Payment schedule.
A. Sewer benefit assessments may be paid over years, not to exceed 30
years, as determined by the WPCA. All assessments paid on said
payment plan shall be charged interest on the unpaid principal of their
installments at the rate of 4.69% effective for the June 1, 1995, billing.
B. The remaining principal balance of any sewer benefit assessment shall
be due and payable upon the transfer of ownership of the property upon
which an assessment has been levied.
Chapter 320
HOCKANUM RIVER WATERSHED SEWERAGE SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 143.
Sewer line extensions — See Ch. 325.
User charges — See Ch. 330.
§ 320-1. Findings; statutory authority.
A. The Water Pollution Control Authority (WPCA) has considered at length
the manner of assessment of benefits so as to provide the funds
necessary to pay the costs of installing the sanitary sewer facilities which
constitute this project. After considering the various alternatives for
assessment, the WPCA has concluded that there are four factors which
are most significant: first, there is a general benefit to each property
regardless of size or property value; second, there is some greater
benefit to larger or more valuable buildings; third, the size of each
property has a distinct bearing on the cost of construction; and fourth,
there are special costs incidental to a property becoming connected to
the sewer system. The WPCA has analyzed and evaluated those factors.
B. No assessment shall be made against any property in excess of the
special benefit to accrue to such property in accord with the General
Statutes.
C. Pursuant to the above, the WPCA herewith adopts pursuant to Chapter
103, §§ 7-245 through 7-273a of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as
amended, the following schedule of assessment of benefits, regulations,
and standard practices and requirements for the Hockanum River
Watershed Sewerage System.
§ 320-2. General rules of assessment.
A. The WPCA shall determine and adopt rates of sewer benefit assessment
for the construction of each sewer project. Such rates shall be based on
the total project cost as ordered published by the WPCA or a portion
§ 305-6 ELLINGTON CODE § 320-2
180:260
thereof determined by said WPCA. In determining said sewer
assessment rates, consideration shall be given to costs, as determined by
the provisions below, and the characteristics of the properties and areas
expected to be improved.
B. The total cost of the sewer construction shall include the cost of
preliminary studies and surveys, detailed working plans and
specifications, acquiring necessary land or property or any interest
therein, damage awards, interest charges during construction, legal and
other fees, outlet benefits or deferred assessments, or any other expense
incidental to the completion of the work, in addition to the cost of
construction.
§ 320-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APARTMENT HOUSE or MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building used by
two or more families living independently of each other.
ASSESSMENT, DEFERRED — Whenever a sewer is laid out and benefits
assessed by the WPCA through or adjacent to undeveloped land, the
assessment of such land shall be deferred until such time as the land shall
be built upon, a building permit issued therefor, approval of a subdivision
plan of such undeveloped property or a special permit approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, whichever event occurs first, at which
time the assessment shall be made as provided herein in accordance with
this chapter and regulations. The WPCA shall place a caveat on the land
records in each instance where assessment of benefits to anticipated
development of land has been deferred.
CAPACITY CHARGE — The cost associated with the purchase of additional
capacity from the Town of Vernon through the execution of a second
amendment to the Intermunicipal Agreement dated December 6, 1989. The
capacity charge shall be levied against all properties connected to the sewer
which benefit from new sewer construction or extension occurring after
December 6, 1989.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY — Property located in those areas specifically
set aside for retail or wholesale sale of consumer, commercial or industrial
goods and equipment or the rendering of either retail or wholesale services,
the performance of which is either consumer, commercial or industrial in
nature, including but not limited to all those uses permitted or requiring
special permits under the Ellington Zoning Regulations.25
COMMERCIAL UNIT ASSESSMENT —
A commercial enterprise for purposes of assessment shall be assigned
one unit for each commercial unit located thereon.
A.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 320-2 WATER § 320-3
180:261
DEVELOPER — Any person who, or any firm, corporation or other legal
entity which, shall subdivide or develop land.
FARMLAND — An area devoted to farm uses, with a minimum area of three
acres, for gain or expectation of gain, in the raising of agricultural products,
livestock and/or poultry and/or the production of dairy products.
HOTEL — A building designed as a temporary abiding place for more than
10 persons or having six or more sleeping rooms in which lodging with or
without meals is provided.
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY — Property located in those areas specifically set
aside for manufacturing, fabricating, assembling, warehousing, finishing,
packaging, processing or research and development, including but not
limited to all those uses permitted or requiring special permits under the
Ellington Zoning Regulations.26
INDUSTRIAL UNIT ASSESSMENT —
A single commercial unit shall be defined as a structure with a total
area of no more than 1,500 square feet of floor area devoted to a single
business enterprise or operation. [Amended 4-27-2015]
For a single business which occupies an area greater than 1,500
square feet, then an additional unit will be assessed for each
additional 1,500 square feet of area or fraction thereof.
(1)
Two or more separate business units having less than 1,500 square
feet total area cannot be combined to form one unit but each shall
be assessed as one unit.
(2)
B.
A commercial unit shall also include each separate unit or store within
a commercial building. Separate units shall be as determined under a
building or zoning permit issued for said property or, in the case of
existing buildings, the actual unit arrangement as determined by actual
use or fire walls.
C.
Both occupied and vacant commercial units shall be included in this
assessment method.
D.
A restaurant unit shall be defined as each block of 12 persons the
restaurant is permitted to seat as defined by the permit issued by the
Ellington Fire Marshal.
E.
Storage space shall be included into the total area in this assessment
method.
F.
An industrial enterprise for purposes of assessment shall be assigned
one unit for each industrial unit located thereon.
A.
A single industrial unit shall be defined as a structure with a total area
of no more than 2,500 square feet of floor area devoted to a single
business enterprise or operation.
B.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 320-3 ELLINGTON CODE § 320-3
180:262
IN-LAW APARTMENT — Living space within a single-family dwelling for
related family members as defined by the Ellington Zoning Regulations.27
LATERAL LINE (SEWER LATERAL) — A line that connects the main or
local community sanitary sewer line or trunk line and runs lateral or
perpendicular thereto and extends to the individual property line providing
a connection with the sanitary sewer building connection.
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or
buildings and accessory buildings or uses, including open spaces, and such
open spaces as are used in connection with the building or buildings.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings containing one or more guest
rooms for transient guests, and including motor court, motor hotel, tourist
cabins, and tourist rooms.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Property located in those areas specifically
set aside for development or actually developed for the use of singlefamily
dwellings or residences, including but not limited to all those uses
permitted or requiring special permits under the Ellington Zoning
Regulations.28
RESIDENTIAL UNIT ASSESSMENT — The unit for purposes of assessment
shall be assigned as follows:
For a single business which occupies an area greater than 2,500
square feet, then an additional unit will be assessed for each
additional 2,500 square feet of area or fraction thereof.
(1)
Two or more separate business units having less than 2,500 square
feet total area cannot be combined to form one unit but each shall
be assessed as one unit.
(2)
An industrial unit shall also include each separate unit or store within
an industrial building. Separate units shall be as determined under any
building or zoning permit issued for said property or, in the case of
existing buildings, the actual unit arrangement as determined by actual
use or fire walls.
C.
Both occupied and vacant industrial units shall be included in this
assessment method.
D.
E. Storage space shall be included into the total area in this assessment.
In residential zones, property improved for residential use, property
which has been approved as a building lot under applicable zoning or
subdivision regulations,29 and property on which a residential unit or
units may be constructed under zoning regulations without the need
for approval under zoning or subdivision regulations shall be assigned
A.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Subdivision of Land, and Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 320-3 WATER § 320-3
180:263
ROOMING HOUSE, BED-AND-BREAKFAST, BOARDINGHOUSE or GROUP
HOME ESTABLISHMENT — A building in which a rooms or rooms and
meals are provided for compensation to persons other than members of the
family of the proprietor.
STORAGE SPACE — A storehouse, storeroom, or warehouse that provides
space or place for storing as part of a commercial enterprise, including but
not limited to space rented for storage.
§ 320-4. Assessment of benefits.
A. The sewer benefit assessment charge for residential property shall be
the sum of the following two factors: [Amended 1-22-2008]
(1) Unit charge. New single-family and multifamily dwellings shall be
assessed $1,875 per bedroom; additions shall be assessed $1,875
per bedroom for increased bedrooms of four or more, or as set by the
WPCA after a public hearing. [Amended 4-27-2015]
(2) Lateral charge. In addition and in recognition of the further benefit
conferred upon property where a lateral line has been joined to the
sewer line to serve the property, a further assessment of $1,000
shall be made. Said lateral charge shall be due and payable with
the levying of the overall assessment of basic benefits if in fact said
lateral line is in place and presently capable of serving said benefited
property.
B. Commercial and industrial property. [Amended 1-22-2008;
4-27-2015]
(1) Unit charge. Each commercial and industrial unit or store shall be
assessed at $1,100 for the first unit (1,500 square feet), and $550 for
each additional unit or portion thereof.
(a) Hotels and motels connecting to the sewer will be assessed at
the rate of $1,100 for the first room and $400 for each additional
room.
(b) Restaurants connecting to the sewer shall be assessed at the
rate of $1,100 for the first unit (12 seats), and $550 for each
additional unit or portion thereof.
(2) Lateral charge. In addition and in recognition of the further benefit
conferred upon the property where a lateral line has been joined to
the sewer line to serve the property, a further assessment of $1,000
shall be made. Said lateral charge shall be due and payable with
the levying of the overall assessment of basic benefits if in fact said
one unit for each residential unit thereon or for each residential unit
permitted to be constructed thereon.
In any zone, one unit shall be assigned to each residential unit in a
multifamily residential development which has either been approved as
a special exception by the zoning authority or approved under zoning
regulations governing such developments.
B.
In any zone, one unit shall be assigned to each three persons permitted
to occupy a rooming house, bed-and-breakfast, boardinghouse or group
home establishment as defined below.
C.
§ 320-3 ELLINGTON CODE § 320-4
180:264
lateral line is in place and presently capable of serving said benefited
property.
(3) Frontage charge. In addition, a footage charge shall be assessed at
$8 per front foot, defined and applied as more specifically set out
in Subsection A(4) to (g)30, inclusive, measured to the nearest whole
foot.
(4) Capacity charge. Future units connected to sewers constructed or
extended after December 6, 1989, shall be assessed an additional
capacity charge of $320 per unit. Said capacity charge will not be
subjected to appreciation charges.
C. Developer-constructed sewer extensions. When a developer constructs
sewers which are to service single-family or multifamily residences
(including sewers constructed to provide future service to planned or
proposed residences) and such sewers are to be connected to existing
Town sewer mains and subject to the terms of the WPCA's standard
developer's agreement, a capacity charge, the unit charge and the value
charge will be assessed. These charges shall be collectable by the WPCA
at the following points in time as reflected by the development process:
(1) Capacity charge. In recognition of the costs associated with the
purchase of additional treatment plant capacity from the Town of
Vernon, a charge of $320 per unit shall be payable for each unit
at the time of execution of the developer's agreement (applies only
to agreements executed after December 6, 1989) between the
developer and the WPCA.
(2) Unit charge. A unit charge of $1,100 per unit as specified in
Subsection A(1) shall be payable for each unit upon the transfer of
an undeveloped lot, the acceptance by the WPCA of the sewer main
constructed by the developer or the issuance of a building permit,
whichever occurs first.
(3) Value charge. The value charge shall be payable for each unit after
completion of a public hearing and all other WPCA levy procedures
are completed as specified elsewhere in this chapter.
D. Farmland.
(1) Farm residences shall be assessed as in Subsection A above with
a front footage of 175 feet or minimum frontage permissible in the
zone. Such assessments shall be payable in the regular manner
hereunder.
(2) Farmland in excess of a conforming building lot under applicable
zoning for each farmhouse shall have its assessment deferred so long
as it continues to be used as farmland.
E. Deferred assessments.
(1) In any case under this chapter where the assessment is to be
deferred wholly or partially, a caveat may be placed upon the land
records and mailed to the owner of record on the last Assessor's
grand list stating the fact that said property has been benefited
by installation of the sewer system but the assessment has been
deferred by this chapter. Where only a portion of the assessment is
30.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 320-4 WATER § 320-4
180:265
required to be deferred, the assessment not deferred may be levied
immediately.
(2) The deferred assessment may be made at any time following the
recording of a caveat or following the time when a caveat might
have been recorded, upon the issuance of a building permit for
construction or reconstruction of any structure or development of
any property for which the sewer benefit may be measured under
this chapter.
(a) After issuance of the building permit, the Building Official shall
determine whether the property for which the permit was issued
must connect to an existing sewer line or that the property is not
on an existing line. The Building Official will notify the WPCA of
this permit and determination by use of a form approved by the
WPCA.
(b) The WPCA will compute the sewer benefit assessment in one of
two methods:
[1] As a new account not previously assessed on a partial basis.
In this method, the entire sewer benefit assessment would
be due and payable, in full. Upon written request, the WPCA
may allow an extended payment plan.
[2] As a new account that has been previously assessed, on a
partial basis. In this method, only the additional assessment
computed after June 30, 1981, is due and payable, in full. The
sewer benefit assessment computed prior to June 30, 1981,
may still be paid over a fifteen-year period, at five-percent
interest. Two separate bills will be issued by the WPCA.
(3) WPCA benefit assessment levy procedure.
(a) The WPCA will notify the owner that he will be heard at the
next available meeting of the WPCA at a public hearing on the
proposed assessment and give notice of the date and time of said
hearing and follow all necessary notice procedures.
(b) Following the hearing, the WPCA will determine the actual
assessment of benefits then to be laid upon said property and
give notice to the property owner.
(c) The Tax Collector will mail a bill for the sewer benefit assessment
that is outstanding, with a notice of explanation, to the current
property owner and file a copy with the Town Clerk.
(d) Said bill shall notify the owner of his right to appeal within 21
days after said filing.
(e) Said assessment shall be due within 30 days following written
notice of the assessment to the property owner or actual
connection of the premises to the system, whichever shall first
occur. In the event no new connection is made to the sewer
system, then issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the
Building Official shall be deemed the time of connection.
(f) The property owner may appeal the sewer benefit assessment
that has been levied to the court no later than 21 days after the
bill is filed with the Town Clerk.
§ 320-4 ELLINGTON CODE § 320-4
180:266
(4) Farmland, forest land, open space land, unclassified land and land
rezoned and used for residential, commercial or industrial purposes
shall be reassessed under this chapter as its use changes to a use
which would have been assessed upon the effective date of this
chapter, whether or not a caveat has been recorded.
(5) Elderly exemptions under the provisions of Connecticut General
Statutes § 7-253a. Assessments shall be made pursuant to this
chapter at regular values. Thereafter, property owners who qualify
for elderly exemptions under general municipal tax law or for frozen
or deferred taxes shall be entitled to elect under the provisions
of Connecticut General Statutes § 7-253a to pay only the accrued
interest under a deferred payment plan. After an election has been
filed, said owner may pay any installation of principal without
revoking said election. The entire unpaid balance of said assessment,
together with accrued interest and any other appropriate charges,
shall be due and payable on transfer of title from said eligible owner
or upon the death of such eligible owner.
F. (Reserved)31
G. Other/additional assessments.
(1) Assessments for users where Subsection A, B, C or D is not
applicable shall be established by the WPCA after a hearing at which
the owner may present evidence and be heard.
(2) The WPCA may, at its discretion, make adjustments in assessments
of benefits in cases where, in the judgment of the WPCA, substantial
hardships would result through strict application of the provisions of
Subsections A, B, C and D.
(3) The WPCA reserves the right to review and reassess properties if, or
when, improvements thereto result in an increase in the number of
assessable units, the use or classification of the property changes,
or other reason which, in the opinion of the WPCA, directly results
in the increased value of the property due to the special benefit of
the availability of public sewers. Reassessments made in response to
improvements in residential, commercial or industrial structures are
intended to reflect the value added due to new construction initiated
by the property owner and not intended to include land values
which have been previously assessed. No new assessments shall be
made in response to increased property values relating to Town-wide
reevaluations. Any reassessment based on increased property value
shall reflect the aforementioned increase over the value computed
in the most recent grand list and shall not be retroactive to any
previous property value.
§ 320-5. Regulations, rules and conditions.
A. Total charges and assessment of benefits for existing units shall be due
and payable June 1, 1981, and may be paid in full at any time prior to July
1, 1981. As of June 1, 1981, the assessment of benefits will be filed as
a charge against the property of the owner, subject to interest at a rate
31.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, regarding appreciation charges for deferred
assessments, was repealed 1-22-2008.
§ 320-4 WATER § 320-5
180:267
of 5%, payable thereafter in a maximum of 15 equal annual installments,
together with accrued interest. Owners may elect the deferred method
of payment by paying the first annual installment or principal on or
before June 1, 1981. Any unpaid balance, with interest, may be paid in
full at any time with no penalty.
B. Upon the sale or transfer for value of any property against which a lien
for deferred payment plan has been filed, the unpaid principal, together
with interest, shall be paid in full. The deferred payment plan shall not
be assumable.
C. The installation and cost of connecting each building to main sewer lines
or lateral lines shall be the obligation of the property owner.
D. Costs of collection, including a reasonable attorney's fee, court costs,
lien fees, advertising, sales and sheriff's fees, shall be payable to enforce
payment of all delinquent assessments and the enforcement of this
chapter as provided in the General Statutes.
E. Default in installment payments.
(1) Failure to pay any installment of principal or interest when due or
within 30 days thereafter shall constitute a delinquency under the
provisions of Connecticut General Statutes § 7-254.
(2) Interest upon said delinquent payment shall be at the rate provided
in the General Statutes for delinquent property taxes or 5%,
whichever is greater.
(3) After any payment has become delinquent, the Tax Collector from
the Authority may permit the owner to pay the delinquency together
with all accrued charges and reinstate the installment method of
paying the remaining installments when due. If more than one
installment is delinquent, then the installment method of payment
shall be reinstated only by the WPCA upon a written petition by the
owner accompanied by payment of all past due installments together
with accrued interest and charges.
§ 320-6. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective on April 18, 1995.
Chapter 325
SEWER LINE EXTENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 143.
Crystal Lake Sewerage System — See Ch. 305.
Hockanum River Watershed Sewerage
System— See Ch. 320.
User charges — See Ch. 330.
§ 320-5 ELLINGTON CODE § 325-1
325:268
§ 325-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for the extension
of the sewer lines for the Hockanum Sewer System and the Crystal Lake
Sewer System. To gain approval for construction, the applicant should
also refer to the Town of Ellington's Sewer Ordinance32 and Drain Layers'
Manual for additional requirements.
§ 325-2. Submission and review of application.
A. The applicant will submit a formal notification (i.e., application and
key map of location) to the WPCA for its conceptual approval with a
nonrefundable fee of $100. The applicant will complete the number of
units and average daily flow.
B. The WPCA or its agent will review the application, and, upon acceptance,
an approval letter will be issued by the WPCA to the applicant.
§ 325-3. Submission of design documents and plans; review fee.
A. The applicant will submit to the WPCA three copies of the design
documents, including the applicable fee (review fee) to cover the cost
of the review. The review fee will only be an estimate of the anticipated
review costs. The amount will be specified in the approval letter.
B. Upon acceptance by the WPCA's Engineer and the Water Pollution
Control Authority, five copies of all plans, specifications, and reports will
be submitted by the applicant to the WPCA for approval.
C. An approval letter listing the conditions will be distributed and designed
documents as follows:
(1) One copy retained by WPCA.
(2) One copy to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(3) One copy to the Director of Public Works.
(4) One copy to the Building Official.
§ 325-4. Preparation of developer's agreement.
A. Upon approval of the design documents submitted, the Ellington WPCA
and applicant will enter into a developer's agreement for construction.
B. A developer's agreement shall also include inspection fees, legal fees,
and engineering fees estimated and required in advance. If money is left
from the review fee, it will be credited to the developer's fees. If costs
exceed the estimate, the developer will be required to pay, and if costs
are lower, the money will be returned to the developer.
C. Attached is the checklist attachment to the developer's agreement.33
§ 325-5. Meeting prior to construction.
Prior to the start of construction, a preconstruction meeting will be
arranged by the Public Works Director. The WPCA Engineer, WPCA
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 143, Art. II, Sewer Construction and Use.
33.Editor's Note: The checklist attachment is on file at the office of the Water Pollution
Control Authority.
§ 325-1 SEWER LINE EXTENSIONS § 325-5
325:269
Administrator, Building Inspector, and Town Planner will attend this
meeting if the project's size or complexity justifies participation.
§ 325-6. Inspections; notice of substantial completion.
A. During construction, full inspection will be provided by the Ellington
WPCA staff and Town Engineer.
B. The inspector will fill out daily inspection reports and will file copies with
the Town Engineer and Building Inspector.
C. Ellington's WPCA staff, the Public Works Director, Town Engineer and
Building Inspector will inspect the project upon its completion. If all
facilities have been installed to specification, a notice of substantial
completion will be prepared and submitted to the applicant indicating
any additional work requirements and requesting the submission of an
as-built drawing of the completed facilities.
§ 325-7. As-built drawings.
Three copies of the as-built drawings will be submitted to the Ellington
WPCA within 30 days. For the following Town Engineer, Public Works
Director and WPCA:
A. All buildings shall be shown in proper scale and location.
B. All correct invert elevations, top of manhole from elevations and
stationing of manholes shall be shown to scale.
C. Each wye shall be stationed and shown on plans to scale.
D. All building connection laterals shall be shown on the plan to scale and
shall be tied by three dimensions on the plan. Below sill or below ground
depth shall be shown.
E. Chimneys shall be shown on cross section.
F. Size of pipe, type of pipe material, slope or grade, and length of each
manhole-to-manhole pipe run shall be indicated.
G. Areas having additional bedding, temporary sheeting or permanent
sheeting shall be shown. Any concrete encasement shall be shown.
H. A bench mark shall be referred to on each drawing.
I. Drawings shall be indicated as "revised to an as-built," dated and
initialed by a registered professional engineer.
J. The Town-engineered as-built drawings shall be on reproducible Mylar
with a plan scale of one inch to 40 inches and profile scale of one inch to
40 inches horizontal, one inch to four inches vertical. The drawings shall
be 24 inches to 30 inches.
§ 325-8. Notice of final acceptance.
Upon satisfactory completion of all the checklist items and receipt of
acceptable Mylar as-builts, with copies for the WPCA, Public Works
Director, WPCA Van, and Building Inspector, the Town Engineer will issue a
notice of final acceptance to the developer to the Ellington WPCA.
§ 325-5 ELLINGTON CODE § 325-9
325:270
§ 325-9. Final accounting.
Upon acceptance by the WPCA, a final accounting will be made to have all
fees paid. Any money left on the account will be returned to the applicant.
If money is owed, the WPCA will require payment to be made within 30
days. The reduction of the performance bond will not be approved until all
outstanding fees are paid in full.
Chapter 330
USER CHARGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 143.
Crystal Lake Sewerage System — See Ch. 305.
Hockanum River Watershed Sewerage
System— See Ch. 320.
Sewer line extensions — See Ch. 325.
§ 330-1. Purpose.
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the
Town of Ellington WPCA to collect charges from all users which contribute
wastewater to the WPCA's collection and treatment works. The proceeds
of such charges, so derived, will be used for the purpose of operating and
maintaining the public wastewater collection and treatment works. It is
intended that user charges meet all costs of operation and maintenance of
the sewer systems on an annual basis.
§ 330-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows. "Shall" is mandatory; "may"
is permissive.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — The same definition in the Ellington Zoning
Regulations, 34 which is a subordinate dwelling unit located within a singlefamily
residence. An accessory apartment shall not have more than one
bedroom. For the purposes of calculating the user charge, it will be at .3 (1/
3) EDU.[Added 5-15-2001]
BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams
per liter (mg/l).
COMMERCIAL USER — All retail stores, restaurants, office buildings,
laundries, and other private business and service establishments.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 325-9 SEWER LINE EXTENSIONS § 330-2
325:271
CRYSTAL LAKE SEWER SERVICE AREA — That area from which collected
wastewater is discharged to the Town of Stafford and defined in the facility
plan adopted by the WPCA, as amended from time to time.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — The average wastewater flow
discharged from a single dwelling unit in the Town of Ellington. For the
purposes of this chapter, an EDU is defined as 150 gallons per day (gpd) of
wastewater flow.
EXCESSIVE WASTEWATER FLOWS — When water consumption records or
other separate meter(s) reveals that a property uses more then the average
amount of water. Excessive water use translates to excessive sewage use,
transferring sewage treatment cost to others and the potential lack of
sewage availability to other parcels.[Added 5-15-2001]
FIXED CHARGES — Those components of the WPCA's annual expenditures
which are not directly related to wastewater flow. These charges may
include, but are not limited to, the costs associated with staffing, equipping
and supplying those employees of the Town of Ellington Department of
Public Works dedicated to the WPCA; WPCA administrative expenses,
including salaries of administrative personnel, administrative office
expenses and administrative charges paid to the Town of Ellington;
purchased services, including engineering, administrative consulting, legal
advice and insurance expenses; and the cost associated with annual
deposits to the equipment/capacity replacement fund.
GOVERNMENTAL USER — Includes legislative, judicial, administrative,
and regulatory activities of federal, state and local governments.
HOCKANUM SEWER SERVICE AREA — That area from which collected
wastewater is discharged to the Town of Vernon and defined in the facility
plan adopted by the WPCA, as amended from time to time.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Includes any user of publicly owned treatment works
which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972,
Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under
the following divisions: Division A, Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing;
Division B, Mining; Division D, Manufacturing; Division E, Transportation,
Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary; and Division I, Services, or
any other user which is not a residential user, commercial user, institutional
user or governmental user.
INSTITUTIONAL USER — Includes social, charitable, religious, and
educational activities, such as schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes,
penal institutions and similar institutional users.
MINIMUM BILL — That portion of the total user charge assessed against
all users of the system, regardless of the volume of wastewater discharged.
The minimum bill shall be computed by dividing the total value of the fixed
charges (see definition of "fixed charges" above) by the number of users.
The minimum bill for commercial, industrial, institutional and governmental
users whose flows exceed those defined for an EDU (see the definition of
"equivalent dwelling unit" above) shall be computed by dividing the total
§ 330-2 ELLINGTON CODE § 330-2
325:272
flow from the facility by the EDU flow value and multiplying the resulting
number of EDUs by the minimum bill amount.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Wastewater that has a BOD
concentration of not more than 200 mg/l and a suspended solids
concentration of not more than 200 mg/l.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE — Those functions that result in
expenditures during the useful life of the treatment works for materials,
labor, utilities and other items which are necessary for managing and using
the facilities for which such works were designed and constructed. The term
"operation and maintenance" includes replacement as defined below.
REPLACEMENT — Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances that are necessary during the useful life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which
the works were designed and constructed. "Replacement" is not intended to
mean the costs associated with depreciation of the collection or treatment
system.
RESIDENTIAL USER — Any contributor to the WPCA's treatment works
whose lot, parcel, real estate or building is used for domestic dwelling
purposes only.
SEASONAL OCCUPANCY — The use of a property and sewer system for
less than the full calendar year on a consistent basis. During the period
of nonoccupancy, no discharge shall be made to the sewer system or any
holding tank. For the purpose of this limited use, proof in the form of
original copies of electric utility bills for the off season shall be required or
other documentary evidence of seasonal use found acceptable to the WPCA.
The WPCA shall review this documentation and may adjust billing for the
unused period.
SS (denoting SUSPENDED SOLIDS) — Solids that either float on the
surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which
are removable by laboratory filtering.
TREATMENT WORKS — Any devices and systems for the storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic
sewage or liquid industrial wastes. These include intercepting sewers,
outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping, power, and other
equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements,
remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide
a reliable recycled supply, such as standby treatment units and clear well
facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of the land that will
be an integral part of the treatment process or used for ultimate disposal
of residues resulting from such treatment (including land for composting
sludge, temporary storage of such compost and land used for the storage
of treated wastewater in land treatment systems before land application);
or any other method of system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing,
treating, separating or disposing of municipal waste or industrial waste,
including waste in combined stormwater and sanitary sewer systems.
§ 330-2 SEWER LINE EXTENSIONS § 330-2
325:273
USEFUL LIFE — The estimated period during which a treatment works will
be operated.
USER CHARGE — That portion of the total wastewater service charge
which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of
operation, maintenance, and replacement of the wastewater treatment
works.
VARIABLE CHARGES — Those components of the WPCA's annual
expenditures which are directly related to the volume of wastewater flow.
These charges may include, but are not limited to, the cost associated with
providing utility services, including electricity, potable water, alarm service,
user fees paid to the Town of Stafford and user fees paid to the Town of
Vernon.
WATER METER — A water volume measuring and recording device,
furnished and installed by a user and approved by the Town of Ellington
WPCA.
§ 330-3. Fund management.
A. The revenues collected as a result of the user charges levied shall
be deposited in a separate nonlapsing fund known as the "Operation,
Maintenance and Replacement Fund."
B. Fiscal year-end balances in the Operation, Maintenance and
Replacement Fund shall be used for no other purposes than those
designated by the WPCA. Moneys which have been transferred from
other sources to meet temporary shortages in the Operation,
Maintenance and Replacement Fund shall be returned to their
respective accounts upon appropriate adjustment of the user charge
rates for operation, maintenance and replacement. The user charge
rate(s) shall be adjusted such that the transferred moneys will be
returned to their respective accounts within six months of the fiscal year
in which the moneys were borrowed.
§ 330-4. Determination of charge.
Users within both the Hockanum Sewer Service Area and the Crystal Lake
Sewer Service Area shall pay their equitable share of the expense of
operating the respective wastewater collection and disposal system on a
semiannual basis. The user charge shall be the total of the variable charge
and fixed charge (see § 330-2). The determination of the equitable share and
subsequent individual user charge shall be based upon the application of
the following general rules:
A. On or before May 1 of each year the WPCA shall determine the costs
associated with the operation of each of the WPCA's systems, Hockanum
and Crystal Lake, and adopt a schedule of these expenses as an
operational budget for the coming fiscal year. Each user of either of the
WPCA's systems will be assessed a minimum charge semiannually, based
on the determination of the minimum bill and related fixed charges as
defined in § 330-2.
§ 330-2 ELLINGTON CODE § 330-4
325:274
B. Those users within the Hockanum Sewer Service Area shall pay for the
services provided by the WPCA defined as variable charges (defined in
§ 330-2) based on their actual use of the treatment works. The actual use
of the treatment works shall be determined by water meter readings for
those users in the Hockanum Sewer Service Area.
(1) In situations where one water meter may serve more than one
residential or commercial unit, the WPCA shall divide the total
metered flow equally among the units served through the meter or
make other reasonable adjustments that more accurately reflect the
actual water use of the individual units.
(2) Those residential users that derive potable water from on-site wells
within the Hockanum System, without metered water service, shall
have their bills computed based on the average water use associated
with other residential users within the system as calculated by the
WPCA based on information supplied by water meter readings.
(3) The system-wide variable charges shall be determined through the
application of the following formula: Total annual variable expenses
÷ total annual wastewater flow = cost per gallon of variable
expenses.
(4) The variable charge attributable to an individual property shall be
calculated and billed semiannually through the application of the
following formula: Cost per gallon of variable expenses X gallons of
water used = property's variable charge.
C. Those users within the Crystal Lake Sewer Service Area shall pay equal
shares of the Crystal Lake variable charges based on the number of
equivalent dwelling units (EDUs), as defined in § 330-2, attributable
to their property. The cost per EDU shall be determined through the
application of the following formula: Total Crystal Lake variable charges
÷ total number of EDUs = variable charge per EDU.
D. If a residential, commercial, institutional, or industrial user has a
consumptive use of water or in some other manner uses water which is
not discharged into the wastewater collection system, the user charge
for that contributor may be based on readings of a wastewater meter(s)
or separate water meter(s) installed, maintained and read at the user's
expense.
E. Any residential or commercial user whose property is occupied on a
seasonal basis may apply to the WPCA to determine qualification as
season occupancy. For the period of occupancy the charge will contain
both fixed and variable charges as previously defined. For the period of
nonuse, only the minimum charge will be made.
F. In all cases where the wastewater flow must be estimated for
commercial, industrial, recreational, restaurant, church or
governmental uses, the WPCA shall apply the flow information contained
in the most recent version of the State of Connecticut Department
of Public Health publication titled "Connecticut Public Health Code
Regulations and Technical Standards for Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems" on file with the WPCA.
G. If a residential, commercial, institutional, or industrial user exceeds the
wastewater flow gallons per day (gpd) approved in the 1998 Facilities
§ 330-4 SEWER LINE EXTENSIONS § 330-4
325:275
Plan Update for the Hockanum River Watershed approved by DEP, the
WPCA will levy a surcharge rate for excessive wastewater flows. The
surcharge rate is to encourage conservation and secure individual
compliance to stay within the total contracted flows of 819,200 gpd sent
to Vernon's Treatment Plant and the total contracted flows of 98,000 gpd
to Stafford's Treatment Plant. [Added 5-15-2001]
H. If a residential, commercial, institutional, or industrial user has potable
water for his or its property without a metered service, the WPCA plans
to implement a requirement that all contributors install a separate water
meter(s) to be maintained at the user's expense. Approved in the 1998
Facilities Plan Update. [Added 5-15-2001]
I. Any residential, commercial, institutional, or industrial user who or
which violates Ellington WPCA Sewer Ordinance § 143-6H by
connecting roof downspouts, foundation drains, building drains, storm
sewers, storm drains, subsoil drainage or other sources of surface runoff
directly or indirectly into the public sanitary sewer shall be subject to a
minimum semiannual sewer user penalty surcharge of $50. The sewer
user penalty charge will be in addition to any penalties imposed by
Ellington's Sewer Ordinance.35 [Added 5-15-2001]
§ 330-5. Billing and payments.
A. The WPCA shall bill users of the WPCA's systems on a semiannual basis.
Semiannual bills shall be due and payable on April 1 and October 1.
B. Penalty interest shall be charged at the rate of 1.5% per month on pastdue
accounts as provided by statute.
§ 330-6. Special charges.
A. All users whose waste strength is greater than 200 mg/l BOD or 200 mg/
l SS shall prepare and file with the WPCA a report that shall include
pertinent data relating to the wastewater characteristics, including the
methods of sampling and measurement to obtain these data, and these
shall be used to calculate the user charge for that user. The WPCA shall
have the right to gain access to the waste stream and take its own
samples. Should the WPCA do so, and should the results be substantially
different as determined by the WPCA from the data submitted by the
user, the user charge for that user shall be revised for the next billing
cycle/period.
B. Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase
in the cost of managing the effluent of the sludge from the WPCA's
treatment works or any user which discharges any substance which
singly or by interaction with other substances causes identifiable
increases in the cost of operation, maintenance or replacement of the
treatment works shall pay for the increased costs. The charge to each
such user shall be determined by the appropriate personnel and
approved by the WPCA.
C. The sewer user charge levied against Connecticut Petroleum for the
groundwater treatment system discharge located on West Road, within
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 143, Art. II, Sewer Construction and Use.
§ 330-4 ELLINGTON CODE § 330-6
325:276
the Hockanum Sewer Service Area, shall be defined as a commercial
discharge (see § 330-2). As voted at the May 18, 1993, regular meeting
of the WPCA, Connecticut Petroleum's charge shall be determined
consistent with the methods outlined in § 330-4, save for the referenced
definition of an EDU (§ 330-2). An EDU shall be defined as 175 gallons
per day for the purposes of computing the charges due from Connecticut
Petroleum. This EDU value shall be used in the calculation of
Connecticut Petroleum's charges through April 1, 1998. This adjustment
in EDU flow in no way affects any special charges which may be levied
and determined through the application of Subsections A and B of this
section.
D. Excess discharge. [Added 1-20-2009]
(1) Findings. All sewage effluent collected in the Town of Ellington
is discharged for treatment to a facility in another town; and the
Town of Ellington has been granted a limited quantity of flow that
it is permitted to discharge to the treatment facilities. Any excess
flow discharged from Ellington results in a violation of its contract
with the treating town and either jeopardizes Ellington's ability to
discharge to that facility at all, or results in a surcharge to Ellington
to cover the excess treatment costs incurred or excessive discharges
that may violate the treatment plant's permitted rate of discharge
under its permit. As a result, the Ellington WPCA finds it necessary
to discourage excessive discharges from its users and, in the event
that a user does discharge greater flow than it was permitted, may
impose the cost of that excess upon the user rather than all of the
users and the WPCA.
(2) Purpose. To address the foregoing issues, the WPCA does hereby
adopt the following regulations.
(3) Definitions. As used in Subsection D, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
ESTABLISHED FLOW — That quantity of average daily flow and that
quantity of peak daily flow allocated to the user by the WPCA at the
time the user was permitted to connect to the sewerage system, or
as the quantity of flow may have been modified from time to time.
TWO-YEAR PERIOD — A rolling period of two years beginning on
the first day of the billing cycle during which there is a sewage
discharge greater than the established flow and ending on the last
day of the billing cycle two years later, subject to adjustment for
any fluctuations in the beginning date of any billing cycle that may
extend or shorten the period by a few days.
(4) First offense. In the event a user is or has discharged effluent greater
than his or its established flow during a single time or period within
any two-year period, then the WPCA shall notify the user, who shall
immediately conduct an investigation to determine the cause of the
excess discharge and will take such action as necessary to correct
the condition or problem to reduce the discharge to the established
flow or less. If the discharge is reduced to or below the established
§ 330-6 SEWER LINE EXTENSIONS § 330-6
325:277
flow for the billing period next after the notification, there will be no
increase in the user rate.
(5) Subsequent offense. In the event a user is or has discharged effluent
greater than his or its established flow a second time or any
additional times within any two-year period, then the WPCA may
impose a charge on the excess discharge, for the full billing period of
that second or additional excess discharge, equal to three times the
standard rate for that user, and shall continue that rate until the user
reduces its discharge to or below the established rate of discharge.
(6) In the event that the WPCA determines that the continued excess
discharge is or will jeopardize its contractual relationship with the
treating town and/or cause it to be subject to any enforcement action
by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, then it
may issue an order to the user to cease any and all discharges to the
Ellington sewer system and seek enforcement of this order through
the Superior Court as a violation of the Ellington Sewer Ordinance.36
§ 330-7. Appeals.
A. Any user which feels its user charge is unjust and inequitable may
make written application to the WPCA requesting a review of the user
charge. Said written request shall, where necessary, show the actual or
estimated average flow and/or strength of its wastewater in comparison
with values upon which the charge is based, including how the
measurements or estimates were made.
B. Review of the request shall be made by the WPCA, and, if substantiated,
the user charges for that user shall be recomputed based on the revised
flow and/or strength data and the new charges shall be applicable to the
next billing cycle/period.
Appendix
Chapter 400
CRYSTAL LAKE FIRE DISTRICT
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 143, Sewers.
§ 330-6 ELLINGTON CODE § 330-7
400:278

TOWN OF ELLINGTON
ZONING REGULATIONS
FIRST ADOPTED AUGUST 1, 1952
REVISED THROUGH MARCH 15, 2019
ARTICLE 1 INTRODUCTION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
ARTICLE 1 INTRODUCTION...........................................................................................1-7
Section 1.1 Purpose ....................................................................................................................... 1-7
Section 1.2 Implementation.......................................................................................................... 1-7
Section 1.3 Zoning Districts ......................................................................................................... 1-8
1.3.1 Zoning Districts Enumerated .............................................................................................................. 1-8
1.3.2 Zoning Map and Boundaries............................................................................................................... 1-8
ARTICLE 2 GENERAL REGULATIONS ........................................................................2-1
Section 2.1 General Requirements .............................................................................................. 2-1
2.1.1 Zoning Compliance............................................................................................................................. 2-1
2.1.2 Lots of Record .................................................................................................................................... 2-2
2.1.3 Private Property Driveways ................................................................................................................ 2-2
2.1.4 Increase in Area and Yard Requirements ........................................................................................... 2-2
2.1.5 Front Yards on Corner Lots ................................................................................................................ 2-2
2.1.6 Visibility at Corners............................................................................................................................ 2-2
2.1.7 Construction in Required Yards.......................................................................................................... 2-2
2.1.8 Through Lots and Corner Lots............................................................................................................ 2-3
2.1.9 Measurement of Required Yards on Irregular Lots ............................................................................ 2-3
2.1.10 Highway Clearance Setback ............................................................................................................... 2-3
2.1.11 Elevation of Foundation...................................................................................................................... 2-3
2.1.12 Unregistered Vehicles Requirements.................................................................................................. 2-3
2.1.13 Donation Bins ..................................................................................................................................... 2-4
2.1.14 Accessory Uses................................................................................................................................... 2-4
2.1.15 Separability......................................................................................................................................... 2-4
2.1.16 Conflicting Regulations ...................................................................................................................... 2-4
Section 2.2 Non-Conforming Uses of Land & Structures ............... Error! Bookmark not defined.
2.2.1 Continuance of Non-Conforming Structures or Uses ......................................................................... 2-5
2.2.2 Replacement of Non-Conforming Buildings or Structures................................................................. 2-5
2.2.3 Change of Non-Conforming Use ........................................................................................................ 2-5
2.2.4 Abandonment of Non-Conforming Use.............................................................................................. 2-5
2.2.5 Non-Conforming Lot of Record ......................................................................................................... 2-5
2.2.6 Completion of Existing Buildings ...................................................................................................... 2-5
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES ................................................................................3-1
Section 3.1 Permitted Uses ........................................................................................................... 3-1
Section 3.2 Density Limitation & Lot Requirements................................................................. 3-3
3.2.1 Density Limitation .............................................................................................................................. 3-3
3.2.2 Lot Requirements................................................................................................................................ 3-5
3.2.3 Minimum Yard Setbacks .................................................................................................................... 3-5
3.2.4 Building Height & Lot Coverage........................................................................................................ 3-6
Section 3.3 Multi-Family Zone Purposes & Standards (Repealed).......................................... 3-6
Section 3.4 Age-Restricted Cluster Housing Zone (Repealed).................................................. 3-6
Section 3.5 Workforce Cluster Housing Zone (Repealed)......................................................... 3-6
Section 3.6 Designed Multi-Family (DMF) Zone ....................................................................... 3-6
3.6.1 Purpose ............................................................................................................................................... 3-6
3.6.2 Overall Procedure ............................................................................................................................... 3-6
3.6.3 Locational Requirements .................................................................................................................... 3-7
3.6.4 Permitted Principal Uses Structures.................................................................................................... 3-7
3.6.5 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures........................................................................................... 3-7
3.6.6 Dimensional and Area Standards........................................................................................................ 3-8
3.6.7 Workforce Housing Provisions......................................................................................................... 3-11
3.6.8 Assisted Living Provision................................................................................................................. 3-12
ARTICLE 1 INTRODUCTION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
3.6.9 Elderly Housing Provisions .............................................................................................................. 3-12
3.6.10 Age Restricted Provisions................................................................................................................. 3-13
3.6.11 Site Development Standards............................................................................................................. 3-13
3.6.12 Design Review-Considerations......................................................................................................... 3-17
3.6.13 Application Requirements ................................................................................................................ 3-19
3.6.14 Approval Considerations .................................................................................................................. 3-20
3.6.15 Additional Provisions ....................................................................................................................... 3-21
ARTICLE 4 COMMERCIAL & INDUSTRIAL ZONES ................................................ 4-1
Section 4.1 Permitted Uses and Uses Requiring Special Permit................................................4-1
4.1.1 Approval of Other Uses ...................................................................................................................... 4-4
Section 4.2 Area, Yard and Bulk Requirements.........................................................................4-5
4.2.1 Lot Area, Width & Yard Requirements.............................................................................................. 4-5
4.2.2 Minimum Lot Size.............................................................................................................................. 4-5
4.2.3 Bulk Requirements ............................................................................................................................. 4-5
Section 4.3 Commercial and Industrial Requirements ..............................................................4-6
4.3.1 Planned Commercial Zones and Industrial Park Zones ...................................................................... 4-6
4.3.2 Lighting .............................................................................................................................................. 4-6
ARTICLE 5 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT .......................................................................... 5-1
Section 5.1 Purpose........................................................................................................................5-1
Section 5.2 Objectives....................................................................................................................5-1
Section 5.3 Definitions ...................................................................................................................5-1
Section 5.4 General Provisions .....................................................................................................5-3
Section 5.5 Administration............................................................................................................5-4
5.5.1 Designation of Administrator ............................................................................................................. 5-4
5.5.2 Certification........................................................................................................................................ 5-4
5.5.3 Application ......................................................................................................................................... 5-4
Section 5.6 Provisions for Flood Hazard Protection...................................................................5-5
5.6.1 General Standards............................................................................................................................... 5-5
5.6.2 Standards for Streams without Established Base Flood Elevations, Floodways, and/or Flood Map.. 5-6
5.6.3 Specific Standards .............................................................................................................................. 5-6
5.6.4 Variance Procedure............................................................................................................................. 5-7
5.6.5 Criteria For Variances......................................................................................................................... 5-8
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE & SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS......................... 6-1
Section 6.1 Buffer Requirements..................................................................................................6-1
Section 6.2 Parking and Loading Space Requirements..............................................................6-1
6.2.1 General Provisions.............................................................................................................................. 6-1
6.2.2 Description of Parking Facilities ........................................................................................................ 6-2
6.2.3 Number of Parking Spaces ................................................................................................................. 6-3
6.2.4 Reduction of Parking Spaces .............................................................................................................. 6-4
6.2.5 Location of Parking Facilities............................................................................................................. 6-5
6.2.6 Surfacing and Drainage ...................................................................................................................... 6-5
6.2.7 Landscaping........................................................................................................................................ 6-5
6.2.8 Landscaping and Lighting .................................................................................................................. 6-5
6.2.9 Interior Circulation ............................................................................................................................. 6-6
6.2.10 Maintenance........................................................................................................................................ 6-6
6.2.11 Loading Requirements for Commercial, Industrial, Planned Commercial and Industrial Park Zones6-6
6.2.12 Continuing Character of Obligation ................................................................................................... 6-6
6.2.13 Change in Use..................................................................................................................................... 6-6
Section 6.3 Signs.............................................................................................................................6-6
6.3.1 Purpose ............................................................................................................................................... 6-6
ARTICLE 1 INTRODUCTION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
6.3.2 General................................................................................................................................................ 6-6
6.3.3 Signs Which Are Exempt from These Regulations ............................................................................ 6-7
6.3.4 Signs Permitted in Residential Zones ................................................................................................. 6-8
6.3.5 Attached Signs Permitted in C, PC, I, and IP Zones........................................................................... 6-8
6.3.6 Attached Signs for Large Anchor Businesses..................................................................................... 6-8
6.3.7 Detached Signs Permitted in C, PC, I, and IP Zones .......................................................................... 6-9
6.3.8 Temporary Signs - All Zones............................................................................................................ 6-10
6.3.9 Illumination....................................................................................................................................... 6-10
6.3.10 Prohibited Signs ................................................................................................................................ 6-11
Section 6.4 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control........................................................................ 6-11
6.4.1 General Requirements for any Excavation (cut), Fills, and Grading ................................................ 6-11
6.4.2 Definitions ........................................................................................................................................ 6-12
6.4.3 Activities Requiring a Certified Erosion & Sediment Control Plan ................................................. 6-12
6.4.4 Exemptions ....................................................................................................................................... 6-12
6.4.5 Erosion & Sediment Control Plan..................................................................................................... 6-13
6.4.6 Minimum Acceptable Standards....................................................................................................... 6-14
6.4.7 Issuance or Denial of Certification ................................................................................................... 6-14
6.4.8 Conditions Relating to Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.............................................................. 6-14
6.4.9 Inspection.......................................................................................................................................... 6-15
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS...........................................................................7-1
Section 7.1 Accessory Apartments............................................................................................... 7-1
Section 7.2 Bed-and-Breakfast..................................................................................................... 7-1
Section 7.3 Communication Tower ............................................................................................. 7-1
Section 7.4 Composting Facility................................................................................................... 7-2
Section 7.5 Earth Excavation....................................................................................................... 7-3
7.5.1 Special Permit Required ..................................................................................................................... 7-3
7.5.2 Expiration of Permit............................................................................................................................ 7-5
7.5.3 Activities Exempted Under This Section............................................................................................ 7-5
7.5.4 Site Plan Requirements....................................................................................................................... 7-5
Section 7.6 Public Garages and Auto Service Stations .............................................................. 7-6
7.6.1 General Requirements......................................................................................................................... 7-6
7.6.2 Location Requirements ....................................................................................................................... 7-6
7.6.3 Administration .................................................................................................................................... 7-6
Section 7.7 Home Occupations..................................................................................................... 7-7
Section 7.8 Remaining Developable Land Option...................................................................... 7-7
Section 7.9 Rear Lot Requirement ............................................................................................. 7-7
Section 7.10 Sanitary Refuse Disposal Area ................................................................................. 7-8
Section 7.11 Trailers ..................................................................................................................... 7-10
Section 7.12 Small Wind Energy Systems—Windmills............................................................. 7-10
Section 7.13 Cultural Educational Center .................................................................................. 7-11
Section 7.14 Agricultural Uses..................................................................................................... 7-12
Section 7.15 Alternative Energy - Solar ..................................................................................... 7-15
ARTICLE 8 SITE PLANS, SPECIAL PERMITS & ZONE CHANGES .......................8-1
Section 8.1 Zone Change Standards and Procedures ................................................................ 8-1
8.1.1 Application for a Zone Change........................................................................................................... 8-1
Section 8.2 Site Development Plan Standards and Procedures ................................................ 8-1
8.2.1 General Requirements......................................................................................................................... 8-1
8.2.2 Site Plan Requirements....................................................................................................................... 8-2
8.2.3 Approval of Minor Modifications, Commercial Site Plans ................................................................ 8-4
Section 8.3 Special Permit Standards and Procedures.............................................................. 8-4
ARTICLE 1 INTRODUCTION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
8.3.1 Special Permit Application ................................................................................................................. 8-4
8.3.2 Standards for Granting Special Permit ............................................................................................... 8-4
ARTICLE 9 ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS ....................... 9-1
Section 9.1 Zoning Enforcement Officer .....................................................................................9-1
Section 9.2 Permits, Fees and Penalties .......................................................................................9-1
9.2.1 Zoning Permits ................................................................................................................................... 9-1
9.2.2 Construction and Occupancy Permit .................................................................................................. 9-1
9.2.3 Health Officer Approval ..................................................................................................................... 9-1
Section 9.3 Application Requirements.........................................................................................9-2
Section 9.4 Notification..................................................................................................................9-2
Section 9.5 Board of Appeals ........................................................................................................9-2
9.5.1 Authority............................................................................................................................................. 9-2
9.5.2 Recording of Variances ...................................................................................................................... 9-2
9.5.3 Amendments....................................................................................................................................... 9-2
9.5.4 Validity............................................................................................................................................... 9-2
9.5.5 Notification......................................................................................................................................... 9-2
Section 9.6 Post Approval Requirements ....................................................................................9-3
ARTICLE 10 DEFINITIONS & INTERPRETATION.................................................... 10-5
Section 10.1 INTERPRETATION ...............................................................................................10-5
Section 10.2 DEFINITIONS .........................................................................................................10-5
ARTICLE 1 INTRODUCTION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Amendments (Since 6-10-06)
REGULATION
EFFECTIVE
Comprehensive Amendments for Whole Scale Modifications & Streamlining of Uses and Reorganization of Content
Effective 6-10-06
Attached Signs for Large Anchor Businesses
Effective 6-10-06
Signs Permitted in Residential Zones
Application for a Zone Change
Application Requirements
Notification
Board of Appeals
Potable Water Wells
Conflicting Regulations
Permitted Uses and Uses Requiring Special Permit
Permitted Uses
Effective 12-22-06
Small Wind Energy Systems – Windmills
Effective 2-15-07
Bulk Requirements & Definitions
Effective 7-15-07
Density, Height, Yard and Living Area Requirements
Effective 8-15-07
Signage
Signs Permitted In Residential Zones
Effective 11-15-07
Permitted Uses and Uses Requiring Special Permit
Effective 1-7-08
Permitted Uses
Off Street Parking Requirements
Cultural Educational Center
Definitions
Effective 4-15-08
Through Lots and Corner Lots
Measurement of Required Yards on Irregular Lots
Potable Water Wells
Definitions
Effective 6-15-08
Notification
Effective 10-15-08
Permitted Uses and Uses Requiring Special Permit
Effective 7-15-09
Permitted Uses
Permitted Uses and Uses Requiring Special Permit
Effective 8-28-09
Permitted Uses and Uses Requiring Special Permit
Effective 9-25-09
Trailers & Definitions
Effective 2-15-10
Density, Height, Yard and Living Area Requirements
Effective 5-15-10
Expiration of Permit
Effective 6-15-10
Workforce Cluster Housing Zone
Effective 7-1-10
Lot Area Width and Yard Requirements
Effective 9-7-10
Permitted Uses
Permitted Uses and Uses Requiring Special Permit
Signs
Agricultural Uses
Definitions
Effective 12-15-10
Definitions
Zoning Districts
Replace Existing Use Table with modified version based upon Density-based Residential Zoning
Repeal existing and adopt Density Limitation
Repeal Minimum Floor Area Requirements and Modify Dimensional Standards
Repeal Open Space Residential (OSRD) Regulations
Adopt Remaining Developable Land Option
Modify Building Separation in ARCHZ regulations
Modify Building Separation in WCHZ regulations
Add General Requirements for Any Excavation (cut), Fills, and Grading
Repeal Non-Agriculturally Related Uses and Definition of same
Modify Site Development / Design Requirements, Composting Facility, and Section Agricultural Uses to remove old zoning classifications
Modify Home Occupations to include all residences regardless of zone.
Effective 7-15-11
ARTICLE 1 INTRODUCTION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
REGULATION
EFFECTIVE
Age-Restricted Cluster Housing Zone, Post Approval
Workforce Cluster Housing Zone, Post Approval
Added Post Approval Requirements to formalize “in house” post approval procedures and to comply with changes to State Statute pursuant to Public Act 11-79
Modify Density Formula for clarification
Effective 2-15-2012
Earth Excavation to add Activities Exempted
Post Approval Requirements to update bonding for erosion controls
Multiple sections regarding fire hydrants
Effective 3-15-2013
Agricultural Permitted Uses & Agricultural Special Permit Uses
Amending the setback requirement to the street property line for agricultural enclosures, buildings and structures
Effective 1-15-2014
Definitions & Interpretation
Amending the definition of Structure to exclude signs
Effective 2-15-2014
Medical Marijuana Production and Dispensary Facilities
Adding a Moratorium on Palliative Marijuana Production and Dispensary Facilities
Definitions & Interpretation
Adding Medical Marijuana Production Facility and Dispensary
Effective 3-31-2014
Medical Marijuana Production and Dispensary Facilities
Extending the Moratorium on Palliative Marijuana Production and Dispensary Facilities
Effective 4-3-2015
Medical Marijuana Production and Dispensary Facilities
Added to use table and definitions, removed moratorium
Brew Pubs
Added to use table and definitions
Effective 12-15-2015
Section 3.3 – Multi-Family Zone repealed
Section 3.4 – Age-Restricted Cluster Housing Zone repealed
Section 3.5 – Workforce Cluster Housing Zone repealed
Section 3.6 – Designed Multi-Family (DMF) adopted
Sections 1.3.1, 2.1.10, 6.1, 9.6.2, and 9.6.4.5 updated references
Effective 1-15-2016
Section 7.9 – Rear Lot Requirement amended regarding access
Effective 2-1-2016
Section 7.5.2 – Expiration of Permit (Earth Excavation)
Effective 5-15-16
Section 7.14 – Keeping of backyard poultry and beehives, and modifications to the keeping of horses.
Section 7.14-3(B) – Farm Stores and Section 10.2 – Definitions (“Connecticut Grown Products” and “Farm Products”)
Effective 6-15-16
Section 2.1.13 – Donation Bins
Section 3.1.3 – Accessory Uses/Structures - Garages
Effective 10-1-16
Section 2.1 Ag Splits and First Cuts
Effective 07-15-17
Section 7.15 Alternative Energy – Solar (new section)
Effective 1-15-18
Section 7.9 Rear Lot Requirements (Remove residential only restriction)
Effective 2-15-18
Section 7.1 Accessory Apartments (remove 1-bedroom limitation and increase floor area of apt from 35% to 50% of floor area of primary or 1000 sf max)
Effective 4-15-18
Section 6.3.8 Temporary Signs – All Zones (repeal existing regulations and replace with new section)
Effective 4-15-18
Section 7.9 Rear Lot Requirements (exempt lots subject to permanent easement for farmland preservation)
Effective 12-30-2018
Table 4.1 – Permitted Uses & Uses Requiring Special Permit – Commercial & Industrial Zones – Revised table
Effective 03-15-2019
ARTICLE 1 INTRODUCTION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
ARTICLE 1 INTRODUCTION
Section 1.1 Purpose
In accordance with Title 8, Chapter 124 of the General Statutes, as AMENDED, and other applicable General or Special Acts of the General Assembly, it is the purpose of these Zoning Regulations for the Town of Ellington, Connecticut, to:
1. Encourage the most appropriate use of land.
2. Conserve and stabilize the value of property.
3. Promote health, safety and general welfare.
4. Provide adequate open spaces for light and air.
5. Secure safety from fire, panic, flood and other disasters.
6. Lessen congestion in the streets.
7. Prevent undue concentration of population.
8. Facilitate adequate provisions for community utilities and facilities, such as transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements.
Section 1.2 Implementation
To carry out the purposes of these zoning regulations, the Commission may:
1. Designate, regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures and land for agriculture, residence, commerce, trade, industry and other purposes.
2. Regulate and limit the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures hereafter erected or altered.
3. Regulate and determine size and location of yards and other open spaces.
4. Regulate and limit the density of population.
5. Divide the Town of Ellington into such zoning districts as seems best suited for said purposes.
6. Provide for the enforcement of these regulations.
ARTICLE 1 INTRODUCTION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Section 1.3 Zoning Districts
1.3.1 Zoning Districts Enumerated
For the purposes of these regulations, the Town of Ellington is hereby divided into the following zones:
Residence Districts
Residential Zone
R
Rural Agricultural / Residential Zone
RAR
Lake Residence Zone
LR
Designed Multi-Family Zone
DMF
Multi-Family Residence Zone
MF
Business Districts
Commercial Zone
C
Planned Commercial Zone
PC
Industrial Districts
Industrial Zone
I
Industrial Park Zone
IP
Flood Plain
Flood Plain District
FP
1.3.2 Zoning Map and Boundaries
A. The boundaries of these zones are established as shown on the Zoning Map, Ellington, Connecticut, effective on August 2, 1968, as it may be AMENDED from time to time, and filed in the office of the Town Clerk of Ellington, Connecticut, which map is part of these regulations, whether or not bound with them.
1. For purposes of these regulations and unless otherwise indicated on the Zoning Map by fixed lines or dimensions, the boundaries are either street lines, street lines extended, property lines, waterways or lines drawn parallel to the center line of the street and dimensioned as to depth.
2. Where boundaries are streets, street or railroad rights of way or waterways, the boundary of the zone is the center line of the right of way or waterway.
B. The boundaries of the Flood Plain District are shown on the Ellington Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map as the same exist or may be AMENDED from time to time by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
ARTICLE 2 GENERAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
ARTICLE 2 GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section 2.1 General Requirements
2.1.1 Zoning Compliance
A. Every building or structure hereafter erected, reconstructed, structurally altered, enlarged or moved, and every building, structure, premises or land used, rearranged, designed or intended for any use shall be so built or used only as is permitted in the zone in which such building, structure, land or use is located.
B. No conveyance of land shall be made that creates a non-conforming structure or lot or reduces the remaining land below the minimum area, frontage and yard requirements of the zone in which said land is located.
1. Maps to be filed on the Ellington Land Records conveying land for agricultural purposes shall be approved by the Planning Department prior to recording in order for the property owner or other person to demonstrate that such conveyance is in compliance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-18, and shall be subject to the following standards:
a. Maps shall be A2 surveys provided by land surveyors licensed in Connecticut.
b. Maps shall reflect the following statement prior to filing on the Ellington Land Records:
NOT A SUBDIVISION, per Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-18; Division of land depicted on map is for agricultural purposes and without demonstrating suitability for development. Subject lot not approved pursuant to C.G.S. Section 8-25 Subdivision of land, and any future division, development, or use, unless otherwise exempt, is subject to all applicable statutes, regulations, and required approvals for the development of the subject lot for a dwelling or structure, or for the lot’s use.
2. Maps to be filed on the Ellington Land Records dividing a parcel into two parts for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building excluding development for municipal, conservation or agricultural purposes, shall be approved by the Planning Department prior to recording and shall be subject to the following standards:
a. Maps shall be A2 surveys provided by land surveyors licensed in Connecticut.
b. The landowner shall provide to the Planning Department a deed history and legal opinion from an attorney licensed in Connecticut determining that the division of the parcel is exempt from subdivision as defined pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-18.
c. Maps shall reflect the following statement prior to filing on the Ellington Land Records:
NOT A SUBDIVISION, per Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-18; Division of land depicted on map constitutes the first division of the parcel, is exempt from subdivision, and is done without demonstrating suitability for development. Lot not approved pursuant to C.G.S. Section 8-25 Subdivision of land, and any future division of land, unless otherwise exempt, is subject to all applicable statutes, regulations, and required approvals, for the development of the subject lot for a dwelling or structure, or for the lot’s use.
ARTICLE 2 GENERAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
C. All structures and uses of land shall comply with the Area and Yard Requirements; Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements; and the regulations governing signs.
D. All uses not specifically permitted are prohibited.
2.1.2 Lots of Record
Where a lot of record at the time of passage of these regulations or any amendments thereto falls into two or more zones, the more restrictive zoning district shall apply, unless the parcel can be potentially subdivided into two or more parcels in full compliance with these regulations in such a manner so as to create separate parcels of land which fall into separate zoning districts.
2.1.3 Private Property Driveways
To provide adequate access for Ellington's emergency vehicles, all driveways in excess of 100 feet shall meet the following minimum criteria:
1. Six inches of bank run gravel and 2 inches of processed gravel on a firm road bed not less than 15 feet wide.
2. A 14% maximum grade and a minimum turning radius of 40 feet.
3. Turn around provisions shall be made at the end of each private driveway.
2.1.4 Increase in Area and Yard Requirements
The Commission may require, in areas not served by public sewer system, that a lot or lots be increased in area to
provide adequate and safe seepage of the sewage effluent within the lot without objectionable odors or pollution of adjoining property and storm water channels. The decision of the Commission shall be based on investigation by the Health Officer and a san
itary engineer who is a Registered Professional Engineer in the State of Connecticut. The investigation shall determine whether adequate sewage disposal for occupant building or buildings can be achieved on a lot of the size required for the zone due to inadequate porosity of the soil, poor drainage conditions, or danger of contamination of ground water supply.
2.1.5 Front Yards on Corner Lots
Requirements for front yards shall be enforced on both streets.
2.1.6 Visibility at Corners
On a corner lot in any zone no planting, wall, fence, structure or obstruction to vision more than two feet in height shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line connecting points on said street lines each of which points is 25 feet distant from the point of intersection.
The Commission may require greater corner visibility where gradient, angle or intersecting streets, existing planting, grading or other pertinent conditions warrant variation for the safety and welfare of the public.
2.1.7 Construction in Required Yards
Notwithstanding other provisions of these regulations, fences, walls, hedges and shrub plantings are permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard provided that no fence, wall or shrub planting along the street sides of corner lots, or from the building setback line to the street line shall be over 2½ feet in height. A fence or wall which is constructed in such a manner as to provide less than fifty (50) percent obstruction of vision through the fence along the entire distance and height of the fence may be erected in the front yard setback area up to four (4) feet in height. (Amended: 30 September 1996)
ARTICLE 2 GENERAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
2.1.8 Through Lots and Corner Lots
On a through and corner lots, front yard setback requirements apply to all street frontages. (Amended: 15 June 2008)
2.1.9 Measurement of Required Yards on Irregular Lots
Where the front line is an arc and the sidelines converge toward the front lot line, typically considered a “pie-lot”, the required frontage may be measured along the front yard setback line for that particular zone and any increased setback requirement in accordance with Highway Clearance Setbacks. (Amended: 15 June 2008)
2.1.10 Highway Clearance Setback
A. In order to protect the property owner from possible future highway widening, all required front yard depths for all zones shall be computed as the distance specified in the appropriate tables (Residential Minimum Yard Setbacks Section 3.2.3, Designed Multi-Family – Dimensional and Area Standards Section 3.6.6, or Commercial and Industrial Lot Area, Width & Yard Requirements Table 4.2.) plus a distance for the specific streets as follows:
1. Arterial Streets include: Connecticut Routes 30, 32, 74, 83, 140 and 286. Along these streets increase front yard setback by 25 feet.
2. Collector Streets include: Abbott Road, Broad Brook Road, Middle Road, Frog Hollow Road, Pinney Road, Windsorville Road, Job's Hill Road, Hoffman Road, Tolland Turnpike, Ellington Avenue, Pinnacle Road, Muddy Brook Road, Hopkins Road, and Butcher Road. Along these streets increase front yard setback by 20 feet.
3. Along Egypt Road, Buff Cap Road, Shenipsit Street, Burbank Road and Mountain Street increase front yard setback by 15 feet.
4. All other streets are Local Streets and require a front yard setback as indicated in the appropriate tables (Residential Lot Area, Width & Yard Requirements Table 3.2.3, Designed Multi-Family – Dimensional and Area Standards Section 3.6.6, or Commercial and Industrial Lot Area, Width & Yard Requirements Table 4.2.), unless otherwise specified in these regulations.
B. Notwithstanding any provisions of these regulations to the contrary, these provisions shall not require a setback from any road or roadway greater than 100 feet measured from the property/highway line.
2.1.11 Elevation of Foundation
A. Wherever possible, foundations should be designed so that the top, measured at the center of the building, is 2 feet or more above the center of the road. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall refuse to issue permits unless this is done.
B. Where the slope of the land is away from the road and this makes compliance with sub-paragraph (1) impractical, a permit may be issued at a lower elevation provided the owner includes upon his application a drainage plan, existing or to be constructed by the owner at his expense and as part of the required construction under the permit, which will insure that surface water from the road and adjacent lots will be carried away from the proposed building and into suitable areas.
2.1.12 Unregistered Vehicles Requirements
A. The keeping of two or more ungaraged unregistered motor vehicles in any zone shall require a Special Permit.
B. In considering the Special Permit application, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be guided by the location of vehicles (permitted in rear yard only), number of vehicles, screening from public view and purpose of keeping vehicles.
ARTICLE 2 GENERAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
2.1.13 Donation Bins (Section Added 9-26-16, Effective 10/1/16)
A. Bins may be located in commercial or industrial zones.
B. Bins shall not be located on lots 40,000 square feet or smaller.
C. Bins shall not be located in any residential district unless on a lot with a permitted non-residential primary use and on a lot 40,000 square feet or larger.
D. Bins shall not be located in a front yard setback.
E. Bins shall not be located in parking spaces.
F. There shall be no more than one bin per property.
G. Bins shall be routinely emptied and at no time shall there be any item visible from the exterior of a bin.
H. Bins shall be in good repair at all times or shall be immediately removed from premises.
I. Bins shall be in compliance with C.G.S. §21a-430. Donation Bins.
J. Bins found in violation of this section shall be immediately removed from premises.
2.1.14 Accessory Uses
Land use and accessory building customarily incidental to primary uses, but not including business or any building or use not located on the same lot with the building to which it is accessory, are permitted.
2.1.15 Separability
Each of the provisions of this section shall be separate and independent of the other. The invalidity of any provision shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof.
2.1.16 Conflicting Regulations
When any provision of these regulations imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions, or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other regulation, ordinance, statute or law, the provisions of these regulations shall apply and govern. In the case of any conflict or inconsistency between sections of these regulations themselves, the more stringent section shall apply and govern. (Amended: 22 December 2006)
ARTICLE 2 GENERAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Section 2.2 Non-Conforming Uses of Land & Structures
2.2.1 Continuance of Non-Conforming Structures or Uses
Any lawful building or the lawful use of any buildings or premises or any part thereof existing at the time of the effective date of these regulations or any amendments thereto, or where a zoning permit is outstanding on the effective date of these regulations authorizing specific construction or use, which does not conform to these regulations, shall be considered nonconforming and as such may be continued, subject to the provisions of this Section.
2.2.2 Replacement of Non-Conforming Buildings or Structures
Any existing nonconforming building may be restored if damaged by fire, flood, storm, accident or Act of God, provided such restoration is undertaken within one year of time of damage and actively pursued. No nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a structure shall be enlarged to a greater size than at the time of destruction.
2.2.3 Change of Non-Conforming Use
A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use substantially the same in character, or to any use permitted in these regulations in any zone in which it is located.
2.2.4 Abandonment of Non-Conforming Use
Any existing nonconforming use shall cease if such nonconforming use is discontinued with the intent of abandonment for a period of one year by reason of the fault and neglect of the owner of the premises. Where said property is part of a decedent's estate, the preceding one year time limit may be extended for good cause shown for a time equal to the elapsed time from death of the decedent to distribution of the estate assets, but in no case shall the total time of non-use exceed two years.
2.2.5 Non-Conforming Lot of Record
The erection of a dwelling shall be permitted on a nonconforming lot of record in the office of the Assessors or the Town Clerk prior to the effective date of these regulations provided that the owner of any such lot did not own adjoining land on the effective date of these regulations, or has not acquired any adjoining land since the effective date of these regulations to enable such owner to conform with these regulations, or to conform therewith to a greater degree. All nonconforming lots shall conform to the yard requirements of the zone in which the lot is located.
2.2.6 Completion of Existing Buildings
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the location, construction or designated use of a building for which a permit has been granted, construction of which has been started at the time of the effective date of these regulations.

ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Section 3.1 Permitted Uses
The following table establishes those uses allowed in the residential zoning districts.
P
Permitted Use
SP
Use Allowed by Special Permit
3.1.1 AGRICULTURAL USES (See Section 7.14)
Rural Agricultural / Residential
Residential
Lake Residential
1. Agriculture
P
P
P
2. Farm Stand, seasonal
P
P
P
3. Farm Store
SP
SP
SP
4. Horse Boarding / Riding Arena
SP
SP
SP
5. Related & Agricultural Uses
SP
SP
SP
6. Dormitories for farm help accessory to an agricultural operation in Ellington
SP
3.1.2 RESIDENTIAL USES
Rural Agricultural / Residential
Residential
Lake Residential
1. Dwelling - One single family detached dwelling on one lot
P
P
P
2. Dwelling – Two-family on a lot of record
SP
3. Dwelling - Conversion of pre-1950 dwelling to multi-family (Lot area 30,000 sq ft minimum plus additional 5,000 sq ft for each family in building; fire escapes and outside stairways to be located on rear of building and away from view from streets where practical; must maintain one-family dwelling overall appearance.
SP
4. Accessory apartment in accordance with Section 7.1
SP
SP
3.1.3 ACCESSORY USES / STRUCTURES
Rural Agricultural / Residential
Residential
Lake Residential
1. Garages for 3 cars or less per family unit
P
P
P
2. Garages (attached) for more than 3 cars per family unit
SP
SP
SP
3. Garages (detached) for more than 3 cars per family unit
SP
SP
SP
4. Garages (total) attached and detached for more than 6 cars per family unit
SP
SP
SP
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
3.1.3 ACCESSORY USES / STRUCTURES
Rural Agricultural / Residential
Residential
Lake Residential
5. Horses subject to the conditions of Section 7.14
P
P
P
6. Home occupations in compliance with Section 7.7 – Home Occupations
P
P
P
7. Home occupations NOT in compliance with Section 7.7
SP
SP
SP
8. Bed-and-breakfast operations subject to the conditions of Section 7.2
SP
SP
SP
3.1.4 COMMUNITY / INSTITUTIONAL USES
Rural Agricultural / Residential
Residential
Lake Residential
1. Public parks
SP
SP
SP
2. Playground, recreation area, athletic field or expansion
SP
SP
SP
3. Public beach
SP
4. Public schools with building coverage of 30 percent allowed by granting of a Special Permit
SP
SP
SP
5. Private schools and colleges including dormitories and acc. buildings
SP
SP
SP
6. Churches and similar places of worship, parish houses, convents, monasteries
SP
SP
SP
7. Community buildings and other public buildings
SP
SP
SP
8. Cultural, Educational Center
SP
SP
SP
9. Cemeteries
SP
SP
10. Hospitals, convalescent homes and nursing homes
SP
SP
3.1.5 OTHER USES
Rural Agricultural / Residential
Residential
Lake Residential
1. Commercial camp, club and clubhouse, including accessory building, structures and uses.
SP
2. Golf course (9-hole, 18-hole, par-3), public or private, including clubhouse, swimming pool, tennis courts and other sports.
SP
SP
3. Community fairs under local sponsorship
SP
SP
4. Communication tower, subject to the restrictions and conditions of Section 7.3
SP
SP
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
3.1.5 OTHER USES
Rural Agricultural / Residential
Residential
Lake Residential
5. Airplane landing fields and landing strips.
SP
Section 3.2 Density Limitation & Lot Requirements
3.2.1 Density Limitation (Amended Effective 2/15/2012, adding “purpose” and clarifying lot size and width minimums when applying the formula.)
A. Purpose
The purpose of this section is:
1. Encourage permanent preservation & protection of open space, greenway connections, scenic vistas, agricultural lands, forest lands, water quality and other cultural, historical or natural resources, which has an overall effect of increasing land values;
2. Facilitate the construction of streets, utilities, building sites and public services in a more economical and efficient manner with reduced maintenance costs;
3. Provide wildlife corridors connecting open spaces and protecting wildlife habitat;
4. Provide land for active recreation where needed;
5. Reduce demand for public-funded green space and providing means for expanding public trails and greenways.
B. Density Limitation Formula
The maximum number of lots permitted in a subdivision is determined by multiplying the developable area of the parcel of land (in acres) by the density factor for that zone. No parcel of land or lot shall have the density factor reapplied once the maximum lot yield has been reached for the original parcel of land that existed as of July 15, 2011. A fractional remainder shall be “rounded up” if the product of the calculation is above 0.50 lots. A data table shall be included on the subdivision plans showing total acreage, density factor, open space (Fee-in-lieu-of open space at commission’s discretion), developable acreage, lot yield, and remaining land provision acreage (if desired by applicant).
The Planning and Zoning Commission strongly recommends that the applicant participate in a pre-application meeting with town staff to discuss the conceptual aspects of the proposed development including storm water infrastructure and associated technical reporting and to prepare and present a conceptual plan, or its equivalent. Town staff suggestions shall not be deemed to constitute approval of any portion of the application.
The requirements in the following table are the density factors for each zone:
Residential
Agricultural / Rural Residential
Lake Residential
1. Maximum Density (lots per acre of developable area) (1)
0.6
0.5
0.6
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
(1) Exceptions To The Density Limitation
a. A division of property that is exempt from “Subdivision” or “Re-subdivision” regulations, as defined by the Connecticut General Statutes, is exempted from this density limitation.
b. A subdivision of a property which, in the absence of the density limitation, would result in four (4) lots or less is exempted from the density limitation. This potential exception shall not apply to resubdivisions or to properties that may be further subdivided in the future.
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
3.2.2 Lot Requirements
Residential
Rural Agricultural / Residential
Lake Residential
1. Minimum Lot Size – Single-family (square feet) (1)
40,000
40,000
25,000
with public water and public sewer,
40,000
Otherwise
2. Minimum Lot Size – Two-family (square feet)
60,000
n/a
n/a
3. Minimum Lot Width (feet) (1)
100
125 with Septic / 100 with Community Septic
100
(1) Under the density limitation formula only and provided that soil suitability is sufficient enough to allow a reduction in lot size for an onsite sanitary system or has access to public sewers, the following shall apply:
a. Lot size may be reduced but not less than 32,000 square feet.
b. Lot frontage may be reduced but not less than 75 lineal feet measured at the front property line.
In addition to the above requirements, each lot in an area not serviced by public servers shall contain land suitable for the structure and for an individual septic system (if not a community septic system) compliant with the current State of Connecticut Public Health Code and the current technical standards for subsurface sewage disposal systems. Depending upon individual lot soil conditions, lot sizes may need to be increased above the minimum specified in order to comply with the same. In areas with soil conditions rated as “excellent” in accordance with the Tolland County Soil Survey (NRCS, as amended) for septic systems, consideration of community septic systems is highly encouraged.
3.2.3 Minimum Yard Setbacks
Residential
Rural Agricultural / Residential
Lake Residential
1. Front Yard (feet) (1)
35
35
35
2. Side Yard (feet) (1)
10
10
10
3. Rear Yard – Principal Building (feet)
25
25
10
4. Rear Yard – Accessory Building (feet)
10
10
10
(1) Where an existing building legally exists within the front or side yard setbacks either by way of variance or as an existing nonconforming building, any addition or accessory structure to the rear of the principal building that will not encroach within the front or side yard setback requirement any closer to the property line than the existing principal building may be permitted by way of a zoning permit. (Added 8-23-10, Effective 9-7-10)
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
3.2.4 Building Height & Lot Coverage
Residential
Rural Agricultural / Residential
Lake Residential
1. Maximum Building Height (feet)
38
38
38
2. Maximum Lot Coverage (percent)
25%
25%
25%
Section 3.3 Multi-Family Zone Purposes & Standards (Repealed)
This section was repealed effective January 15, 2016. Please see Section 3.6.
Section 3.4 Age-Restricted Cluster Housing Zone (Repealed)
This section was repealed effective January 15, 2016. Please see Section 3.6.
Section 3.5 Workforce Cluster Housing Zone (Repealed)
This section was repealed effective January 15, 2016. Please see Section 3.6.
Section 3.6 Designed Multi-Family (DMF) Zone (effective 1-15-16)
3.6.1. Purpose
1. The Designed Multi-Family (DMF) Zone is intended to:
a. Provide for a variety of housing types in Ellington in order to help meet the housing needs of a diverse population.
b. Create high-quality developments capable of sustaining long-term value.
c. Promote project designs that provide opportunities for healthy living, enhance and protect open spaces, natural resources and features, and other elements of the Town's rural character.
d. Help achieve the goals and objectives of the Town's Plan of Conservation and Development.
e. Allow the Planning and Zoning Commission to effectively manage the number and type of multi-family housing units to maintain an appropriate housing balance in the community.
2. Since the intent of the DMF Zone is to provide flexibility in design standards in order to achieve important public objectives, the DMF requirements shall prevail in the event of conflict with any other provisions of the Zoning Regulations.
3.6.2. Overall Procedure
Development in a DMF Zone shall occur via the following procedure:
1. A DMF Zone shall be established and represented on the Zoning Map after approval by the Commission of:
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
a. a petition for a zone change processed in accordance with Section 8.1;
b. concurrent approval of a conceptual site plan. The content of conceptual plans shall be guided by the requirements of Section 3.6.12 and the DMF regulations;
2. After approval of a zone change and conceptual site plan, an applicant may petition the Commission for approval of a special permit and final site plan to authorize development of the site.
3. No special permit shall be issued for a development within the DMF Zone unless the Commission finds that the development plan:
a. meets all of the standards of these regulations;
b. is consistent with the conceptual site plan approved as part of the zone change application, and
c. considers the advisory report from the Design Review Board (DRB).
4. Potential applicants for DMF project approval are strongly encouraged to meet with Town staff for guidance prior to making a formal application.
3.6.3. Locational Requirements
A DMF Zone shall only be established where the Commission finds that the proposed location:
1. Is in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and Development,
2. Is consistent with the purposes of these regulations,
3. Will be served by public sewer,
4. Will be served by public water, and
5. Has frontage on a collector or arterial street (See Section 3.6.6) and will be served by a direct driveway connection to such collector or arterial street by way of fee simple ownership; or, when presented as part of a master plan, direct driveway connection to such collector or arterial street is provided by permanent deeded easement.
3.6.4. Permitted Principal Uses and Structures
1. Single family detached units.
2. Single family attached units.
3. Buildings containing multiple dwelling units.
4. A multi-family development in existence or as approved by the Commission as of January 15, 2016.
5. A single family dwelling on a separate lot and in existence as of January 15, 2016.
3.6.5. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
1. Clubhouse or similar form of community facility for the purposes of community association meetings, recreation, or for similar purposes for the exclusive use of project residents and their guests.
2. Tennis courts, swimming pools, and other similar common recreational elements for the exclusive use of project residents and their guests.
3. Other accessory uses or structures which, in the Commission's sole judgment, are customarily associated with common interest residential communities, multi-family developments, assisted living facilities or elderly housing developments, that are clearly subordinate and incidental to principal residential uses.
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
3.6.6. Dimensional and Area Standards
1. Minimum Parcel Area
If a development includes a mix of attached and detached units, then a minimum of ten (10) acres of contiguous land shall be provided.
Five (5) acres of contiguous land for attached units;
Ten (10) acres of contiguous land for detached units;
2. Minimum Frontage
200 feet
3. Maximum Units per Acre
(buildable land equals total parcel area minus wetlands, watercourses, one-hundred-year floodplain, and areas over thirty-percent slope).
Assisted living facilities are not limited to units per acre; rather, density is based on floor area and common space requirements.
4.0 units per acre of buildable land unless otherwise specifically stated herein
5.0 units per acre of buildable land if all units have at least a one car garage which is a minimum of 12' x 20' (garage units)
6.0 units per acre of buildable land if all units have at least a one car garage which is a minimum of 12' x 20' (garage units) and at least 20 percent of the units are deed-restricted in perpetuity as “workforce housing” units as provided in Section 3.6.7 of these regulations
15.0 units per acre of buildable land if the units are restricted as “elderly” units as provided in Section 3.6.9 of these regulations
85,000 square feet of gross floor area if units are restricted as “assisted living” as provided in Section 3.6.8 of the regulations
4. Maximum Units per Building
10 units per building except for assisted living facilities and elderly housing developments
5. Average Bedrooms Per Unit (as interpreted by the Commission, any room that can be easily converted to a bedroom like a library, office, den, study, studio, loft or other similar space shall be considered a bedroom)
1.75 bedrooms per unit except that “workforce” units as provided in Section 3.6.7 of these regulations may average 2.25 bedrooms per workforce unit
6. Maximum Building Height (See definitions)
32 feet for detached units or 2.5 stories;
38 feet for attached units or 2.5 stories;
45 feet for assisted living facilities or 3.0 stories;
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
7. Maximum Building Coverage
20% of the buildable land if built at 4.0 units per acre of buildable land;
25% of the buildable land if built at 5.0 units per acre of buildable land;
30% of the buildable land if built at 6.0 units per acre of buildable land;
35% of the buildable land if an assisted living facility or elderly housing development;
8. Building Setback - Minimum Front Yard from a public street
35 feet for detached units and subject to 2.1.10 Highway Clearance Setback
125 feet for attached units
9. Building Setback – Minimum Side and Rear Yard
35 feet for detached units
50 feet for attached units when adjacent to another multi-family use or a commercial use or an industrial use
100 feet for attached unit buildings when adjacent to a single family residential use or single family residential zoning district
10. Parking Setback - Minimum Front Yard from a public street
35 feet for detached units;
100 feet for attached units;
11. Parking Setback - Minimum Side and Rear Yard
50 feet to any residential use or zone boundary;
25 feet when adjacent to another multi-family use or a commercial use or an industrial use;
12. Minimum Building Setback from Interior Drive
25 feet; excluding carport drop-off and loading areas as approved by the Commission
13. Minimum Building Setback from Interior Surface Parking Area
10 feet (except for a garage space or entry)
14. Minimum Building Separation
20 feet from any portion of building including overhangs, chimneys, hatchways, bay-windows, etc.
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
15. Minimum Floor Area
(Measured from exterior wall dimensions. As interpreted by the Commission, any room that can be easily converted to a bedroom like a library, office, den, study, studio, loft or other similar space shall be considered a bedroom)
Unless otherwise specifically provided herein:
700 square feet for a studio or one bedroom unit;
1,000 square feet for a two bedroom unit;
1,200 square feet for a three bedroom unit;
Assisted Living:
400 square feet for a studio unit;
500 square feet for a one bedroom unit;
800 square feet for a two bedroom unit;
Elderly Housing:
600 square feet for a one bedroom unit;
16. Minimum Landscaped Front Yard
50 feet in depth for the entire width of the lot for attached unit developments or assisted living; 25 feet in depth for the entire width of the lot for detached unit developments or elderly housing;
17. Minimum Landscaped Buffer Strip Side Yard
25 feet in depth for the entire length of the lot; or, 15 feet in depth for the entire length of the lot when adjacent to another multi-family use or commercial use or an industrial use. Due to existing vegetation or topographic conditions, the Commission may determine that side yard landscaped buffer strips are unnecessary.
18. Minimum Landscaped Buffer Strip Rear Yard
25 feet in depth for the entire width of the lot; or, 15 feet in depth for the entire width of the lot when adjacent to another multi-family use or commercial use or an industrial use. Due to existing vegetation or topographic conditions, the Commission may determine that rear yard landscaped buffer strips are unnecessary.
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
3.6.7. Workforce Housing Provisions
To increase the types of available housing, with emphasis on market rate and moderately priced privately developed common interest communities, the Commission may authorize an increase in density pursuant to Section 3.6.6.3 when a project will be developed as a “workforce housing development” in accordance with these regulations and the following provisions.
1. Applicable Definitions
a. Eligible Household – A household whose annual income is at or below eighty percent (80%) of the area median income for Ellington, as determined and reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
b. Incentive Housing Restriction – A deed restriction constituting a binding obligation with respect to the restrictions on household income, sale price, and housing costs in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
c. Median Income – After adjustments for family size, the lesser of the state median income or the median income for the area in which the Town of Ellington is located as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
d. Workforce Housing Development – A residential development that is located within the Ellington DMF Zone that contains not less than twenty percent (20%) of the dwelling units that will be conveyed subject to an Incentive Housing Restriction requiring that such dwelling units shall be sold at, or below, prices which will preserve the units as housing for which Eligible Households pay thirty percent (30%) or less of their annual income on housing costs, where such income is less than or equal to eighty percent (80%) of the median income in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
e. Workforce Housing Unit - A dwelling unit that is within a Workforce Housing Development that is subject to an Incentive Housing Restriction.
2. Applicable Requirements
a. Not less than 20% of all the dwelling units constructed in a Workforce Housing Development shall be a Workforce Housing Units. When a calculation performed under this subsection results in a number that includes a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number.
b. Workforce Housing Units shall only be sold or rented to Eligible Households.
c. Each Workforce Housing Unit shall be subject to an Incentive Housing Restriction.
d. All Incentive Housing Restrictions must include, at a minimum, the following:
i. A description of the Workforce Housing Development.
ii. An identification of the Workforce Housing Units.
iii. A requirement that only an Eligible Household may reside in a Workforce Housing Unit.
iv. The formula pursuant to which the maximum sale price of a unit will be calculated.
e. The purchase of a Workforce Housing Unit for investment purposes by an entity or an individual not intending to occupy the dwelling is prohibited, except that a nonresident family member may purchase up to one unit for a family member who will reside in the dwelling unit and otherwise comply with the requirements of this section.
f. No Workforce Housing Unit shall transfer unless the Zoning Enforcement Officer has issued a Certificate of Zoning Compliance finding that the provisions of this section have been satisfied.
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
g. An affordability plan in accordance with any requirements of the Connecticut General Statutes or the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies shall be submitted with the application for a Special Permit for a DMF Workforce Housing Development. In addition to complying with state statute and state agency regulations, an affordability plan shall include the identity of the person, entity or agency responsible for administration of the affordability plan and its compliance with income and sale price limits, a fair housing marketing plan governing the sale of Workforce Housing Units, a description of the sequence in which Workforce Housing Units will be built and occupied and designation of Workforce Housing Units within the development.
h. Parking shall comply with Section 6.2.3, Number of Parking Spaces. When applicable, Section 6.2.4, Reduction of Parking Spaces may apply.
3.6.8. Assisted Living Provision
In order to meet senior housing needs in Ellington, the Commission may authorize an increase in density pursuant to Section 3.6.6.3 when a project will be developed as an “assisted living facility” in accordance with these provisions.
1. Applicable Definitions
a. Assisted Living Facility - A special combination of housing, support services, personalized assistance and some health and nursing care services primarily for people ages 62 or older that need help with instrumental activities of daily living in order to maintain a maximum level of independence.
b. Assisted Living Tenant - A person primarily 62 years or older that resides in an Assisted Living Facility.
c. Assisted Living Unit - A living environment belonging to an Assisted Living Tenant that includes no more than one or two bedrooms, one kitchen, and a full bathroom.
2. Applicable Requirements
In addition to meeting the standards within the DMF regulations, the following shall apply for Assisted Living Facilities:
a. Not less than ten percent (10%) of the maximum floor area (See Section 3.6.6.3) shall be dedicated as common space.
b. There shall be one (1.0) parking space for every three (3.0) bedrooms plus one (1.0) parking space for each employee on the largest shift.
3.6.9. Elderly Housing Provisions
In order to meet senior housing needs in Ellington, the Commission may authorize an increase in density pursuant to Section 3.6.6.3 when a project will be developed as an “elderly housing development” in accordance with the following provisions.
1. Applicable Definitions
a. Elderly Housing Development - Municipal housing primarily for the elderly, when sponsored by the Housing Authority of the Town of Ellington and financed by local, state or federal funds.
b. Elderly Housing – Housing primarily intended for persons 62 years of age or older, for handicapped or disabled persons 18 years and older or for veterans as prescribed by the Connecticut Department of Housing.
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
2. Applicable Requirements
In addition to the standards within the DMF regulations, the following shall apply for Elderly Housing Developments:
a. No unit shall have more than one (1) bedroom.
b. There shall be 0.75 parking spaces for every one unit plus 1.0 parking space for each on-site employee of the Ellington Housing Authority.
3.6.10. Age-Restricted Provisions
To increase the types of available housing, with emphasis on market rate, privately developed, common interest communities for empty nesters and seniors, the Commission may authorize an increase in density pursuant to Section 3.6.6.3 when a project will be developed as an “age-restricted housing development” in accordance with these provisions.
1. Applicable Definitions:
Age-Restricted Development – a housing development primarily for residents 55 years of age and older and in compliance with this section.
2. Applicable Requirements:
a. Each housing unit shall be occupied by:
i. At least one individual who is age 55 years or older.
ii. A spouse or other occupant who must be age 18 or older.
iii. An occupant pursuant to Section 3.6.10(2)(a)(ii) who has survived the individual in Section 3.6.10(2)(a)(i) and who has an ownership interest in the dwelling.
iv. Any occupant pursuant to Section 3.6.10(2)(a)(ii) who has an ownership interest in the dwelling and where the individual in Section 3.6.10(2)(a)(i) has entered into a long-term continuing care facility.
b. One child 18 years or older may reside with his or her parent(s).
c. The purchase of a dwelling unit for investment purposes by an entity or an individual not intending to occupy the dwelling is prohibited, except that a nonresident family member may purchase up to one unit for a family member who will reside in the dwelling unit and otherwise comply with the requirements of this section.
d. The management shall verify annually by January 31st to the Zoning Enforcement Officer that the Age-Restricted Development is in compliance with the occupancy requirements of this section.
e. Age-Restricted units shall have deed restrictions which shall be filed in the land records of the Town of Ellington limiting occupancy as required above.
f. Parking shall comply with Section 6.2.3, Number of Parking Spaces. When applicable, Section 6.2.4, Reduction of Parking Spaces may apply.
3.6.11. Site Development Standards
Any DMF development shall comply with the following standards and requirements:
1. Landscaping and Buffering
a. All front, side and rear yards shall be planted with a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs, or preserved in a natural state, and shall be maintained in perpetuity so as to protect
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
adjacent properties and present a reasonably opaque, natural barrier to a minimum height of ten feet. A combination of earthen berm and plantings may be used to achieve 10’ minimum height requirements, and when planted and pruned all evergreens shall have a minimum height of 6’.
b. The areas between residential units shall be landscaped, graded and otherwise designed to provide privacy for homeowners without sacrificing the ability to maintain the units.
c. Walls, fences, hedges or other elements may be provided or required to assure that each living unit has some exterior limited common area for the exclusive use and benefit of the unit owners.
d. The area between drives, parking areas and buildings shall be graded, landscaped and otherwise improved in accordance with the landscape and streetscape requirements noted herein.
e. Parking areas for more than three cars shall be screened and landscaped.
f. For all projects, a detailed landscaping plan shall be prepared by a Registered Landscape Architect in compliance with these regulations.
g. Along all interior streets deciduous street trees shall be provided, located no more than 50 feet on center and a minimum of eight feet high and 2 1/2 inches in caliper after planting and pruning.
h. Where possible, existing trees shall also be retained and incorporated into the project design, if they help achieve DMF regulations.
i. Landscaping shall also be used to screen refuse collection areas, utility cabinets, recreational trails and other miscellaneous items.
j. In the Commission's sole discretion, decorative fences, screen walls or other methods may be selectively allowed for screening, if they help achieve DMF objectives.
k. Screening designs shall reflect the same quality and variety provided in other areas of the project.
2. Green Space
a. A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total parcel area shall be dedicated in perpetuity as green space. Green space may include grassed areas and landscaped buffers.
b. Green space shall be an integral and fundamental component of the project purpose and design since the location, quality, extent, and long-term treatment of green spaces within the project are essential considerations in evaluating the project's acceptability.
c. The preservation of green space within the development is intended to accomplish one or more of the following objectives:
i. Protect or complement unique natural features, habitat or natural resources on the site or in the vicinity;
ii. Provide opportunities for passive recreation including trail systems and/or public access to natural areas on and/or adjacent to the project;
iii. Protect unique natural, historical, archaeological, cultural, and/or scenic features;
iv. Provide screening/buffers from adjacent streets and properties.
d. Green space may include non-buildable areas as defined in Section 3.6.6.3, but non-buildable areas shall not exceed 50% of the overall required amount of green space.
3. Pedestrian and Bicycle Movements
a. Within the proposed development, provisions acceptable to the Commission shall be made for pedestrian walkways (generally sidewalks).
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
b. In addition to internal pedestrian walkways, developments shall provide for concrete sidewalks of at least five feet in width along all public streets meeting the construction standards of the Town of Ellington.
c. Developments shall maximize opportunities for non-vehicular movement of people within and to adjoining properties.
4. Lighting
a. Floodlighting is not permitted. Any outdoor lighting shall be shielded and directed so that the light source or light from any signs or any fixtures shall not be seen at or beyond the property line or adjacent properties.
b. Project lighting shall be owned and maintained by the property owner and or the common interest community.
c. The maximum height of freestanding pole-mounted lights shall be 12 feet.
d. In general, foot-candle levels should not exceed those for rural areas, as prescribed by standards adopted by the International Dark Sky Association (IDSA).
5. Building and Roof Design
a. No part of a building of which the adjacent floor level is more than three (3) feet below grade, may be used for dwelling purposes.
b. Applicants are encouraged to design units to be readily adaptable to meet ADA requirements, especially as to door widths, thresholds and other features necessary to accommodate wheelchair access.
c. Personal storage space shall be provided within the confines of each dwelling unit. No outside shed or storage bin shall be allowed for storage of personal items.
d. For attached unit developments, exterior finishes shall include brick or stone accents or other architectural elements in order to vary the design of veneers of buildings.
e. Rooftop HVAC may only be permitted if properly screened in all directions. Antennas and other like miscellaneous structures shall not be located on roofs.
6. Signage
a. Each project shall be allowed entry signage where an access drive connects to a public street except that no project shall be permitted to have signs at more than two (2) entrances.
b. If the project has a center island at an entrance with a public street, one (1) low profile double sided sign may be placed in that island except that the Commission may allow for two signs integrated into landscape features such as stone walls to be placed on either side of that access drive.
c. Entry signs shall not exceed four (4) feet high by ten (10) feet wide and may be placed on a sign base made of natural stone, masonry, or approved like-materials.
d. The total height of the entry sign plus the approved sign base shall not exceed six (6) feet in height from the adjacent grade.
e. At a minimum, a five (5) foot area around the sign base shall be landscaped with ornamental plantings.
f. Entry signs, if illuminated, shall be illuminated by means of exterior lighting concealed from view and shall not be illuminated internally.
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
g. Project entry signs and related features shall not interfere with necessary sight lines, in order to accommodate safe stopping distances, given posted speed limits.
h. Maintenance of such signs and associated landscaping shall be the responsibility of the developer, unless and until, the responsibility is reassigned to a homeowner’s association or similar management entity.
7. Interior Private Driveways and Parking
a. Projects shall be accessed via a main interior private drive or drives, and unit access shall not be taken directly to an existing public street.
b. Interior private drives to public streets shall be located in compliance with applicable sight line, grading, and other standards of the Zoning Regulations and as required by the Director of Public Works and the Town Engineer.
c. All interior drives shall be privately owned and maintained as a condition of DMF approval.
d. The paved width of interior private drives shall not be less than 24 feet except that the Commission may increase the width of interior private drives serving 20 or more units up to 28 feet wide.
e. Interior “streets” shall be provided with a graded and grassed snow shelf along the edge of pavement or curb line a minimum of six feet wide.
f. Surface parking shall be provided “off street” for all uses, in separate parking areas, unit garages, or in some combination of both.
g. The Fire Marshal may require emergency access points from abutting public streets into the project for the exclusive purposes of providing vehicular access for emergency vehicles.
8. Community Facilities
a. If a community facility building or recreation facility or similar amenity is proposed, such facility shall be constructed and issued a certificate of occupancy before issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any additional units beyond 50% of the total approved number of units.
9. Stormwater
a. Stormwater treatment and management shall reflect the current best management practices and shall include low-impact development approaches as promulgated by the State Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
b. Each project shall be required to meet the Phase II NPDES stormwater requirements. In general and where approved by the Town Engineer, the use of curbless roads, swales, infiltration, and other like methods shall be preferred.
c. Stormwater retention ponds shall not be designed solely to collect and retain water for later release, but shall be graded and landscaped to be an integral design component of the project.
d. All stormwater systems shall be privately owned and maintained and such requirement shall be included in the project declaration.
10. Refuse
a. Refuse collection shall be under private contract
b. All refuse containers shall be completely screened and located so as to provide sufficient access, as well as not to have negative effects on dwelling units or uses located on adjacent lands.
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
11. Utilities
a. All utilities shall be located underground and sufficient easements or other rights shall be provided to applicable public utility companies as a condition of project approval.
b. Where deemed necessary by the Water Pollution Control Authority (WPCA), interior sewer lines may be required to be publicly owned and maintained.
c. Interior hydrants shall be provided in locations, amounts and design according to the Fire Marshal, including any conditions relating to the ownership and ongoing maintenance.
12. Property Maintenance
a. It shall be a condition of approval that all projects shall be maintained in perpetuity in accordance with the approved plans.
b. This shall include a provision allowing the Zoning and Wetland Enforcement Officer to access the site at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspecting and noting any defects or failure to maintain the property as required.
3.6.12. Design Review Considerations
The applicant shall provide sufficient detail to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Design Review Board (DRB) and the Commission that the design of all buildings and structures and the design of all site improvements and project features will meet high standards in terms of materials, finishes, durability and overall quality.
The intent of these requirements is not to limit creativity by defining detailed prescriptive standards, but to assure that the development will sustain its value over time, incorporate consistent design themes, take advantage of unique site attributes, and respect site constraints in an effort to accomplish the overall goals and objectives of the DMF.
1. Building Arrangement
a. Units should be designed and arranged in proper relationship to interior streets and care should be taken to design buildings in scale and proportion to the interior streets and surrounding areas.
b. The interior streetscape should function as an integral pedestrian amenity within the development.
c. Optimal building arrangement should vary by unit type, project size, abutting uses and lands, and the unique opportunities and constraints presented by a given project parcel and setting.
d. All projects should be designed to break up unit clusters and include components that create pedestrian-scaled concepts.
2. Building Footprints
a. Building footprints, especially for larger, multiple-unit formats, should be varied by avoiding long expanses of single-plane walls.
b. Applicants should use architectural features as integral design elements to satisfy the intent of avoiding long expanses of walls.
3. Building Walls
a. Building elevations and related elements should be well proportioned, with doors, windows and other features placed and scaled in appropriate rhythm.
b. Applicants should use natural materials, including masonry stone, wood clapboard, natural brick, or other like materials or vinyl siding with a mix of styles (i.e. shakes, clapboard, etc.)
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
c. Main colors should avoid bright palettes, although selective use of bold accent colors may be encouraged for trim or other decorative elements.
d. Period colors appropriate to a particular historic period are encouraged, where appropriate.
e. All units within a project should not be the same color, but proposed colors should be well distributed through the project and be compatible overall.
4. Roof Design
a. Roof design should be an important element of all proposed architecture.
b. Roofs should be pitched, and applicants are encouraged to include dormers, cupolas, multiple gables and varied gable orientation, and other treatments or decorative elements in order to create interest, break up extended rooflines, and avoid monotonous, single-plane roofs.
c. Views of and to roofs and rooftop HVAC units from within the project and from adjacent lands should be considered.
d. Roof surfacing should be high-quality architectural shingles or similar equivalent materials.
5. Community Facilities
a. Community facilities should reflect the same level of quality and consistency in design as other approved project elements.
6. Landscape and Buffers
a. Any project should be landscaped with a variety of natural areas, shade trees, evergreens, flowering trees, shrubs, perennials and lawn areas to demonstrate that landscaping is an integral component of the overall project design.
b. Where possible the project should be designed to take advantage of existing land topography or to mitigate for the lack of natural contours.
c. Where appropriate, landscape plans should include planted berms, stone retaining walls, or other elements intended to achieve functional or aesthetic objectives.
d. Each project should include well-designed entry features at all main access drives to public streets, consistent with the overall project design theme.
e. Foundation plantings consisting generally of decorative flowering shrubs, perennials, ornamental grasses and like materials, located within landscaped beds surfaced with natural wood chips, shredded bark or other approved natural material, should be provided for all residential units and community buildings.
7. Lighting
a. Project lighting for streets, parking areas, community facilities and other uses should be the minimum necessary to provide safe and sufficient all-season lighting.
b. Since all lighting will be private, applicants should provide decorative lighting designs, as opposed to standard street and other lighting typically used in public street and commercial applications.
c. Building-mounted lighting should be limited to the minimum necessary and should meet all applicable standards noted herein.
d. Decorative uplighting for aesthetic purposes may be permitted but should be limited to important focal points or features, such as project entry signage, project landscaping and similar accents.
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
3.6.13. Application Requirements
1. Zone Change and Conceptual Site Plan
In addition to the requirements of Section 8.1, an application for a Zone Change and Conceptual Site Plan approval shall include the following materials:
a. Existing conditions plan for the subject property showing any buildings, structures, above- or below-ground utility locations, easements, site topography at two-foot intervals, inland wetlands and watercourses, floodplains, and land cover.
b. Computation of permitted and proposed density and unit mix.
c. Conceptual site plan drawn to a scale of no less than one inch equals 100 feet showing the following:
i. Proposed access ways and internal roads;
ii. Building locations;
iii. Parking locations and sidewalks;
iv. Common areas;
v. Landscaped areas;
vi. Community facilities, if applicable;
vii. Utilities; and
viii. Any additional information that the Commission may deem pertinent in order to evaluate the rezoning request.
d. General architectural renderings for all unit types and buildings including dimensions.
e. Use and compliance statement describing the proposed development and how the proposal complies with all DMF objectives and adopted Plan of Conservation and Development recommendations.
f. Green space and ecological report, describing in general the rationale for the proposed green space concept in terms of DMF goals, objectives, standards and requirements and the proposed design, location, functions, ownership and maintenance of the proposed green space areas.
g. A traffic report at a level of detail appropriate for the size of the proposed development addressing:
i. existing conditions, average daily traffic (ADT), weekend and weekday a.m. and p.m. peak hour trips and Level of Service (LOS) and Volume-Demand-to-Capacity (V/C) ratios for all affected travelways and intersections,
ii. the anticipated impact on these conditions from project trips at buildout,
iii. measures proposed to mitigate project impacts,
iv. the adequacy of available sight lines at any proposed access drive connections to public streets and measures proposed to correct any substandard conditions at the site drive(s), given posted and actual travel speeds at the location(s).
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
2. Special Permit and Final Site Plan
In addition to the requirements of Section 8.2 and Section 8.3, an application for a Special Permit and Final Site Plan approval shall be filed simultaneously and shall include the following materials:
a. Draft homeowner's declaration, if applicable, and covenants addressing ownership, maintenance and other issues regarding project green spaces and common areas and other concerns affecting project compliance with DMF requirements.
b. WPCA approval for sewer service.
c. Inland Wetlands approval, if applicable.
d. Evidence the applicants have all necessary rights and interests to accomplish the development as proposed (grading rights, easements, access rights, utility easements, etc.)
e. Written documentation from the Tax Collector that all tax payments are current.
f. Architectural plans drawn to scale and including floor plans for all proposed models depicting the uses of all interior spaces and exterior elevations for all sides of all unit types indicating proposed materials, colors, finish, lighting, signs, and other building features.
g. Phasing plans, including a grading and erosion control plan and narrative sufficient to meet the requirements of Section 6.4, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, of these regulations.
h. Details for all site improvements and similar features.
i. Number plan for unit identification.
j. Detailed plans provided in plan view, cross section and profile for all interior streets and in plan view and cross-sectional views for all proposed surface parking areas.
k. Details of all stormwater-related systems, plans, data and mapping necessary for the Town Engineer to determine the sufficiency of the proposed system including the use of low-impact development approaches.
l. The location and construction and screening details related to refuse collection areas.
3.6.14. Approval Considerations
In acting upon a DMF application (zone change and concept plan, special permit, final site plan), the Commission shall consider whether the application adheres to Section 8.2 Site Development Plan Standards, Section 8.3 Special Permit Standards and Procedures, the above design standards and the following considerations:
1. Project Location. That the project location is appropriate in terms of access, existing and anticipated (by current zoning) abutting uses, neighborhood compatibility, and the ability to utilize the concept to achieve public objectives.
2. Principal and Accessory Uses. That all proposed principal and accessory uses are permitted and that accessory uses as proposed will complement and support the overall project and are sufficient in terms of location, amount, type and design.
3. Green Space. That green space locations and designs are an integral component of the project, and are consistent with the Plan of Conservation and Development and the goals and objectives of the DMF Zone.
4. Natural Resources. That the project design, as well as its ongoing operations and maintenance, will provide sufficient protection for natural resources, and will include any necessary mitigation, and that the project complies with any permit issued by the Inland Wetland Agency.
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
5. Pedestrian Facilities. That the design incorporates features that promote a pedestrian-scale community so as to assure that the living environment created will enhance the quality of life for unit owners, as well as long-term maintenance, safety and social well-being.
6. Historical/Archaeological/Cultural Resources. That the project protects and respects important affected resources by incorporating those resources into the project design or, where not feasible, by taking appropriate measures to document and memorialize such features for the benefit of future generations.
7. Overall Design. That building architecture and overall site improvements and amenities are of high quality, meet all applicable DMF requirements, and will sustain the project's value over time, such that the project adds to the long-term welfare of the overall community.
8. Exterior Streetscape. That appropriate, context-sensitive measures have been incorporated into the project's exterior streetscape in order to minimize the project's impacts, where appropriate, to enhance the existing built environment, blend into or otherwise be consistent with the existing landscape and generally add value to the community's "public space."
9. Interior Streetscape. That the interior streetscape provides a distinctly pedestrian-scale environment, conducive to active and passive recreation, walking, biking, chance social encounters, sitting, and other typical activities; that the interior streetscape promotes and encourages use of the public realm for these purposes; and that the design does not inhibit such activities through creation of a sterile, barren streetscape, devoid of interest, with excessively deep front setbacks and lack of porches, benches, or other amenities.
10. Landscape and Lighting. That project lighting and landscape have been designed in an intelligent and strategic manner, in order to add long-term value to the community, and consistent with the overall objectives of the DMF concept.
11. Traffic/Access. That safe and efficient access will be provided, including sufficient parking and that the development has been designed to achieve the overall pedestrian scale of the project, especially with regard to interior spaces.
12. Utilities. That adequate long-term provisions have been made to assure safe and sufficient utility services in accordance with the requirements of applicable authorities.
3.6.15. Additional Provisions
1. Following Planning and Zoning Commission approval of a DMF final site plan and special permit and as condition of said approval, applicants shall be required to satisfy the requirements of Section 9.6 - Post Approval.
2. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to approve the following minor changes to an approved final site plan for a DMF project provided any such changes comply with all applicable bulk requirements of the DMF regulation and are documented on final plans:
a. minor changes in site grading necessary to adjust for field conditions,
b. minor adjustments in building locations or orientations,
c. minor changes in the location of incidental accessory features such as unit decks, stairs, or utility cabinets, or
d. minor changes to address unique and unanticipated site conditions and for like purposes.
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
3. Other changes beyond the scope of these minor amendments (including, but not limited to, an increase in the number of approved units, changes to the approved unit types and designs, changes to the approved utility systems, changes to the approved interior circulation layout, changes to the approved landscape concept and plan, changes to the approved stormwater plan, or other similar changes that affect major elements of the project's original plan) shall only be approved by the Commission acting on a formal application for modification to site plan and special permit approval.
4. For a Common Interest Ownership project, until such time as the project ownership and maintenance converts to the homeowner’s association, the project developer shall have total responsibility for compliance with all approval conditions and other requirements and such limitation shall be disclosed in the approved declaration.
5. Written notification of any sale by the project owner to another party shall be provided to the Town Planner within 30 calendar days of such closing. The Planner shall have the right to meet with any subsequent owners and review project requirements. All special permit conditions and site plan requirements shall transfer to any subsequent owner.
6. The project’s governing documents shall in no way limit or encumber the Town from requiring specific performance under the terms of the approval or any related conditions, and the developer shall be obligated pursuant to the approvals to fully complete the project in accordance with said approvals.
ARTICLE 4 COMMERCIAL &INDUSTRIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
ARTICLE 4 COMMERCIAL& INDUSTRIAL ZONES
Section 4.1 Permitted Uses and Uses Requiring Special Permit
The following uses are permitted in Commercial and Industrial Zones:
Table 4.1 Permitted Uses and Uses Requiring Special Permit
P = Permitted Use, Site Plan Approval SP = Special Permit Blank= Not Permitted
Uses
C
PC
I
IP
Agriculture (1) [Amended 12-15-2010]
P
P
P
P
Agriculture - Farm Stand - seasonal (1) [Amended 12-15-2010]
P
P
P
P
Agriculture - Farm Store (1) [Added 11-22-2010, Effective 12-15-2010]
SP
SP
SP
SP
Agriculture - Horse Boarding / Riding Arena (1) [Amended 12-15-2010]
SP
SP
SP
SP
Agriculture - Related & Non Related Uses (1) [Added 11-22-2010, Effective 12-15-2010]
SP
SP
SP
SP
Amusement Enterprise
SP
Auto, General Repairer License
SP
SP
SP
Auto, Limited Repairer License
SP
SP
SP
Auto, Truck, Airplane: Assembling & Remodeling
P
P
Auto, Truck, Boat, Vehicle (New & Used) Sales, and Service (SP for IP Zone Added 1-7-08)
SP
SP
SP
SP
Bicycle Racing Facility - Non Motorized
SP
SP
Bottling Plant
SP
P
P
Brewery, Brew Pub, Distillery
SP
SP
SP
SP
Carpenter & Woodworking Shop
SP
SP
P
P
Communication Tower (2)
SP
SP
SP
SP
Community Buildings and other Public Buildings
P
SP
P
Community Fairs under Local Sponsorship
P
P
P
Contractor's Equipment - Sales and Storage
SP
SP
SP
SP
Entertainment, Transient (Local Sponsor) (modified: 7-15-09)
SP
ARTICLE 4 COMMERCIAL &INDUSTRIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Table 4.1 Permitted Uses and Uses Requiring Special Permit
P = Permitted Use, Site Plan Approval SP = Special Permit Blank= Not Permitted
Uses
C
PC
I
IP
Florist, Wholesale: Greenhouse, Sale, Supplies (8) (Amended: 22 December 2006)
P
SP
P
SP
Food Processing, Wholesale, may include incidental retail on premises (Excluding Slaughtering, Curing, and Smoking)
SP
SP
SP
SP
Fuel Oil, Propane, and other Petroleum Products – Other than Bulk Storage (3) (Amended: 9-25-09)
SP
SP
SP
SP
Funeral Home
SP
SP
Gas Station
SP
SP
SP
SP
Glass Fabrication & Installation
SP
SP
SP
SP
Hospitals, Convalescent and Nursing Homes
SP
SP
SP
Hotel, Motel, Tourist Court
SP
SP
Ice Manufacture – Storage & Sale
SP
SP
SP
SP
Jewelry Manufacture
SP
SP
SP
SP
Laboratory
SP
SP
SP
SP
Machine Shop
SP
SP
SP
SP
Manufacture & Assembly from Prepared Materials Including Repairs
SP
SP
P
P
Manufacturing, processing and warehousing of goods
P
P
Manufacturing which is incidental to a retail business (4)
SP
SP
Metal Fabrication
P
P
Saw Mill
P
P
Licensed Medical Marijuana Production Facility(9) (10)
SP
SP
Licensed Medical Marijuana Dispensary (9) (10)
SP
SP
Office: Business, Professional, Medical, Financial.
P
SP
P
P
Optical & Scientific Instrument Manufacture
SP
SP
SP
SP
Package Store, Beer & Liquor Sale
SP
SP
Pawnshop
SP
SP
Personal Service Business.
P
SP
ARTICLE 4 COMMERCIAL &INDUSTRIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Table 4.1 Permitted Uses and Uses Requiring Special Permit
P = Permitted Use, Site Plan Approval SP = Special Permit Blank= Not Permitted
Uses
C
PC
I
IP
Plastics & Synthetics Manufacture
SP
SP
SP
SP
Plumbing & Heating: Sale, Service, Storage
SP
SP
SP
SP
Plumbing Shop
P
P
Printing, Industrial
P
P
Public Garage, Bus, Taxi Service, Rentals
SP
SP
SP
SP
Public Parks, Playgrounds and Recreation Areas
P
P
P
P
Public Utility Garage and Similar Facilities.
SP
SP
SP
SP
Quarry, Rock Crushing
SP
SP
SP
SP
Radio and Television Antennas - Commercial (5)
SP
SP
SP
SP
Radio and Television Studios
SP
SP
SP
SP
Carpet Cleaning Establishment
P
P
Research and Development Facilities
SP
SP
Restaurants, Tavern, Entertainment, Liquor Permitted (modified: 7-15-09)
SP
SP
Retail Business (8) (Amended: 22 December 2006)
SP
SP
SP
SP
Transfer Station (6)
SP
SP
Composting Facilities
SP
SP
School - Commercial, Vocational
SP
SP
SP
SP
Ship & Boat Building: Repair, Sale, Storage
SP
SP
SP
SP
Skydiving or Parachute Jumping(7)
SP
SP
Stone & Monument Works: Sale, Storage
SP
P
P
Storage yard for new lumber, building materials and related items.
SP
SP
SP
SP
Theater, Indoors In Building
SP
SP
Veterinarian, Small Animal Hospital, Commercial Kennel
SP
SP
SP
SP
Warehousing, Storage
SP
SP
P
P
Wholesale, Business (8) (Amended: 22 December 2006)
SP
SP
SP
SP
ARTICLE 4 COMMERCIAL &INDUSTRIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Table 4.1 Permitted Uses and Uses Requiring Special Permit
P = Permitted Use, Site Plan Approval SP = Special Permit Blank= Not Permitted
Uses
C
PC
I
IP
(1) Subject to the restrictions and conditions of Section 7.14
(2) Subject to the restrictions and conditions of Section 7.3
(3) Bulk Storage – storage of more than 2,000 gallons aggregate intended for redistribution before it reaches a retail consumer. In conformity with applicable State and Federal regulations (Amended: 9-25-09)
(4) Where articles are sold at retail on the premises, and where not more than five persons are employed in such manufacturing. Such manufacturing shall conform to requirements specified for Industrial Zones.
(5) Must be located within property lines a minimum distance in all directions equal to the height of the tallest antenna.
(6) Subject to the restrictions and conditions of Section 7.10
(7) At an airplane landing field or landing strip located in an I-Industrial Zone subject to the requirements of Section 8.3 of these regulations. In addition, the Commission may impose any other reasonable conditions with regard to skydiving or parachute jumping. Such special permit shall expire on the 30th day of June.
(8)No individual retail or wholesale business establishment may exceed thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. The commission may, by vote of 3/4 of its members, increase the maximum store size up to sixty thousand (60,000) square feet not including mezzanines up to 10% of the total square footage, if the applicant meets the following criteria: additional buffering to sensitive areas, allows linkages to abutting properties where appropriate, and gives consideration to special architectural design. Furthermore, the language of this regulation shall not be construed to allow the same business entity to occupy space on opposite sides of a common wall so as to circumvent the intention of this regulation. (Amended: 22 December 2006)
(9)A maximum of one (1) licensed medical marijuana production facility and one (1) licensed medical marijuana dispensary is permitted in the Town of Ellington at any one time.
(10)No production facility or dispensary shall be permitted within 500 feet of any public or private school, municipal park, public or private recreational facility, daycare facility, place of worship, hospital, veteran’s home or camp or military establishment.
4.1.1 Approval of Other Uses
Other uses may be approved by the Commission when the Commission determines such use to be substantially similar to the uses permitted in Table 4.1. Uses similar to those permitted by Site Plan approval may be allowed by Site Plan approval. Those uses similar to Special Permit uses may be permitted by Special Permit approval.
ARTICLE 4 COMMERCIAL &INDUSTRIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Section 4.2 Area, Yard and Bulk Requirements
4.2.1 Lot Area, Width & Yard Requirements
Table 4.2.1 Lot Area, Width & Yard Requirements for Commercial/Industrial Zones
Zone
Lot Area (1)
Minimum Width(1)
Front Yard (2) (3) (5)
Side Yard (3)
Rear Yard (3)
C-Commercial
40,000 sq. ft.(4)
200 feet
100 feet
10 feet (6)
10 feet (6)
PC - Planned Commercial
3 Acres
300 feet
100 feet
10 feet (6)
50 feet (6)
I - Industrial
40,000 sq. ft.
200 feet
100 feet
10 feet (6)
50 feet (6)
IP - Industrial Park
4 Acres
200 feet
100 feet
10 feet (6)
50 feet (6)
(1)May be increased because of poor soil conditions, terrain limitations, etc.
(2)May be reduced to 50 feet along any roadway not designed as a collector road, arterial road or state highway.
(3) Accessory buildings shall conform to building line requirements for front, side and rear yards applicable to main building.
(4) With or without public sewers.
(5) Except gas pumps.
(6) 50 feet side and rear yard required where abutting residential property or zone, except if home occupation only.
4.2.2 Minimum Lot Size
A. Dwellings in Commercial and Industrial Zones shall be located on lots of the same area required in all residential zones.
4.2.3 Bulk Requirements
Table 4.2.3 Bulk Requirements
Floor Single Level (1)
Building
Height (See definitions)
Lot Cover
C-Commercial
2,500
38
60%
Planned Commercial
N/A
38
60%
I - Industrial
N/A
38
60%
IP - Industrial Park
N/A
38
60%
(1)All structural designs subject to zoning board approval.
ARTICLE 4 COMMERCIAL &INDUSTRIAL ZONES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Section 4.3 Commercial and Industrial Requirements
4.3.1 Planned Commercial Zones and Industrial Park Zones
A. Planned Commercial Zones and Industrial Park Zones may be designated on the Zoning Map or petitioned for in accordance with Article 8.
B. A permit is required together with a site plan of the development, whether in an established C-Commercial or I-Industrial Zone, or elsewhere in the Town, in conformity with Article 8 of these regulations.
C. In considering the proposed use the Commission shall be guided by the standards in Section 8.3 of these regulations.
4.3.2 Lighting
A. All lighting facilities planned to be installed during construction shall be detailed for the Commission as part of all plans of development and requests for permits for all commercial and industrial permits.
B. Lighting shall be located and directed so as not to shine or glare onto any public street or onto any adjacent property.
C. Permits or approvals given on the basis of plans submitted shall be tentative because of the great difficulty in evaluating plans without actually seeing the various types of light designs and fixtures. In the event the Commission is misled upon such presentation, it may require the permittee to adjust, alter, relocate and/or replace the lighting and it shall be no defense that the fixtures and location are the same as described on the plans submitted.
ARTICLE 5 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
ARTICLE 5 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
Section 5.1 Purpose
It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion or, in flood heights or velocities;
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
3. Control the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters;
4. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and,
5. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Section 5.2 Objectives
The objectives of this section are:
1. To protect human life and health;
2. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
3. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
4. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in flood plains;
5. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and,
6. To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Section 5.3 Definitions
Area of Shallow Flooding: A designated AO Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from 1 to 3 feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.
Base Flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials.
Elevated building: A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls, as allowed under applicable standards.
ARTICLE 5 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
The overflow of inland or tidal water;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map: An official map of the Town of Ellington on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the 100-year, 500-year, and floodway boundaries.
Flood Insurance Rate Map: An official map of the Town of Ellington on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of special flood hazards and risk premium zones applicable to the town, as well as base flood elevations at selected locations.
Flood Insurance Study: The official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood and includes the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Floor: The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement) i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking of vehicles.
Functionally Dependent Facility: A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, such as docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales, or service facilities.
Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
Manufactured Home: A structure that is transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes recreational vehicles, park vehicles, or travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
New Construction: Means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after March 15, 1982 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
Recreation Vehicle: A vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Special Flood Hazard Area: The area within a community subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, as identified on the community’s FIRM.
ARTICLE 5 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Start of Construction: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on the site, such as pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filing; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or any other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the exterior dimensions of the building. .
Structure: For the purpose of this section, means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank.
Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure during the life of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure, as determined by the cost approach to value, the quantity survey method or the square foot method either: (i) before the improvement or repair is started, or (ii) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: (i) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (ii) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
Section 5.4 General Provisions
A. Lands to which this Ordinance Applies. This ordinance shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the Town of Ellington.
B. Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard Areas. The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood study dated February 5, 1997 with accompanying FIRM and Floodway maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance.
C. Establishment of the Floodplain Development Permit. A Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of these regulations prior to the commencement of any development activities.
D. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of these regulations all provisions shall be: (i) considered as minimum requirements; (ii) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and (iii) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
ARTICLE 5 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
E. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. These regulations do not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Ellington or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Section 5.5 Administration
5.5.1 Designation of Administrator
The Zoning Enforcement Officer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this section.
5.5.2 Certification
Where required under this section, a registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this section. Such certification must be provided to the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
5.5.3 Application
1. A building permit, zoning permit, site plan approval, and/or special permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area. The applicant should review the Zoning Regulations with the Zoning Enforcement Officer to determine with permit approval process, or processes, are to be followed for the particular land use which is being proposed.
2. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall review all development permits to assure that the requirements of this section have been satisfied.
3. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall notify adjacent communities and the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, Inland Water Resources Division prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and evidence of such notification shall be sent to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Maintenance shall be provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
4. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall advise the applicant that additional Federal or State permits may be required, and if specific Federal or State permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with any local permit. Such additional permit requirements may include, but not be limited to: Stream Channel Encroachment Line Permit, Water Diversion Permit, Dam Safety Permit, and Corps of Engineers 404 Permit.
5. The applicant shall provide information with the application which would show that any proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
6. Construction, reconstruction, extension of any building or structure, or any other development, including but not limited to mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations shall be prohibited in the Special Flood Hazard Area, except in conformance with these regulations.
ARTICLE 5 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
7. When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data available from Federal, State, or other source in order to administer these regulations.
8. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall record and maintain the following for any development that occurs under this section:
a. The as-built elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures,
b. The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed,
c. Certification as to floodway heights and,
d. Any and all certifications required under these regulations.
9. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall make the necessary interpretation, where needed, as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions).
10. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this section.
Section 5.6 Provisions for Flood Hazard Protection
5.6.1 General Standards
In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions shall apply:
A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
B. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
C. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
D. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed to ensure that electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
E. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
F. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the system into flood waters.
G. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
H. In any portion of a watercourse which is altered or re-located the flood carrying capacity shall be maintained.
ARTICLE 5 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
I. Manufactured Homes are prohibited in all special flood hazard areas.
J. Use of land, construction, or other activities permitted within this Section shall be subject to approval by all applicable federal or state agencies.
5.6.2 Standards for Streams without Established Base Flood Elevations, Floodways, and/or Flood Mapping
A. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source, including data developed pursuant to appropriate sections of the Ellington Subdivision Regulations as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in Zone A on Ellington’s FIRM meet the standards in Section 5.6.3 Specific Standards.
B. In A Zones where base flood elevations have been determined, but before a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvement, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted which will increase base flood elevations more than 1 foot at any point along the watercourse when all anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development.
C. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may request floodway data of an applicant for watercourses without FEMA-published floodways. When such data is provided by an applicant or whenever such data is available from any other source (in response to the Town’s request or not), the Town shall adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more than 1 foot at any point along the watercourse.
5.6.3 Specific Standards
The following provisions shall apply in all areas of special flood hazard (A1-30, AE, and AH Zones where base flood elevations data has been provided).
A. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the level of the base flood elevation.
B. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: (i) Be flood-proofed to one foot above base flood elevation so that below one foot above base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; (ii) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural design specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions of the subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
C. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
D. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development shall be prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Such certification must be demonstrated through Hydraulic and Hydrologic Analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice. Fences located in the floodway must be aligned with the flow and be of an open design.
ARTICLE 5 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
5.6.4 Variance Procedure
A. Requests for variances from the requirements of this Section shall be heard and decided by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Floodway Prohibition. Variances shall not be issued within any designed floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
C. Considerations for Granting Variances. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of these regulations and the items listed below. Upon consideration of these factors and the purposes of this section the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this regulation.
1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
5. The necessity of the facility to waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility;
6. The availability of alternative locations which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage for the proposed use;
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters, and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at this site; and
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
ARTICLE 5 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
5.6.5 Criteria For Variances
A. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary as not to destroy the historic character and result in the loss of historic designation of the building;
B. Variances may only be issued upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship. and; (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. Only hardships which are based on unusual physical characteristics of the property in question, characteristics which are not shared by adjacent parcels, shall qualify to meet subsection (A) above. Claims of hardship based on the structure, on economic or on personal circumstances are not sufficient cause for the granting of a variance under this regulation.
C. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage.
D. The Zoning Enforcement Officer Shall Maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE &SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE & SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Section 6.1 Buffer Requirements
A. A buffer strip may be required in a commercial or industrial zone where a side or rear yard adjoins a residential zone or residence. Said buffer strip shall be at least 30 feet in depth and shall be planted with trees and shrubs of acceptable species in the outside one-third of the area. At least 30% of all plants shall be evergreen.
B. In a DMF-Designed Multi-Family Zone, the Commission may require that the applicant provide an adjacent buffer strip not more than 50 feet wide, planted to a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs, which shall be maintained in proper order, or may require said planting without requiring a buffer strip.
C. All new plants shall have a minimum height after planting and pruning of 6 feet. Acceptable existing trees and shrubs shall be preserved and supplemented with additional plants as deemed necessary by the Commission to meet the requirements of privacy for residential zones and abatement of noise, dust and objectionable lighting.
D. Where the requirements of these regulations can be provided by other means, such as a permanent fence or wall, the Commission may approve such substitution for a planted screen if after a public hearing the Commission decides that the purpose of these regulations to provide abatement of noise, dust and glare will be met. The effect of grading and drainage shall also be taken into consideration in arriving at a decision.
Section 6.2 Parking and Loading Space Requirements
6.2.1 General Provisions
A. The off-street parking and loading requirements set forth in this section shall be the minimum required for all business, commercial, industrial and other uses.
B. Any building, structure or use which is enlarged in excess of 10% of area shall comply with these minimum parking and loading space, landscaping and lighting requirements exception for Section 6.2.5, "Location of Parking Facilities". This exclusion shall apply to those parking spaces already in existence along an existing building wall. Any new parking areas of existing areas which will be nearby a building addition shall comply with the requirements of Section 6.2.5
C. Where a lot or building contains two or more uses, the parking requirements shall be the composite of the requirement of each use.
D. No parking spaces shall be permitted within 50 feet of any boundary line facing any street of any municipal facility located in any zone regardless of the size of the municipal facility.
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE &SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
6.2.2 Description of Parking Facilities
A. Feeder drives servicing parking areas shall be no less than 24 feet in width. The Planning Commission may require greater width for the feeder drive where warranted for safety considerations or improved traffic flow.
B. Adequate ingress and egress to an off-street parking area by means of clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles.
C. All off-street parking spaces and means of ingress and egress shall be laid out on the parking surface with paint, plastic striping or curbed islands which shall provide a permanent delineation between spaces, drives and surrounding structures, uses and land.
D. Separate pedestrian walkways and/or means of pedestrian ingress and egress to the parking area or facility may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission in appropriate instances because of the size, layout or location or the parking area or facility.
E. Perpendicular parking (90 degrees) is encouraged. Parallel parking (0 degrees) and oblique parking (angles other than 0 or 90 degrees) are discouraged. Standards are as follows:
Table 6.2.2 Parking Facility Standards
---Parking Angle---
90º
60º
45º
0º
Curb Length Per Car
10'
11'4"
13'3"
23'
Stall Depth
18'
19'
18'
10'
Lot Width 1 Row & Driveway
42'
37'
31'
21'
Lot Width 2 Rows & Driveway
60'
56'
49'
30'
OR
90º
60º
45º
0º
Curb Length Per Car
9'
10'4"
12'7"
23'
Stall Depth
20'
21'8"
20'5"
9'
Lot Width 1 Row & Driveway
44'
39'8"
33'5"
33'
Lot Width 2 Rows & Driveway
64'
61'6"
54'
42'
F. In order for a parking space to be credited as a required space, it shall have access to a drive that meets at least the feeder drive width standard.
G. All fire lanes and handicapped spaces shall be marked by vertical signs.
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE &SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
6.2.3 Number of Parking Spaces
A. Off-street Parking Standards. The following off-street parking standards are minimum requirements for off-street parking and the Planning and Zoning Commission may require additional off-street parking for a particular development based on the nature of the development, its location, access and relation to surrounding development, and any unique parking demand which may be associated with such a development.
B. Any use not listed below shall provide minimum parking spaces as recommended by the Town Engineer and accepted by the Planning and Zoning Commission:
Table 6.2.3 Off Street Parking Requirements
Use
Required Spaces
Auditorium, theater, stadium or other places of public assembly including town hall, schools, etc. based on maximum capacity
1 parking space for each 4 seats.
Community center, clubs, athletic club, golf course
1 parking space for each 150 square feet of net floor area.
Convalescent and rest homes
1 parking space for each 4 beds plus 1 parking space for each employee.
Cultural, Educational Center (Added 4-15-08)
1 parking space for each 500 sq. feet of net area accessible by the public
Day care center
1 parking space for each employee plus 1 parking space for each 5 children.
Dwelling - Single Family
2 parking spaces per family unit
Dwelling - Two Family
Dwelling - Multi-family
2 parking spaces for every family unit plus 1 visitor parking space for every 3 family units or fraction thereof.
General office and/or professional office (except medical offices and medical clinics), general services government offices, personal services, professional services (except medical offices and medical clinics), broadcasting studio, message center
1 parking space for each 200 square feet of net floor area.
Golf driving range, miniature golf, archery range, bowling, firing range, riding stable, tennis courts
2 parking spaces for each driving tee, golf hold, alley, lane, for each six stalls, court, or other unit of activity, whichever the case may be.
Home occupation
1 parking space for each employee plus 1 parking space, such parking spaces to be in addition to any required off-street parking for residential purposes.
Hospitals
2 parking spaces for each three beds plus 1 parking space for each employee on the largest shift.
Hotel, motel, inn, tourist home
1 parking space for each guest room or residence unit plus 1 parking space for each employee.
Ice skating and/or roller skating rink
1 parking space for each 100 square feet of skating surface.
Library and museum
1 parking space for each 400 square feet of net floor space.
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE &SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Table 6.2.3 Off Street Parking Requirements
Use
Required Spaces
Manufacturing uses
1 parking space for each employee on the largest shift.
Medical office including clinic
1 space for each 150 square feet of net floor area or 6 spaces for each full-time doctor or dentist, whichever is greater plus 1 space for each employee. For the purposes of these regulations, several part-time doctors or dentists shall be considered as one or more full-time doctor(s) or dentist(s) when their cumulative office hours equal a 40-hour (or more) work week
Motor vehicle general and limited repair, motor vehicle gasoline or service station
5 parking spaces plus 3 parking spaces for each service stall. In addition, if any motor vehicles are offered for sale or for rent on the premises, an individual parking space shall be provided for each such motor vehicle offered for sale or for rent.
Motor vehicle car wash, bus garaging and equipment maintenance
1 parking space for each parking, washing or service stall, whichever the case may be.
Schools - Public, Private, Parochial
Elementary/Middle: 1 parking space for each classroom plus 1 parking space for each employee of the largest shift.
Secondary: 6 parking spaces for each classroom plus 1 parking space for each 4 seats in the largest capacity public assembly space located on the site.
Place of worship
1 parking space for each 5 seats
Restaurants and other eating and drinking establishments
1 parking space for each 100 square feet of net floor area.
Retail trade uses
1 parking space for each 200 square feet of net floor area.
Warehousing
1 parking space for each 2,000 square feet of building floor area used for storage purposes or 1 parking space for each employee, whichever is greater
C. Floor Area Defined: For the purposes of the minimum parking and loading space requirements, "net floor area" shall mean the floor area used, designed or intended to be used for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients, patients or members, including those areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for the display and/or sale of merchandise. "Net floor area" shall not include areas used principally for non-public purposes such as storage and incidental repair, for rest rooms, for utilities, or for required stairways or elevators.
6.2.4 Reduction of Parking Spaces
A. The Commission may permit a reduction of up to 25% of the required parking spaces due to shared use of parking facilities when the parking needs of the joint users occur at different hours of the day, different days of the week, or different times of the year. The applicant shall show upon the site plan the complete layout for the full parking requirements. The owner shall file that plan in the office of the Planning Department stipulating that the owner, or the successor of the owner, will install as many of the non-installed parking spaces as the Commission deems necessary within 6 months of the Commission's request, when, in the opinion of the Commission, such installation is needed.
B. In parking lots in excess of 50 spaces, the Commission may permit the installation of compact spaces, not to exceed 25% of the total number of spaces installed, at 8 feet by 16 feet. These spaces shall be clearly designated as compact car parking. This reduction is not available to retail uses.
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE &SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
6.2.5 Location of Parking Facilities
A. There shall be no parking spaces permitted within 20 feet of the front, rear, or sides of a commercial structure or multi-family dwelling (unless such multi-family dwelling includes a driveway for a private garage) or within 30 feet of any façade of an industrial building.
B. There shall be no parking permitted within 15 feet of side and rear property lines, except in the case of shared parking spaces meeting the criteria of 6.2.4.A.
C. No parking shall be permitted within 30 feet of the front property line in the Commercial and Industrial Zones. In the Multi-Family, Planned Commercial and Industrial Park Zones, and for multi-family uses in a Commercial Zone, no parking shall be permitted within 50 feet of the front property line. For any building in excess of 50,000 square feet in any zone, no parking shall be permitted within 75 feet of the front property line.
D. No parking spaces shall be permitted within 50 feet of a residential zone boundary or within 30 feet of an existing residence in the Multi-Family, Commercial, Planned Commercial, Industrial and Industrial Park Zones.
6.2.6 Surfacing and Drainage
A. All parking spaces, loading facilities, and access roadways shall have at least 6 inches of process stone and 2 1/2 inches of bituminous concrete as surface treatment unless the Commission allows some other surface treatment which, in the opinion of the Commission, will provide an adequate all-weather surface with proper drainage, will permit recharging of ground water, and will allow for reduction of storm-water runoff.
B. Parking facilities shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulation within the area or facility. No surface water from any off-street parking or loading area shall be permitted to drain onto adjoining property unless express approval therefore has been obtained from the property owner or authority exercising jurisdiction over such property.
6.2.7 Landscaping
A. Any off-street parking or loading area which adjoins a residence or residential zone shall be effectively screened by a fence, wall or plantings as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any landscaping required herein shall be integrated with any other landscaping required or provided for other portions of the parking area or facility. All landscaping whether required or not by these Regulations, shall be properly installed and maintained on a year-round basis.
B. No less than 15% of the interior of a parking lot containing 30 or more parking spaces shall be landscaped with trees and other shrubs and continuously maintained. This landscaped area requirement shall be provided by landscaped end islands and landscaped center islands within the parking area which are designed and located to minimize the unattractiveness of parking lots. End islands shall be not less than 15 feet wide and shall be required for all parking. Where center islands are used to meet minimum landscape requirements, center islands shall be not less than 15 feet wide.
C. Plantings along the perimeter of a parking area will not be considered as part of the 15 percent interior landscaping. One deciduous shade tree not less than 2 inches in caliper shall be planted within the landscaped areas for each 15 parking spaces or fraction thereof.
6.2.8 Landscaping and Lighting
All parking areas greater than 10 spaces shall be lighted. The lighting used shall reflect the light downward and away from adjoining premises. Lighting shall be compatible with the rest of the development and landscaping of the off-street parking area.
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE &SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
6.2.9 Interior Circulation
Safe and adequate pedestrian and vehicular traffic must be provided in all areas of off-street parking. The interior pedestrian and vehicular traffic flow shall integrate with the parking arrangement and sufficient traffic aisles and lanes for safe transit shall be provided. No exit from or entrance to an off-street parking facility shall be laid out or maintained as to constitute or create a traffic hazard or nuisance.
6.2.10 Maintenance
Parking areas and access lanes must be kept in good repair at all times.
6.2.11 Loading Requirements for Commercial, Industrial, Planned Commercial and Industrial Park Zones
A. On the same premises with every building or structure erected or occupied for a use involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained adequate space for off-street standing, turning, loading and unloading services in order to avoid interference with the use of streets and without encroachment on any off-street parking area.
B. Such loading and unloading spaces shall be not less than 10 feet by 50 feet with 15 foot height clearance. A minimum of 1 loading and unloading space shall be required for each 10,000 square feet of gross building floor area. The Commission may reduce the size of a loading space(s) and/or the number of spaces where it can be demonstrated that such a reduction is warranted based on the use of the building. Additional off-street loading and unloading spaces may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission because of the building volume.
6.2.12 Continuing Character of Obligation
The requirement for the provision of parking spaces and loading spaces shall be the continuing obligation of the owner of the real estate on which any structure or use is located as long as such structure or use is in existence and its requirement for parking and/or loading spaces continues.
6.2.13 Change in Use
Any change in the use of a building which affects the numbers of required spaces under these regulations shall require full compliance with these parking regulations.
Section 6.3 Signs
6.3.1 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to control the location, size, number, manner of lighting, and architectural appearance of signs located on all buildings and premises within all zones in order to ensure public safety, property value protection, and the protection of residential, business, industrial or historic character of each zone.
6.3.2 General
A. No permanent sign shall be erected, relocated, or altered, except for normal maintenance, without a zoning permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
B. In reviewing a proposed sign or existing signs proposed for modification or alteration, the Commission or its agent shall consider
1. The extent to which such signs are compatible with the character of surrounding development and the neighborhood;
2. The extent to which such signs shall preserve and enhance property values; and
3. The extent to which the design and location of such signs shall protect against traffic distractions and hazards.
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE &SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
C. Any property containing two or more businesses shall submit a unified sign design to the Planning and Zoning Commission for site plan approval. The Commission shall give consideration to the proposed size, location, shape, materials and lighting.
D. At the discretion of the Commission, other signs within these zones may require site plan approval. In all instances an application and plan shall be submitted by the applicant which includes the following: (In instances requiring site plan/special permit approval, this may be submitted at the time of initial site plan/special permit approval for the principal use of the site, or may be submitted separately following this approval.)
1. Name, address, and phone number of applicant;
2. Location of the building, structure, or lot to which the sign is to be attached;
3. Written consent of the property owner, if different from the applicant;
4. A plot plan certified by a Registered Land Surveyor or Professional Engineer, licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, to Class A-2 standards showing the proposed location of the sign on the building and/or lot in relation to nearby buildings, other structures, and lot lines;
5. Location map at a scale of 1" = 1,000';
6. Blueprints or drawings of the plans, specifications, and method of construction of the sign and its supports, showing proposed dimensions, sign area, distance from ground level to top of sign, copy, colors, and materials;
7. Landscaping;
8. Lighting and lighting detail.
9. Following the erection of all detached signs in a C, PC, I, or IP Zone an "As Built Map" shall be prepared certified to Class A-2 standards by a Registered Land Surveyor or Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, documenting compliance with these regulations as well as the approved site plan.
E. The following signs shall require a special permit:
1. Any sign which is to be used in conjunction with a use that is regulated by special permit.
2. Any and all signs to be used in conjunction with a shopping plaza, industrial park, or office complex.
F. In reviewing applications for a special permit, the Commission shall be guided by standards set forth in Section 6.3.1, paragraph 6.3.2.B, paragraph 6.3.2.D, and Section 8.3.2 of these regulations.
G. The total area of a sign shall consist of the smallest rectangle that will encompass all lettering, wording, designs, or symbols, excluding supports. The height of a sign shall be measured from the ground level to the highest point of the sign, or any part thereof including supports and lights.
6.3.3 Signs Which Are Exempt from These Regulations
The following types of signs shall be exempt:
1. Government flags.
2. Signs erected or posted and maintained for public safety and welfare or pursuant to any government function, law, by-law, or other regulation.
3. Directional signs containing no advertising material and not exceeding three square in area or greater than four feet in height.
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE &SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
4. Roof shingles used to identify a farm as defined by the definition for Sign-Agricultural, limited to the roof of one agricultural building per individual property. [Added 11-22-2010, Effective 12-15-2010]
6.3.4 Signs Permitted in Residential Zones
A. Monument Signs - Residential development. (Amended: 15 November 2007)
1. Two (2) free-standing signs may be posted at each entrance to a residential subdivision, not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area including the base and five (5) feet in height above the finish grade, noting the name of the complex or development and may include the property’s address, developer/builder name, and contact information including the phone number and/or website only. The area calculation is for one side only, no double sided signs shall be allowed unless such signage is located within a center island.
2. Such signage shall be setback a minimum of three (3) feet from all lot lines, shall be located on private property, and shall comply with the sight line setback requirements as required.
3. Maintenance of such signs and associated landscaping shall be the responsibility of the developer until the responsibility is reassigned to a homeowner’s association or upon conveyance to an owner of such encumbered lot. If no maintenance provision is executed then signage must be removed upon conveyance of the last lot in the subdivision.
B.
6.3.5 Attached Signs Permitted in C, PC, I, and IP Zones
A. One attached sign per business establishment. More than one attached sign may be allowed where a building fronts on more than one street (limited to 1 sign per facade). In this instance, the total area of all signs shall not exceed the requirements described in paragraph 6.3.5.B.
B. The total area of all signs shall not exceed 1 square foot for each lineal foot of the front of the building. No additional sign area shall be allowed for multi-story buildings. For attached wall developments such as a shopping center, each business shall be allowed one attached sign not to exceed one square foot in area for each linear foot of the front building wall that the business occupies.
C. The attached sign shall not project more than 18 inches from the wall or surface to which they are attached, and not be painted on the surface of any building.
6.3.6 Attached Signs for Large Anchor Businesses
A. The purpose of this section is to:
Table 6.3.4 Permitted Signs in Residential Zones
Type of Sign
Number of Signs
Maximum Area
Maximum Height
Minimum Setback
Occupant Name/Address
1
2 sq. ft.
4 feet
5 feet
Permitted Non-Residential Uses
1
6 sq. ft.
5 feet
15 feet
Sign and/or bulletin board in conjunction with a church and similar places of worship, parks, public facilities, or public and private schools and colleges
1
16 sq. ft.
8 feet
15 feet
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE &SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
1. Allow for additional wall signs for large commercial businesses offering multiple services;
2. Encourage the effective use of signs to convey specific information to the public; and
3. Enable the use of wall signs to break up large expanses of horizontal and vertical building facades.
B. Standards for Sign Area
1. The maximum total sign area shall not exceed 1.5 square feet per lineal foot of building frontage supporting such signs;
2. The maximum size of any one sign shall not exceed 200 square feet.
C. Additional wall signage for large anchor businesses may be approved under the following conditions:
1. The lot shall be zoned C or PC;
2. Business must be in excess of 50,000 square feet;
3. Business must have building frontage in excess of 300 feet;
4. Business front wall must be in excess of 500 feet from the street; and
5. Business must have 2 main points of egress.
6.3.7 Detached Signs Permitted in C, PC, I, and IP Zones
A. General Requirements
1. Detached signs shall be limited to one sign per commercial or industrial lot, shopping center, business/office park or farm. [Amended: 12-15-2010]
2. Detached signs may be permitted only within the front yard. Signs must be set back at least 15 feet from all lot lines.
3. Height and area requirements of such signs shall be in accordance with the following:
a. If located within 65 feet of the front lot line and less than eight feet in height such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet.
b. If located within 65 feet of the front line and from eight feet to ten feet in height, such signs shall not exceed 20 square feet; and
c. If located more than 65 feet from the front lot line yard signs shall not exceed 10 feet in height and shall not exceed 50 square feet.
d. In no case shall any sign exceed 10 feet in height.
4. All detached signs shall be placed within a landscaped area. The extent and type of landscaping and location of the sign shall be shown on a site plan submitted to the Commission for approval. All signs shall be installed on a wood, stone or other base structure which is at least two feet in height and at least one-half as wide as the sign face erected on the sign structure, and one-fourth as deep as the width of the sign face erected on the sign structure.
B. In the case of agricultural (temporary seasonal) signs, temporary signs shall be limited to one (1) 12 square foot sign every 300 feet of road frontage and not to exceed two sides per sign. At no time shall seasonal signs exceed 6 per farm and shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from the edge of pavement or greater when needed to provide safe sightlines. No sign shall be greater than 5 feet in height including the base, if any. [Added 11-22-2010, Effective 12-15-2010]
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE &SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
6.3.8 Temporary Signs - All Zones
A. Purpose:
1. To help promote local businesses and improve economic development in the Town of Ellington through the appropriate use of temporary signs.
2. To support agriculture and a farm friendly town.
3. To clarify regulations for temporary signs.
4. To allow the expanded use of temporary signs while maintaining a balance of aesthetics and safety for the good of the community.
B. Definitions:
1. A sign erected for a short period of time (see Section C.7 below for time limitations).
2. A sign announcing an event, activity, real estate sale or lease, trade work activity, business announcement or business promotion.
3. A sign typically erected on wooden posts or metal rods and readily installed and removed by hand tools or is portable.
C. General Requirements - Temporary Signs:
1. Are permitted in all zones and shall not require a Zoning Permit.
2. Shall not be located on telephone poles, highway traffic signs or placed on sidewalks.
3. Shall require the landowner’s permission prior to installation.
4. When equal to or less than 4 square feet in area and less than 3 feet tall from natural grade, shall be located with the leading edge of the sign at least 6 feet back from the edge of pavement to the closest street or highway.
5. When larger than 4 square feet in area or higher than 3 feet tall from natural grade, shall be located with the leading edge of the sign at least 15 feet back from the edge of pavement to the closest street or highway. In cases where 15 feet is not achievable due to existing conditions, such as parking lots, topography or other site specific restrictions and there are no other options on the lot to achieve the 15 foot setback, the sign may be placed closer than 15 feet provided the sign is placed the maximum distance possible from the edge of pavement to the closest street or highway. In no case can a temporary sign create any safety issues for vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Any sign creating a sight line issue or not incompliance with this section must be removed or relocated immediately upon the request of the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
6. Shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and the top of sign shall not exceed 5 feet from natural grade, unless otherwise specified herein.
7. Shall not be erected for more than 150 cumulative calendar days per year whether the same sign or varying signs.
8. Are limited to two temporary signs per lot at any one time, except where more than one business occupies the same lot or where a lot fronts on two streets, and shall only be located on the property or lot of the business. Where more than one business occupies the same lot, each business shall be limited to two temporary signs. Where a business is located on a lot with frontage on two or more streets, the business shall be permitted a temporary sign along two streets with each sign location limited to a maximum 150 cumulative calendar days per year whether the same sign or varying signs.
9. Political signs pertaining to an upcoming governmental election/referendum are exempt from the limitation of one temporary sign per lot at any one time.
10. Real estate for sale or lease signs are exempt from the maximum 150 cumulative calendar days per year time limitation provided the property is actively marketed, and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
11. For businesses shall only be allowed for sales, special promotions, or new business announcements including grand openings, under new management or hiring opportunities.
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE &SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
12. Promoting a special event or date specific activity shall be erected no more than 60 calendar days prior to the event or activity and shall be removed within 2 calendar days of the end of the event or activity.
13. Promoting trade work conducted at a property may have a single sign erected on the premises where the work is being conducted during the time period of the work and shall be removed within two weeks after completion of the work, provided (notwithstanding any other provision of this paragraph C to the contrary) that the sign is no more than 4 square feet in area, no more than 3 feet in height from natural grade, and the leading edge of the sign is set back at least 6 feet from the edge of pavement to the closest street or highway.
14. For businesses located outside of Ellington are not permitted except for active trade work signs (subject to the provisions of subparagraph 13 above), real estate for sale or lease signs (subject to the provisions of subparagraph 10 above ), and signs that support agriculture and a farm friendly town.
15. Promoting agriculture may be located on property other than the location of the farm or agricultural enterprise. Agricultural signs for individual farms or agricultural enterprises shall be limited to 4 square feet in area, shall have no more than 10 signs at any one time, and shall be removed when the crop availability is over.
16. Temporary signs promoting agriculture representing multiple farms or agricultural enterprises shall be limited to 12 square feet in area, shall have no more than three signs at any one time, and shall be erected only during the period of operation.
17. Any temporary sign placed on public property including right of ways shall be subject to removal and disposal by an agent of the Town with no liability for the same.
6.3.9 Illumination
A. Exterior lighting is permitted when confined or directed to the surface of the sign so that no direct rays or glare are visible beyond the property lines or create a danger to vehicular traffic.
B. In general, interior illumination of signs shall be avoided. However, where the applicant provides ample documentation that such illumination is superior to protection of neighboring properties, avoiding discomfort or glare on public highways, and minimizing conflict with any traffic signals, then the Commission may permit such illumination.
6.3.10 Prohibited Signs
The following signs are prohibited:
1. Portable, wheel signs, or signs on parked vehicles where the sign is the primary use of the vehicle;
2. Neon signs, as well as signs which revolve, rotate, flash or move in any manner, or give the appearance of movement;
3. Advertising flags, banners, streamers or balloons;
4. Roof mounted signs which project more than two feet over the top of the exterior wall on which it is attached; (except roof mounted signs greater than 80 square feet in area may project up to three (3) feet over the top of the exterior wall on which it is attached.
5. Billboards.
Section 6.4 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
6.4.1 General Requirements for any Excavation (cut), Fills, and Grading
A. Cut and fill earth slopes shall not be steeper than 3:1 (horizontal/vertical), unless otherwise stated elsewhere in these regulations.
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE &SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
B. Adequate provisions shall be shown on any plan for subdivision or development where cuts or fills are proposed in an effort to prevent surface water from damaging the cut face excavation or the sloping surfaces of fills.
C. Cut and fills shall not endanger adjoining property as determined by the Town Engineer.
D. Fill shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or erosion of soil.
E. Fills shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed channels.
F. Grading shall not be done in such a way so as to divert water onto property of another landowner without the written consent of the landowner as determined by the Town Engineer.
G. During grading operation, necessary measures for dust control will be exercised.
H. Grading equipment will not be allowed to cross flowing streams except by means of bridges and culverts.
6.4.2 Definitions
Certification means a signed, written approval by the Ellington Planning and Zoning Commission or its designated agent that the soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with the applicable requirements of these regulations.
Commission means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Ellington.
County Soil and Water Conservation District means the Tolland County Soil and Water Conservation District established under subsection (a) of Section 22a-315 of the General Statutes.
Development means any construction of grading activities to improved or unimproved real estate.
Disturbed area means an area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion.
Erosion means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
Grading means any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition.
Inspection means the periodic review of sediment and erosion control measures shown in the certified plan.
Sediment means solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion.
Soil means any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin.
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan means a scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative.
6.4.3 Activities Requiring a Certified Erosion & Sediment Control Plan
A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any application for development when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half acre.
6.4.4 Exemptions
A single family dwelling that is not a part of a subdivision of land shall be exempt from these soil erosion and sediment control regulations.
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE &SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
6.4.5 Erosion & Sediment Control Plan
A. To be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002) as AMENDED. Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with prior approval of the Commission.
B. Said plan shall contain, but not be limited to:
1. A narrative describing:
a. The development;
b. The schedule for grading and construction activities including:
1. Start and completion dates;
2. Sequence of grading and construction activities;
3. Sequence of installation and/or application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures;
4. Sequence for final stabilization of the project site.
c. The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities.
d. The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities.
e. The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities.
f. The operations and maintenance program for the proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities.
2. A site plan map at a sufficient scale to show:
a. The location of the proposed development and adjacent properties;
b. The existing and proposed topography including soil types, wetlands, watercourses and water bodies;
c. The existing structures on the project site, if any;
d. The proposed area alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads and, if applicable, new property lines;
e. The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities;
f. The sequence of grading and construction activities;
g. The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures;
h. The sequence for final stabilization of the development site.
3. Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the applicant or requested by the Commission or its designated agent.
4.
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE &SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
6.4.6 Minimum Acceptable Standards
C. Plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be developed in accordance with these regulations using the principles as outlined in Chapters 3 and 4 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as AMENDED. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall result in a development that: minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction; is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed; and does not cause off-site erosion and/or sedimentation.
D. The minimum standards for individual measures are those in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002) as AMENDED. The Commission may grant exceptions when requested by the applicant if technically sound reasons are presented.
E. The appropriate method from the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002) as AMENDED shall be used in determining peak flow rates and volumes of runoff unless an alternative method is approved by the Commission.
6.4.7 Issuance or Denial of Certification
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall either certify that the soil erosion and sediment control plan, as filed, complies with the requirements and objectives of this regulation or deny certification when the development proposal does not comply with these regulations.
B. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as extending the time limits for the approval of any application under Chapters 124, 124A, or 126 of the General Statutes.
C. Prior to certification, any plan submitted to the municipality may be reviewed by the County Soil and Water Conservation District which may make recommendations concerning such plan, provided such review shall be completed within thirty days of the receipt of such plan.
D. The Commission may forward a copy of the development proposal to the Conservation Commission or other review agency or consultant for review and comment.
6.4.8 Conditions Relating to Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
A. The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan, that are a condition of certification of any modified site plan may be required to be covered in a performance bond or other assurance acceptable to the Commission. The Town Engineer is authorized to estimate said costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation.
B. Site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan is certified and those control measures and facilities in the plan scheduled for installation prior to site development are installed and functional.
C. Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as scheduled according to the certified plan.
D. All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure the compliance of the certified plan.
E. All persons engaged in development activities who fail to file a soil erosion and sediment control plan in accordance with these regulations, or who conducts a development activity except in accordance with provisions of a certified plan shall be deemed in violation of these regulations.
ARTICLE 6 LAND USE &SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
6.4.9 Inspection
Inspections shall be made by the Commission or its designated agent during development to ensure compliance with the certified plan and that control measures and facilities are properly performed or installed and maintained. The Commission may require the permittee to verify through progress reports that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed according to the certified plan and are being operated and maintained.

ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Section 7.1 Accessory Apartments
A. Accessory Apartments are subject to the following restrictions and conditions:
1. Either the primary dwelling unit or accessory apartment shall be owner-occupied and one of the dwelling units shall be occupied by a person 60 years of age or older, or a handicapped person.
2. The usable floor area of the accessory apartment shall have a maximum of 1,000 square feet, except that the area of the accessory apartment shall not exceed 50 percent of the usable floor area of the primary dwelling unit. These areas shall be exclusive of garages, porches, or basements.
3. The architectural treatment of the total structure shall be as to portray the character of a single-family dwelling unit.
4. The structure shall have only one main entrance on the street side of the structure; all other entrances shall be at the side or to the rear.
5. The primary dwelling unit and the accessory apartment shall have a connecting door between the two dwelling units.
B. Any violation of the terms of the special permit shall be prosecuted in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes.
Section 7.2 Bed-and-Breakfast
A. Bed-and-Breakfast operations subject to the following requirements: (Added: 6-24-02)
1. Length of stay for a lodger shall not exceed 14 consecutive days.
2. Number of guest rooms is limited to one less than the total number of bedrooms in the dwelling unit, not to exceed five guest rooms total.
3. A single identification sign not to exceed two square feet may be erected. Such sign shall be non-illuminated and shall be attached against the front wall of the building it identifies. In the event that the building cannot be seen from the street right-of-way, the Planning and Zoning Commission may permit the erection of the sign at least 15 feet from the front property line and no higher than four feet.
4. No parking spaces for the bed-and-breakfast operation shall be in the required front yard setback. One parking space shall be provided for each guest room. Two additional parking spaces shall be provided for the operator/owner of the bed-and-breakfast as well as an additional parking space for each employee in excess of those parking spaces required for the operator/owner.
B. The dwelling in which the bed-and-breakfast operates shall be the principal residence of the operator/owner, and the operator/owner shall live on the premises where the bed-and-breakfast is active.
Section 7.3 Communication Tower
A. The applicant will be required to take reasonable steps to mitigate any adverse visual impact from all new communication tower facilities. Steps shall include but are not limited to: landscaping, fencing, painting or similar measures as appropriate to camouflage the communication tower.
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
B. A communication tower must comply with the setback requirements of the zone in which it is located or be set back from the property lines a distance equal to the height of the tower, whichever is greater.
C. Towers shall not exceed 190 feet in height above the ground.
D. To discourage unauthorized trespassing and provide for the public safety, the base of any ground-mounted tower shall be secured by fence enclosure to a height of 6 feet above the ground.
E. No lighting of any communication tower will be permitted, with the exception of ground lighting for maintenance purposes, except as required by the Federal Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration, or the Connecticut Siting Council.
F. No advertising or signs shall be permitted on any communication tower.
G. To avoid unnecessary proliferation of communication towers, new towers will not be approved unless there is a need demonstrated such as all available space on existing or approved towers covering the same geographic area has been utilized or that there is an area within Ellington or immediately adjacent to Ellington which is not served by existing facilities; i.e. a hole exists in a propagation mapped area.
H. To protect the public health from the unknown effects of electromagnetic fields, all communication transmitters much comply with FCC emissions regulations.
I. Communication towers shall provide space for municipal emergency service transmission antennas as required by the town.
J. The facility owner at their expense shall remove a communication tower facility not in use for 12 consecutive months. This removal shall occur within 20 days of the end of such a 12 month period. The commission may require a bond or other security to the Town of Ellington valid for the life of the tower to guarantee removal.
K. All utilities installed in conjunction with any communication tower site shall be installed underground unless otherwise approved by the commission.
Section 7.4 Composting Facility
A. A complete site development plan as required under Section 8.2 of these Regulations shall be submitted for any proposed composting facility. In addition, this site development plan shall show the following items.
1. The location of all wetlands, watercourses, and wells within 1,000 feet of the lot where the composting facility is located. Wetlands may be plotted using data obtained from USDA Soil Conservation Service soil surveys.
2. Existing and proposed topographic contours on the project site shall be shown on separate sheets at intervals of 2 feet or less, unless otherwise directed by the Commission.
B. All incoming materials accepted for composting at any composting facility shall be stored on an impervious surface designed to prevent leachate from such materials entering the ground. The applicant must demonstrate that proposed impervious surface has been designed to accommodate the total anticipated peak volume of materials to be received, processed, and stored at the composting facility. At the discretion of the Commission a facility which accepts only leaves for composting may operate on a pervious surface.
C. The special permit shall designate those materials which may be accepted by the composting facility. Any material or substance designated by the federal or state Departments of Environmental Protection as hazardous material shall not be accepted or processed by any composting facility.
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
D. Approved organic materials accepted at any composting facility shall be processed and stored in a manner approved by the Commission.
E. The Commission may require that materials be stored in a structure designed to prevent the infiltration of precipitation into such materials.
F. The Commission may require reasonable buffer strips and/or fencing to separate any composting facility from adjacent property. Composting facilities shall comply with the noise criteria and restrictions contained in paragraph 7.5.1.L of these regulations.
G. The Applicant must demonstrate that reasonable measures have been taken, as necessary, to prevent the generation of unpleasant or noxious odors. The Commission may place reasonable conditions on any composting facility to prevent or minimize the generation of such odors.
H. The composting facility shall not be located within 750 feet of any residential zone or existing residence. This distance shall be measured from the operational edge of the facility to the lot line of the residential zone.
I. The Commission may require that the operator of the composting facility post a performance bond as recommended by the Town Engineer, to guarantee proper operation and final closure of the facility.
Section 7.5 Earth Excavation
7.5.1 Special Permit Required
A. Except as exempted in this section, a Special Permit shall be required for the excavation, removal, processing, and importation of sand, stone, gravel, loam, peat, peat moss, concrete, asphalt, and similar materials on premises in any zone provided the conditions of this section can be met. In addition to these conditions, the Commission shall also be guided by the purpose of these regulations as set forth in Section 1.1 and Special Permit review criteria as presented in Section 8.3 of these regulations.
B. Erosion Control. A detailed erosion control plan shall be submitted in accordance with Section 6.4, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control of these regulations.
C. Wind Erosion and Dust Control. Proper measures shall be taken to minimize the nuisance from dust and wind erosion at storage areas, yards, access roads, service roads, or other untreated open area within the lot;
D. Working Slopes. Upon completion of the workday, proper measures shall be taken to restore a slope not exceeding one vertical to one and one-half horizontal to the area excavated or otherwise disturbed ground. Alternatively, the Commission may approve as part of the application, satisfactory terracing arrangements to ensure the safety and stability of the working slopes. Finished slopes shall not exceed one vertical and three horizontal slopes. Fences or embankments shall be provided if necessary for the protection and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
E. Minimum Setbacks. All excavation, removal, or grading shall be located at least 100 feet from any property line unless a plan for removal is coordinated with the owner of an adjacent tract and approved by the Commission. The Commission may approve grading up to a public street, road, or highway right of way by a 2/3 majority vote. There shall be no stockpiling of materials within 100 feet of any property line, public street, road, highway, or right of way. No fixed machinery shall be erected or maintained within 200 feet of the property or street line;
F. Topsoil Preservation. A sufficient amount of topsoil shall be set aside on the premises for re-spreading to a minimum depth of 4 inches over the excavated area in accordance with the approved grading plan. Such topsoil stockpile shall not be sold or removed from the premises;
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
G. Buffering. When deemed applicable by the Commission, the applicant shall provide a fence or suitable barrier for the purpose of minimizing objectionable noise and screening operations from the view of highway traffic and neighboring property owners;
H. Landscaping. A final landscaping plan shall be prepared for each phase by the applicant and approved by the Commission. This plan shall contain a suitable notation indicating that at the completion of the operation the area shall be seeded with suitable grass mixture containing at least 50% permanent grasses and maintained by mulching, repairing and reseeding until the area is stabilized. However, the Commission may approve other groundcover alternatives. All material and labor costs to implement such a plan shall be included in the Bonding section below;
I. Bonding. Before a permit is granted under this section, the applicant shall file a bond with security in a form acceptable to the Finance Officer and Town Attorney and in such amount as the Town Engineer deems sufficient to ensure the faithful performance and completion of the work in accordance with provisions of this section. Additional bonding may be required to assure that any materials deposited on site will not result in any environmental problems; such bonding shall be in a form acceptable to the Finance Officer and Town Attorney and in such amount as determined by the Town Engineer.
J. Hours of Operation. Earth excavation operations shall be conducted only between 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., and shall be restricted to weekdays (Monday through Friday), Saturday between 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., and shall not operate on legal holidays.
K. Control Points. In order to ensure that the site is graded in accordance with the approved plan, vertical and horizontal control points shall be setup around the entire perimeter of the parcel. Such control points shall be:
1. Noted on the approved plan;
2. Spaced no farther than two hundred feet apart;
3. Set in the ground with iron or steel stakes at least 3/4 inches in diameter and thirty inches in length.
In addition, the applicant shall be required to provide the Zoning Enforcement Officer with as-built drawings six months after the issuance of the permit to demonstrate compliance with the approved grading plan. Any deviation from the approved plan shall be a violation and cause for revocation of the permit.
L. Sound Pressure Level. The sound pressure level of any machinery used in conjunction with an earth removal operation shall not exceed the decibel level stated below. Sound pressure level shall be measured with a standard “A Scale Sound Level Meter” (slow response) manufactured according to the United States of America Standards Institute (USASI) standards S 1.4 - 1961, as revised which has been calibrated in accordance with USASI standards. The microphone used to measure the loudness of a noise shall be placed at any point on the property line, but no closer than five feet from any wall not less than three feet from the ground.
Allowable noise levels shall be as follows:
1. For a lot, or an approved phase of operation contained within a lot, which does not abut a Residential zoning district or lot containing an existing residence - 66 dBA.
2. For a lot, or an approved phase of operation contained within a lot, which does abut a Residential zoning district or lot containing an existing residence - 55 dBA.
3. No operation which produces vibrations at or above human perceptibility at any property line shall be allowed.
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
M. Truck Access. Truck access to the excavation site shall be so arranged as to minimize danger to traffic and nuisance to surrounding properties. That portion of access road within the area of operation shall be treated to prevent dust.
N. Structures. No building shall be erected on the premises, except as may be permitted in these regulations.
O. Phasing. Where a plan is to be implemented in phases, no phase shall be greater than 7 acres in area.
P. Inspections. Prior to importation, the site operator at his or her own expense shall provide evidence acceptable to the Town Engineer that all materials imported to the excavation site and premises are environmentally safe and that such materials will not contribute to the pollution of ground or surface water supplies or result in any other environmental hazard.
7.5.2 Expiration of Permit
Any special permit issued under this section shall expire five (5) years following the date of issuance unless other terms are specified by the Commission. As a condition of approval, permit holders shall submit to the Ellington Planning Department an engineering report documenting current as-built conditions by November 1st of each year. Changes to an approved plan which extend the scope, intensity or boundary, or in the opinion of the Commission or its staff qualify as a modification to approval, shall require a modification to special permit by the Commission. Effective May 15, 2016 all existing permits shall be good for five (5) years from the initial issue date, and all permittees shall comply with annual reporting requirements contained herein. (Amended 4/25/16, Effective 5/15/16)
7.5.3 Activities Exempted Under This Section (Added 2-25-13, Effective 3-15-13)
The following activities do not require a special permit under this section:
1. Necessary and incidental activities associated with a site development plan or subdivision plan approved by the commission.
2. The development of a single family home that is not part of a subdivision plan approved by the Commission provided that a zoning permit has been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
3. Excavation or importation of less than 100 cubic yards in any one 12 month period not associated with a site development or subdivision plan approved by the Commission.
4. Bona fide agricultural activities.
5. Activities within the State or Town right-of-way when conducted on behalf of the State or the Town.
7.5.4 Site Plan Requirements
In addition to the site plan requirements listed in Section 8.2 of these regulations, a grading plan certified by a registered land surveyor and a professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut shall be submitted which contains the following:
1. An estimate of the number and types of trucks and other machinery and equipment to be on site and types of any buildings to be erected.
2. The quantity of materials to be imported or removed within the limits of the proposed excavation, removal, filling, or grading, and the location of processing equipment.
3. Existing contours at no less than two foot intervals in the area of activity and proposed contours. The map shall extend the property line 100 feet beyond the activity area.
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
4. Storm drainage data showing drainage areas and estimated runoff of the area to be served by existing drainage facilities together with detailed plans and specifications of all proposed drainage facilities and other protective devices to be constructed in connection with proper drainage of the premises, both during and after construction of the operation.
5. All other data necessary to ensure compliance with subsection 7.5.1 of this section.
6. The applications shall be accompanied by a list of all property owners within 500 feet of any portion of the tract of land which is to be excavated.
Section 7.6 Public Garages and Auto Service Stations
7.6.1 General Requirements
A public hearing shall be held to consider in addition to the factors set out in the basic guidelines for special uses:
A. Whether an additional station will constitute a detriment to the existing commercial balance of the general area. The Commission may consider additional commercial development proposed as an integral part of the application for this use when considering the well planned development of the area.
B. Whether the layout and design of the station conforms to the area architecture.
C. Whether the design provides adequate toilet facilities for customers, adequate storage for products to be sold and/or used in the operation of said station.
D. Whether the building has adequate area:
For the sale of gas and oil only - no repairs - 450 square feet
Limited repairs - 1,000 square feet
General repairs - 1,500 square feet
Used or new car license - 2,500 square feet
E. Whether each item to be sold or service to be performed on site is suitable for this location, facilities provided or proposed and abilities of the Permittee.
7.6.2 Location Requirements
A. A public garage or auto service station may be located in a Commercial or Industrial Zone if approved by the Commission provided that no part of a building to be so used is within 400 feet of any entrance to a public park or playground or within 300 feet of the nearest point of any building in which there is established or maintained a school, hospital, church, theater, public library, convalescent or nursing hospital, or building for civic assembly.
B. Buildings shall be located 100 feet from the front street line, except that no building need be farther away from the street line than the average setback of existing adjacent commercial buildings. Gasoline pumps shall be located in conformity with State Regulations.
7.6.3 Administration
A. A permit when issued shall specify each use which is approved and shall be non-assignable without approval of the Commission.
B. The Commission may approve an assignment of an existing permit without hearing after reviewing all of the above considerations but may in its discretion require a public hearing.
C. Any application to expand the uses at a previous approved location shall require a hearing and compliance with all items and factors listed herein.
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Section 7.7 Home Occupations
Home Occupations must conform to the following in any dwelling regardless of zone; subject to a zoning permit approval. Should a home occupation not meet the requirements stipulated herein, a special permit approval must be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission:
A. The home occupation must clearly be incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling.
B. The residential character and appearance of the dwelling and the lot on which it is located shall not be changed in any visible manner.
C. The home occupation shall not create any objectionable noise, odor, vibration, or unsightly conditions.
D. The home occupation shall not create a health or safety hazard.
E. The home occupation shall not create any interference with communications transmission or reception in the vicinity.
F. The home occupation will create no significant change in traffic or the need for expanded parking.
G. The home occupation shall be confined to 1/3 of the floor area of said dwelling. For the purposes of calculation, the floor area of the attic and basement shall be excluded.
H. The home occupation must be carried on entirely within the dwelling, to include the basement, accessory building, garage and/or attic of the dwelling.
I. No advertisement of the existence of the home occupation shall be visible from the dwelling or the lot on which it is located, except for one sign as permitted by Section 6.3.4.
J. No products or materials shall be stored on the lot outside in such a manner as to be visible from any adjacent property.
K. The home occupation may employ up to one non-household employee to be present in the dwelling during business hours.
Section 7.8 Remaining Developable Land Option
The density based zoning classification scheme and 40,000 square foot minimum lot sizes may allow for the ability to retain land for other uses other than building lots depending on lot configuration. In cases where the subdivider, or landowner, wishes to retain a portion of their land for farming, personal use, or some other use consistent with these regulations, the following options are available and are solely determined by the applicant:
A. Retain in fee simple ownership by the applicant/landowner with an agricultural or similar type of easement in favor of the town, state, land trust, homeowner’s association or combination thereof.
B. Fee simple purchase by the town (as an increase to the open space or other municipal purpose), state, land trust, homeowner’s association or combination thereof.
C. Some combination of the above as acceptable to all parties.
Section 7.9 Rear Lot Requirement (Amended 1/29/18, Effective 2/15/18)
A. All rear lots require a special permit from the Planning and Zoning Commission, unless a lot is a lawful lot of record as recorded in the office of the Town Clerk prior to February 1, 2016, or a lot subject to permanent easement for farmland preservation.
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
B. The provisions of this Section are intended to permit the use of land which has been unintentionally landlocked or deprived of minimum frontage on a street, or, in the case of a subdivision, where the topography or unusual shape of the property lends itself to the use of an interior lot to accomplish the best use of the land. In the case of a subdivision, the Commission shall not approve interior lots unless it finds that such lots provide the best development of the land because of the topography and shape of the land. No more than 20% of all lots contained within a subdivision shall be approved as rear lots. This requirement shall apply when a tract of land is divided into a total of six or more lots subsequent to the adoption of this amendment.
C. There shall be provided a minimum 25 foot wide fee simple access fronting on a town accepted road (or a road which will be built and accepted by the town as a result of the lot in question being part of subdivision application), or state highway, or private street used for travel and approved by the Commission as part of a subdivision approved after July 1999. The lot line from which this access leads shall be considered the front lot line of the rear lot, and the driveway serving the lot shall be located within the fee simple accessway. The front yard setback shall be measured from the lot line which intersects the accessway, and shall extend the full width of the lot. If the lot will contain enough area such that it may, in the future, be further divided into additional building lots, the fee simple access strip shall be a minimum of 50 feet wide. The minimum width shall be met the entire length of the accessway.
D. The minimum lot area shall be 2x the minimum lot size required for the zone in which it is located. In cases where required lot size is reduced because of the use of sewers, the required lot size shall be 2x the reduced lot size.
E. Said rear lot shall conform to all other applicable regulations prescribed for the zone in which it is located.
F. The owner of the rear lot shall provide and maintain the driveway and storm drainage in the access area. Said driveway is to be fully capable of providing unrestricted access at any time for emergency vehicles such are fire trucks, etc.
Section 7.10 Sanitary Refuse Disposal Area
A. A Special Permit for a Sanitary Refuse Disposal Area in an I-Industrial Zone shall be given only after a public hearing in which the following minimum requirements are established:
1. That the site is well suited to this purpose,
2. That such operation will not unreasonably effect the use and enjoyment of other land in the general area,
3. That it will create no health or safety hazard in the community, and
4. That it will provide a needed service or benefit to the Town of Ellington.
B. Plans. The applicant shall present a site plan, complying with Section 8.2, to include the following:
1. The location of any wells, springs, streams or water courses on the property or within 200 feet of the proposed extremity of any disposal operation;
2. The precise areas of proposed operation of such disposal facility within the tract with access roads; and
3. The proposed final grades shown with contours of 2 feet or less on another map unless otherwise requested by the Commission.
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
C. Site Area and Lot Lines. Sites shall have a minimum area of 5 acres while setback and use lines shall be specified in each case taking into consideration access, land use, grades, proposed operations and benefit to the Town of Ellington.
D. Buffer Strips and Fencing. The Commission may require reasonable buffer strips to separate any disposal area from adjacent property and/or may require all or any part of such site to be fenced to the satisfaction of the Commission and the Board of Selectmen, or a planting of mixed evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs to supplement any existing planting or as a screen of new planting, all or any part of which screening shall be maintained by the Owner in good repair and proper order.
E. Health Approval. Before any permit is issued the applicant shall give to the Commission evidence in writing that his site and operation plans have been approved by the Connecticut Commissioner of Health and the Town Health Officer of Ellington.
F. Operation. Operation of such area shall comply with all regulations of the Commission of Health, the Town Health Officer of Ellington, ordinances of the Town of Ellington and regulations of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission may revoke any permit issued hereunder in the event of any violation of the above regulations and all disposal operations shall cease forthwith upon service of a written order upon any owner, custodian, manager or person in charge of the site in person or by certified mail addressed to the Owner at the last address on file in the Assessor's Records. Such further work as is necessary to eliminate any health or safety hazard shall be required at the Owner's expense, but no further refuse shall be accepted.
G. Bond. Before issuance of a permit the operator shall post a bond with surety in an amount set by the Commission to insure compliance with all operating regulations and to cover any expense to the Town in the event of failure by the operator.
H. Permit Duration and Fees. For the first 5 years of operation the permit shall be valid for 1 year periods; thereafter the permit shall be valid for 3 years periods. Such permit shall be non-assignable without the express consent of the Commission. Renewal permits may be issued upon evidence of compliance with all applicable regulations and payment of a special permit fee and renewal of the bond required by paragraph G above for the duration of the permit. The permit fee for a multi-year permit shall be payable upon the issuance of such permit in an amount equal to the number of years of the permit times the annual fee for special permits.
I. Insurance. The owner shall insure his liability for damage to property of others or injuries sustained by persons using or upon such property making the Town of Ellington a named insured on such policy in the amount of $100M/300M. A certificate of such insurance, non-cancelable except upon 30 days written notice to the Commission, shall be deposited with the Commission before a permit is issued.
J. Use of Facility. Use of such facility shall be limited to residents and businesses of the Town of Ellington under such contract as the Owner may have with the Board of Selectmen of Ellington and such other persons, firms, corporations or municipalities as may be mutually agreed upon by the Owner and the Commission and under such restrictions on time, quantity and type of materials and roads within the Town of Ellington over which trucks will travel and types of trucks to be used as are reasonably warranted in view of the capacity of the area, economics of operations and projected use by the Town of Ellington.
K. Fines. Violations of such regulations as the Town of Ellington may from time to time establish shall be subject to fines payable to the Town of Ellington in such amounts as may be established by the Commission.
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
L. Operation. The Sanitary Refuse Disposal Area shall be operated as a Sanitary Landfill in conformity with Connecticut Commission of Health rules and such regulations as the Commission may establish as to: hours of operation, type of materials which may be disposed of and prohibited materials, fencing, depth of layers of refuse, soil covering, management, open days, period of covering, drainage, fire protection, use by other than residents and businesses located in the Town, policing and maintenance.
Section 7.11 Trailers
A. Camp(er)/Travel and boat trailers may be stored out of doors subject to the following conditions:
1. Storage shall be beyond the front foundation wall of the principal building or structure and in compliance with all yard requirements.
2. Such trailers, while stored, shall not be occupied, inhabited or used for cooking or sleeping purposes.
3. A boat resting on a stored trailer, or cradle, or similar manner up to 24 feet in length, measured on the waterline may be stored on a lot in accordance with (1) and (2) above. Boats in excess of 24 feet, measured on the waterline may be stored by obtaining a special permit.
B. Utility or box trailers not exceeding 30 feet in overall length may be stored out of doors in accordance with A above.
C. Livestock trailers may be stored out of doors and shall be located at least 100 feet from any street line and at least 50 feet from a residential zone or residence. (Added 1-25-10, Effective 2-15-10)
D. Construction trailers may be stored on a site under progressive construction for 6 months after obtaining a zoning permit. If construction progresses longer than 6 months, a new zoning permit shall be obtained. In the event construction does not progress for a successive ninety (90) days the trailer shall be removed. (Added 1-25-10, Effective 2-15-10)
E. All trailers stored in accordance with this section shall in addition be kept at all times in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. (Amended 1-25-10, Effective 2-15-10)
Section 7.12 Small Wind Energy Systems—Windmills
Wind energy is an abundant, renewable, and nonpolluting energy resource. It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe, effective, and efficient use of small wind energy systems to reduce our dependence on non-renewable energy and decrease pollution to our environment.
A. Definitions
1. Small Wind Energy System (Windmill)—A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion of electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than one hundred (100) kW and which is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power.
2. Tower Height—The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind turbine itself.
B. The Commission shall approve an application for a special permit for a small wind energy system if it shall find that the proposed windmill will conform to the following standards:
1. The lot shall be a minimum of 3 acres.
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
2. The height above average ground level of the permanent structure shall not exceed sixty-five (65) feet on a parcel less than five (5) acres and eighty (80) feet on parcels five (5) acres or more; provided that, in all cases, the wind system shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements, including any necessary approvals for installation close to airports.
3. The wind system shall not be located closer to a property line than the height of the tower plus the required property line setback of the zone. No part of the wind system structure, including guy wire anchors, may extend closer than the required setback of the zone.
4. Except during short-term events including utility outages and severe wind storms, the wind system shall be designed, installed, and operated so that noise generated by the system shall not exceed sixty (60) decibel (dBA), as measured at the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling.
5. The wind system shall not result in the impairment of scenic vistas, shall not be located in any easements, or significantly reduce the value of adjoining properties.
6. Adequate landscaping to buffer the ground level equipment and structures from adjoining property is provided.
7. In granting a special permit for a wind system, the Commission shall have the power to impose such additional standards and requirements as it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of these regulations.
Section 7.13 Cultural Educational Center (Added 4-15-08)
A Cultural, Educational Center shall be subject to the following requirements, restrictions and conditions:
A. The use of property as a Cultural, Educational Center shall be established by Special Permit, granted by Planning and Zoning Commission. Such determination of use rests solely with the Commission in accordance with the definition in Section 10.2 – Definitions.
B. No overnight guest lodging is permitted.
C. A single identification sign in conformance with Section 6.3.4.B shall be allowed as part of the special permit.
D. No on-street parking shall be permitted. All parking shall be in conformance with Article 6 - Land Use and Site Development Regulations. Parking may be utilized in spaces located on alternative parking surfaces rather than in established, paved parking areas and must be identified as such on the plan submitted for approval.
E. No on-site food preparation facilities shall be permitted. All food services shall originate in off-site facilities.
F. The use of a Cultural Educational Center shall be limited to scheduled, special events and shall not include regularly scheduled daily public activity. The standards for granting Special Permit as contained in Section 8.3.2 shall apply to any application.
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Section 7.14 Agricultural Uses (Added 11-22-10, Effective 12-15-10; Modifications Effective 6-15-16)
7.14.1 Statement of Purpose. Agriculture has played and continues to play a significant role in Ellington. It enhances the quality of life for residence and is a strong element of Ellington’s diverse community character. It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the economic and operational viability of agricultural businesses, to support programs that preserve farming and farmland, and to allow more flexible farm use regulations.
7.14.2 Permitted Uses: Any reference to minimum or maximum lot size shall be construed to mean contiguous acreage under single ownership and/or leasehold in any zone. Agricultural uses shall not be permitted on common interest properties (e.g. condominium and apartment complexes), unless approved as a permitted accessory use or structure on a site plan approved by the commission.
A. Agriculture. All uses in Section 7.14 shall require a minimum of 3 acres, unless a minimum acreage is specifically defined.
B. Agricultural enclosures, buildings, or structures except farm stores and seasonal farm stands, as long as the setback of the underlying zone is met for the street property line, when located at least 50 feet from any side or rear property line and subject to the issuance of a Zoning Permit. (Amended 12-30-13, Effective 1-15-14)
C. Seasonal Farm Stand provided that 70% of gross sales shall be from agricultural goods produced on the owner’s farm, or processed products made from raw materials that were produced on the owner’s farm, for at least three of the immediately preceding five years; the farm stand shall cease operations for a minimum of six consecutive weeks on an annual basis; and adequate parking with safe ingress and egress is present and is located outside of the public right-of-way.
D. Keeping of Horses: (Added 5-23-16, Effective 6-15-16)
a. Applicability: This section shall apply to the keeping of horses, donkeys, ponies, miniature horses, and similar members of the equine family, and any reference to “horse” shall be inclusive of all of these animals.
b. Minimum lot size: A property must have at least 3 contiguous acres in order to keep horses.
c. Number of horses and other equine: A property with at least 3 contiguous acres may keep 2 horses or equine. An additional horse may be kept for each additional acre of contiguous land (e.g., a property with 4 acres may keep 3 horses). For the purposes of calculation, acreage shall be rounded down to the nearest acre (e.g. a property with 5.6 acres may keep 4 horses).
d. Structures for the Keeping of Horses: All structures and enclosures for the keeping of horses shall comply with the requirements of Section 7.14.2.B and/or Section 7.14.3.A, as applicable.
E. Keeping of Backyard Poultry: (Added 5-23-16, Effective 6-15-16)
a. Applicability: Backyard poultry shall include chickens, ducks, turkeys, and other birds of similar mature size, but not guinea hens, peacocks, emus or ostriches. Farms shall have no limit on the number of poultry that may be kept.
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
b. Minimum Lot Size: A property must be greater than or equal to 20,000 square feet in order to keep backyard poultry.
c. Number of Poultry: A property which meets the minimum lot size may keep up to a maximum of 8 backyard poultry.
d. Roosters: Roosters are not permitted on property which has less than 3 acres.
e. Management: Backyard poultry shall be suitably contained on the premises at all times. Free range backyard poultry are prohibited.
f. Setbacks and Permitting Requirements:
i. Structures less than 200 square feet and enclosures (such as fenced areas) for the keeping of backyard poultry shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the side and rear property lines and 50 feet from the front property line, or meet the setbacks of the underlying zone (whichever is greater). These structures and enclosures shall not require a Zoning Permit, but all owners of backyard poultry shall submit a written statement to the Zoning Enforcement Officer certifying compliance to these regulations.
ii. Any structure for the keeping of backyard poultry that is greater than or equal to 200 square feet shall require review in accordance with Section 7.14.2.B or Section 7.14.3.A, as applicable.
g. Waste Management: The storage and management of waste (e.g. a combination of manure and bedding) for backyard poultry shall be in accordance with the Public Health Code, as amended. In no case shall waste be located closer to property lines than the minimum setback requirements for structures and enclosures for the keeping of backyard poultry and shall not exceed 2 cubic yards at any given time.
h. Site Suitability and Impact: In order to minimize potential adverse impacts, the following shall apply:
i. Sites with slopes greater than 15% shall be avoided or improved to avoid heavy surface water runoff, soil erosion, sedimentation or hazardous conditions for keeping backyard poultry.
ii. Structures for the keeping of backyard poultry shall not be permitted directly over land containing an on-site sewage disposal system. Structures and enclosures (such as fenced areas) shall not be permitted directly over wells.
iii. Proper drainage shall be provided to avoid collection of water. Water shall be diverted from poultry keeping areas; however, such water shall not pollute surface or subsurface water supplies nor shall runoff be directed to neighboring properties.
F. Keeping of Bees: (Added 5-23-16, Effective 6-15-16)
a. Minimum Lot Size: The keeping of bees shall be allowed on any property greater than or equal to 30,000 square feet.
b. Setbacks and Permitting Requirements: Beehives shall be a minimum of 10 feet from all property lines or conform to the setback requirements of the underlying zone, whichever is greater and shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any dwelling on abutting properties.
c. Management: An adequate on-site source of water for the bees shall be provided.
7.14.3 Special Permit Uses:
The Commission may approve an application for special permit for the following:
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
A. Agricultural enclosures, buildings, or structures including farm stores and seasonal farm stands when closer than 50 feet from any side or rear property line as long as the setback of the underlying zone is met. (Amended 12-30-13, Effective 1-15-14)
B. Farm Store when a minimum of 3 contiguous acres under single ownership and/or leasehold in any zone and subject to the following standards: (Amended 5-23-16, Effective 6-15-16)
1. At least 20% of gross product sales shall be from farm products produced on the owner’s farm or processed products made from raw materials that were produced on the owner’s farm, and an additional 20% of gross product sales from Connecticut-Grown farm products or products made from raw materials produced from Connecticut-Grown farm products. Farm products produced on land owned by the owner of the farm store separate from the farm store land or processed products made from raw materials on other land owned by the owner of the farm store separate from the farm store land shall be counted towards meeting minimum gross product sales.
2. Adequate off-street parking and safe ingress and egress is provided to ensure public safety. A reasonable parking area not to exceed three square feet for every one square foot of store area (where products are displayed for sale whether inside or outside of a structure), shall be provided. Permeable parking surfaces are recommended.
3. Farm stores may be used to support farmers’ market activities, promote agricultural ideals, and host agricultural related workshops.
4. Farm stores may include kitchen facilities for the preparation and sale of food for consumption on or offsite and shall be subject to approval from the Health Officer and in accordance with applicable federal, state and local codes.
C. Horse Boarding / Riding Arena if it finds that the proposal will conform to the following standards:
1. A minimum of 10 contiguous acres under single ownership and/or leasehold.
2. The use is conducted only by the resident of the premises as an accessory use.
3. The primary and any accessory structures shall not be less than two hundred (200) feet from any street line, side, and rear lot lines.
In considering such special use, the Commission shall weigh the agricultural and rural aspects of the area, as well as the residential or commercial character or potential of the area, and shall find that the granting of such land use shall result in an appropriate use of the land and will not have a detrimental effect on the value or enjoyment of existing residential or other uses in the area. (Amended: 22 December 2006)
Section 7.15 Alternative Energy – Solar (New section approved 12/18/17, Effective 1/15/18)
7.15.1 Purpose - The purpose of this section is to:
A. Enable the use of solar energy systems;
B. Provide opportunities for homeowners and businesses to save on fuel costs;
C. Establish standards to allow the use of solar energy; and
D. Ensure that solar energy systems are safe and compatible with surrounding development.
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
7.15.2 Definitions
A. Fixed Racks: Devices that hold solar modules stationary at a fixed angle and orientation.
B. Solar Array: Shall mean a solar energy collection system that is attached to the roof a building or is a free-standing, ground-mounted system consisting of a linked series of photovoltaic modules primarily for the collection, inversion, storage and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or water heating.
C. Solar Energy Collection System: Shall mean a ground-mounted or roof-mounted solar array.
D. Solar Trackers: Devices that sense the location of the sun and tilt modules as needed to maximize exposure to sunlight.
7.15.3 General
A. All parts of a solar energy collection system shall be maintained in good repair at all times.
B. Any part of solar energy collection system not in good repair shall be fixed or removed and properly discarded.
7.15.4 Roof-Mounted Accessory Use – All Zones
A roof-mounted solar array is a permitted accessory use in all zones on primary and accessory structures without a Zoning Permit and shall comply with the purpose and general requirements of this section and the following:
A. A roof-mounted solar array and any portion thereof shall be located in compliance with minimum yard setbacks and lot coverage requirements applicable to buildings for the zoning district in which located, including Highway Clearance Setback requirements.
B. A roof-mounted solar array and any portion thereof affixed to a pre-existing legal non-conforming structure, as of the effective date of this regulation (January 15, 2018), shall not have to comply with the minimum yard setbacks or building height applicable to the structure for the zoning district in which located.
C. In no case shall a roof-mounted solar array and any portion thereof exceed twelve (12) inches above a roof affixed to a residential structure, or twenty-four (24) inches above a roof affixed to commercial or industrial structures.
7.15.5 Ground-Mounted Accessory Use – Residential Zones or Residence
A ground-mounted solar array is a permitted accessory use in residential zones or when serving a single-family or two-family dwelling in commercial or industrial zones without commission approval when in compliance with the purpose and general requirements of this section and the following:
A. Ground-mounted solar arrays shall require the issuance of a Zoning Permit prior to installation.
B. A ground-mounted solar array and any portion thereof shall be in compliance with the maximum lot coverage requirements for the zoning district in which located.
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
C. A ground-mounted solar array and any portion thereof shall be located beyond the rear foundation wall of the primary structure from the front and side yards and shall be in compliance with the minimum rear yard setback applicable to buildings for the zoning district in which located.
D. A ground-mounted solar array and any portion thereof shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height from natural grade at any point of the array when fixed or twenty (20) feet in height from natural grade at any point of the array when a solar tracker. Trackers are measured when the array is 60 degrees to horizontal.
7.15.6 Ground-Mounted Accessory Use – Commercial or Industrial Zones or adjacent to Residential Zones or Residence
A ground-mounted solar array is a permitted accessory use in commercial or industrial zones without commission approval when not adjacent to a residence or residential zone and in compliance with the purpose and general requirements of this section and the following:
A. Ground-mounted solar arrays shall require the issuance of a Zoning Permit prior to installation.
B. A ground-mounted solar array and any portion thereof shall be in compliance with the maximum lot coverage requirement and minimum yard setbacks applicable to principal buildings for the zoning district in which located, including Highway Clearance Setbacks, and shall not be visible to existing public or private streets or existing easements or right-of-ways used or intended to be used as a public or private street, or a state highway.
C. A ground-mounted solar array and any portion thereof located in commercial or industrial zones shall not exceed twenty five (25) feet in height from natural grade. Trackers are measured when the array is 60 degrees to horizontal.
7.15.7 Ground-Mounted Primary Use and Other – All Zones
A ground-mounted solar array not in compliance with Sections 7.15.5 or 7.15.6 or proposed as a primary uses in all zones may be allowed by approval from the commission by Special Permit and Site Plan Approval pursuant to Section 8.3 Special Permit Standards and Procedures, the purpose and general requirements of this section, and the following:
A. A ground-mounted solar array and any portion thereof shall be located at least 50’ from property lines and shall be in compliance with the maximum lot coverage requirements for the zoning district in which located.
B. A ground-mounted solar array and any portion thereof located in residential zones shall not exceed twenty (20) in height from natural grade at any point of the array and when located in commercial or industrial zones shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height from natural grade at any point of the array. Trackers are measured when the array is 60 degrees to horizontal.
C. A ground-mounted solar array and any portion thereof shall be effectively screened from visibility along all yards and to adjacent properties, regardless if the adjacent property is developed or undeveloped providing the adjacent property is developable land, or to existing public or private streets or existing easements or right-of-ways used or intended to be used as a public or private street, or a state highway. Screening provisions may include earthen berms, plantings, fencing, existing evergreen vegetation and other like features or combinations thereof.
D. All ground-mounted solar arrays shall require the issuance of a Zoning Permit prior to installation.
ARTICLE 7 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
E. A primary solar energy collection system that ceases to operate shall be removed within twelve (12) months of cessation and properly discarded.

ARTICLE 8 SITE PLANS, SPECIAL PERMITS &ZONE CHANGES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
ARTICLE 8 SITE PLANS, SPECIAL PERMITS & ZONE CHANGES
Section 8.1 Zone Change Standards and Procedures
8.1.1 Application for a Zone Change. (Amended: 22 December 2006)
The application for a zone change shall conform to the requirements of the Connecticut General Statutes and shall include the following materials:
1. Application form (Zoning Map amendment and conceptual site plan).
2. Application fee.
3. Owner consents (if not applicant).
4. Parcel deed(s).
5. Class "D" boundary survey indicating the area to be rezoned and showing at least the subject property and all abutting properties owners and APNs within 100 feet of the subject parcel(s), including existing inland wetlands and watercourses, zoning, streets, public facilities, and existing and planned open spaces.
6. Notification to property owners in accordance with Section 9.4.
Section 8.2 Site Development Plan Standards and Procedures
8.2.1 General Requirements
A. A complete site development plan to be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission is required for:
1. Special Permit uses.
2. All business uses.
3. All industrial uses.
4. Other uses as required in these regulations
B. Home occupations not subject to a special permit may be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
C. At the public hearing the applicant shall present written approval of the site plans from the Health Officer.
D. The Commission may hold a public hearing on all petitions for developments requiring site development plans.
E. Applications for Site Plan approval shall include the following:
1. A completed application form signed by the applicant and the owner of the property;
2. A fee in the amount prescribed by the Commission or by ordinance; and
3. Twelve copies of the site plan shall be submitted to the Commission.
ARTICLE 8 SITE PLANS, SPECIAL PERMITS &ZONE CHANGES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
8.2.2 Site Plan Requirements
A. A site plan of development (site plan) shall be complete, showing all design criteria and specifications, and, compliance with all applicable zoning regulations, and information required by the Commission, including plans, maps and documents.
B. The site plan shall be signed and sealed by a professional land surveyor and a professional civil engineer each licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, each where appropriate to their respective areas of expertise, and shall bear appropriate registration stamps. A site plan prepared by an architect will not be accepted.
C. The information required may be shown on one or more pages (aka sheets) and all pages together shall comprise the complete site plan. All drawings shall be at a scale of not less than 1 inch equals 60 feet and where practical, the scale shall be 1 inch equals 40 feet. Site development plans shall be prepared at a scale of 1"=40', or greater, and shall contain all of the information required in this Section. All Site Plan drawings shall be in sufficient detail and accuracy, (generally A-2), to enable the construction of all site improvements shown and approved on the drawings. All public improvements shall be constructed to the standards of the Town’s Subdivision Regulations.
D. Format. Each page shall bear the identical primary title. Each page shall bear a secondary title indicating the subject of that page (i.e. existing grades, final grading plan, erosion control plan, etc.). Each page shall bear the same original date; however, other different revision dates may appear. Each page shall bear a page number using the format: 1 of ___, 2 of ___, 3 of ___, etc. All pages shall be submitted properly collated, on page size not greater than 24" x 36" or less than 11" x 17", with the exception that written reports may be submitted bound or unbound using 8½" x 11" paper. The Commission or its staff may require that the site plan and supporting documentation also be prepared and submitted in electronic versions as specified in the General Regulations.
E. Site Plan Contents: Site Plans shall include the following:
1. Boundary survey of site, Class A-2, scale of 1":40' prepared in accordance with the regulations of the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors.
2. Title Block with name of developer, property owner, north arrow, seals and signatures of all appropriate design professionals;
3. A location map at the scale of 1" to 1000' showing the proposed project location and properties and zoning districts within 1000 feet;
4. Zoning classification of property;
5. Area of lot;
6. Name of abutting owners and zoning classification of their property as well as the footprint locations of existing structures on land adjacent to the proposed development;
7. Existing and proposed topography of the site at 2-foot intervals based on NGVD datum;
8. Existing and proposed sanitary and storm water facilities to include stormwater drainage calculations;
9. Provisions for water supply;
10. Boundary of inland wetlands by a soil scientist certified by the State of Connecticut, where applicable;
11. Location of any area within the Flood Plain District, or a certification by the surveyor or engineer sealing the plan that no area shown on the plan is within the Flood Plain District;
ARTICLE 8 SITE PLANS, SPECIAL PERMITS &ZONE CHANGES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
12. Locations of existing and proposed principal and accessory buildings with dimensions, area, and number of stories and distances between all buildings and property lines;
13. Building plans to assure conformance with these regulations;
14. Recreation and open space areas;
15. Existing and proposed streets, walkways and sidewalks;
16. Driveways, parking and loading areas, including specifications for pavement preparation, and signage and marking, as applicable;
17. Off-site improvements;
18. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan (as required by Section 6.4);
19. Locations and descriptions of all existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way;
20. Landscaping plan with location, size and common name of proposed planting; landscape buffer strips;
21. Location of all exterior lighting to include type of fixture, height and wattage;
22. Sign locations;
23. Where public water exists fire hydrants at specific locations and with the size of requisite mains and laterals as approved by the Fire Marshal using national standards as a guide. The Fire Marshal shall also require a report that demonstrates adequate volumes and pressures. Also, a report shall be required by Police authorities to assure proper traffic control signs. (Amended 2-25-13, Effective 3-15-13)
24. Outside storage areas with proposed screening;
25. Trash disposal areas and proposed screening;
26. In tabular form show in one column the required standards contained in the bulk table or elsewhere in these Regulations and in a second column in line with the standards in the first column the standards proposed for a specific facility;
F. Where development is for industrial use, a statement shall be submitted indicating the product to be manufactured or assembled and evidence that the processes involved will not become a nuisance because of noise, dust, glare, odor, traffic generated or other harmful effects upon the neighborhood.
G. No development shall be approved which is inconsistent with the public welfare, or which impairs the integrity of these regulations, or which does not fully safeguard the appropriate use of the land in the immediate neighborhood.
H. The Commission shall approve, approve with modifications or disapprove such plans of development on the basis of the foregoing requirements and these regulations and the factors outlined in Section 8.3.2.
I. The Commission, upon request of the developer, will review preliminary studies for areas for which a site development plan is required before a formal application for permit is made. Purpose of this informal review would be to acquaint the developer with regulations and to study the plan with relation to the comprehensive plan of development of the Town.
J. Storm Drainage - A professional engineer shall be retained to set all grades on storm drain piping. The engineer shall inspect the installation of drain piping and prepare an as-built plan of the system prior to the building official issuing a certificate of use and occupancy.
ARTICLE 8 SITE PLANS, SPECIAL PERMITS &ZONE CHANGES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
K. Performance and Maintenance Bonds
1. Before a building permit may be issued, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, on behalf of the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall have accepted a cash bond, a bond of a corporate surety company licensed to do business in and having a business in the State of Connecticut, or a letter of credit in an amount and with surety and conditions securing to the Town of Ellington within a time period specified in the bond or letter equal to the actual cost of construction and installation of all public improvements and all landscaping. The estimated cost of construction and installation of said improvements and landscaping shall be prepared by the developer and approved by the Town Engineer.
2. When the developer petitions the Town of Ellington to accept the public improvements, he shall agree to place with the Town a maintenance bond or letter of credit equal to 10% of the original approved estimate of the cost of construction and installation in subparagraph A above. Said bond or letter of credit shall secure to the Town protection against faulty construction for a one year period after the Town acceptance. When the public improvements and landscaping are accepted by the Town, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall release the original bond or letter upon receipt and acceptance of a maintenance bond as set forth herein.
3. All forms of surety shall be subject to the approval of the Town Attorney.
L. Waiver: The Commission may waive the submission of all or part of the information required under this section if it finds that the information is not necessary in order to decide on the application’s conformance with these Regulations.
8.2.3 Approval of Minor Modifications, Commercial Site Plans
Minor changes to commercial site plans may be approved by the Town Planner; however, staff reserves the right to defer any such approval to the PZC.
Section 8.3 Special Permit Standards and Procedures
8.3.1 Special Permit Application
The Commission may issue a Special Permit or may modify an existing Special Permit to allow any of the uses requiring such a permit upon receipt of an application accompanied by a site development plan. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on all such applications and plans.
8.3.2 Standards for Granting Special Permit
In considering a proposed use for which a Special Permit is required and in considering a modification of an existing Special Permit, the Commission shall be guided by the need for the proposed use:
1. The location and size of the proposed structures and intensity of the use in relation to the size of the lot will be in harmony with the orderly development of the area and compatible with other existing uses.
2. The kind, size and height of the structures on the lot will not hinder or discourage the appropriate use of adjoining property or diminish the value thereof.
3. The proposed use will not adversely alter the essential characteristics of the area or adversely affect the property value of the neighborhood.
4. The parking facilities will be adequate and properly located, and the entrance/exit driveways are laid out to achieve maximum safety, and the existing public roadways are adequate in width and condition to handle future traffic.
ARTICLE 8 SITE PLANS, SPECIAL PERMITS &ZONE CHANGES
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
5. The proposed plans provide for the conservation of natural features, drainage basins and the protection of the environment of the area.
6. The physical design elements of the proposed development including road patterns shall be attractive and suitable in relation to the site's characteristics and the style of other buildings and development in the immediate area.
7. The proposed building materials and other design aspects of the building’s architecture, together with proposed landscaping, lighting, and signage, are appropriate with respect to the surrounding neighborhood.
8. The proposed use will not have any detrimental effect on public health, safety, convenience and property values.
9. The proposed use shall have easy accessibility for fire apparatus, ambulances and police vehicles. The Commission may require to have constructed to Town specifications certain thoroughfares in the development for such purposes.
10. There are adequate utilities, including water supply and sewerage disposal, to support the proposed use.

ARTICLE 10 DEFINITIONS &INTERPRETATION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
ARTICLE 9ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS
Section 9.1 Zoning Enforcement Officer
There shall be a Zoning Enforcement Officer designated by the Commission who shall receive applications and issue permits. He shall have the power and authority to enforce the provisions of these regulations.
Section 9.2 Permits, Fees and Penalties
9.2.1 Zoning Permits
A. All changes in uses to include Home Occupations, and all new buildings or structures and modification of existing buildings and structures shall require a zoning permit. Mechanical and electrical modifications to existing structures, as well as modifications to existing structures that do not change the bulk dimensions in any way, shall not require a zoning permit. Plans submitted for new construction and/or for change of use in any zone may be required by the Fire Marshal to include fire hydrants at specific locations and with the size of requisite mains and laterals as approved by the Fire Marshal using national standards or State of Connecticut Department of Public Health standards as guides. The Fire Marshal may also require a report which demonstrates adequate volumes and pressures.
B. All applications for zoning permits shall be accompanied by plans or diagrams showing the following where applicable:
1. Dimensions and area of the lot.
2. Size of the building to be built upon the lot.
3. Location of the building upon the lot.
4. Location of the well and septic tank, or source of water and sewerage if lot is served by public systems.
5. Elevation of road or proposed road.
6. Elevation of first floor.
7. Elevation of the top of foundation in relation to center of road.
8. Such other information as may be required by the Commission of its agent.
9. Grading plan to scale showing dispersal and channeling of all surface water.
C. Any zoning permit which presently exists, or which may hereafter be issued or granted shall expire six months from the date unless substantial construction shall have begun within said time and been diligently pursued to completion by the holder of said permit.
9.2.2 Construction and Occupancy Permit
No building or structure shall be occupied for any purpose until a Certificate of Occupancy has been obtained from the Building Inspector of the Town of Ellington.
9.2.3 Health Officer Approval
No Zoning Permit shall be issued for any use where water and/or sanitary facilities are contemplated until approval of these facilities has been obtained from the Health Officer in accordance with State and Town Health Codes.
ARTICLE 10 DEFINITIONS &INTERPRETATION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Section 9.3 Application Requirements
A. Applications for zone change, subdivision approval, special permit, planned development, and all others which require a hearing and a fee, must be in writing, accompanied by all necessary plans, required data, and antecedent approvals, and when requested by the Commission or the Planning Department, in electronic format. Applications shall be officially received only at a regular meeting of the Commission. (Amended 2-25-13, Effective 3-15-13)
B. All applications as stated above shall be submitted to the Planning Department for official receipt by the Commission during regular business hours of the town.
Section 9.4 Notification
A. The Ellington Planning Department shall cause public notification of any application that requires a public hearing to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town of Ellington. Such legal notice shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days, nor less than ten days, and the last not less than two days before such hearing.
B. In any application for a zone change, regulation amendment, subdivision, re-subdivision, special permit, or any other public hearing, the applicant shall cause notice to be mailed to abutters within 100 feet of the subject parcel(s), ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notification shall include, as a minimum, a copy of the legal notice as provided by the Ellington Planning Department. Proof of mailings shall be submitted prior to the public hearing in the form of a certificate of mailing or certified mail. Failure to complete all necessary mailings shall deem the application incomplete and subject to denial or postponement. (Amended: 22 December 2006)
C. In cases where the Commission is the initiator of any application requiring a public hearing which includes more than 10 properties, the notice requirements of Section 9.4 B shall not apply. (Effective: 15 October 2008)
Section 9.5 Board of Appeals
9.5.1 Authority
There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals whose powers and duties shall be as provided in the General Statutes.
9.5.2 Recording of Variances
No variance granted by the Ellington Zoning Board of Appeals shall become effective until a copy thereof has been filed in the land records of the office of the Town Clerk
9.5.3 Amendments
These regulations may be AMENDED, changed or replaced from time to time in conformity with Section 8-3 of the General Statutes.
9.5.4 Validity
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of these regulations shall be adjudged invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of these regulations as a whole or the remainder thereof.
9.5.5 Notification
The applicant shall cause notice to be mailed to abutters, within 100 feet of the subject parcel(s), ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notification shall include, as a minimum, a copy of the legal notice as provided by the Ellington Planning Department. Proof of mailings shall be submitted prior to the public hearing in the form of a certificate of mailing or certified mail.
ARTICLE 10 DEFINITIONS &INTERPRETATION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Failure to complete all necessary mailings shall deem the application incomplete and subject to denial or postponement. (Amended: 22 December 2006)
Section 9.6 Post Approval Requirements
Following Planning and Zoning Commission approval of a site plan or modification of a site plan, the applicant shall satisfy the requirements of this section where applicable
9.6.1 Preconstruction Meeting. Prior to any construction activity, the applicant shall meet with Town Staff to review the approved plans, conditions of approval, sequence of construction and compliance schedules, and any other post approval obligations.
Site work in the Public Domain can be performed without a bond but is subject to review and inspection by the Department of Public Works and/or the Town Engineer for compliance with the approved plans.
9.6.2 Mylars. In the case of a DMF-Designed Multi-Family Zone, final site plan and special permit approval the applicant shall submit paper check prints of the approved plans reflecting the conditions of approval for review and approval by the Town Engineer prior to submitting mylars. Once approved by the Town Engineer the applicant shall provide two complete mylar sets of the approved plans reflecting all conditions of approval to the Town Planner and/or his/her designee prior to the issuance of the first zoning permit for any building within the development.
9.6.3 Deeds. Applicants are required to provide all executed deeds of easements, hold harmless agreements, and any other legal documents required pursuant to the approved plan. All such documents are subject to the approval of the Town. Easements shall be recorded on the Land Records by the applicant prior to issuance of a zoning permit.
9.6.4 Bonds. The applicant may be required to post bond with security for erosion control prior to the commencement of any site work, in entirety or in phases. No Zoning Permit shall be issued before financial guarantee is posted or the approved site improvements that will be conveyed to or controlled by the Town are completed to the satisfaction of the Commission or its agent. (Amended 2-25-13, Effective 3-15-13)
9.6.4.1 Definition - Bond. A contractual agreement by the Developer or Permittee agreeing to construct all public improvements within the time provided in these regulations and as authorized by the Commission or upon failure to do so to provide a stated amount to be paid to the Town sufficient for the Town to accomplish the construction. The Bond shall be duly executed on forms provided or approved by the Town, with proper references to all maps and plans showing the streets, drainage and other improvements covered by the bond in a penal amount established pursuant to Sec. 9.6.4.3
9.6.4.2 Definition - Security. A financial guarantee from a source recognized by the Town to have available cash equal to the penal sum of the bond it secures.
For the purposes of this section, security shall mean one of the following:
9.6.4.2.1 A Surety Bond from a company licensed to do business in the State of Connecticut accompanied by a power of attorney of the person executing the Bond for the company;
9.6.4.2.2 A Pledge of a passbook, statement savings account or Certificate of Deposit acknowledged by the bank that the account has been pledged to the Town until such time that the Town provides the financial institution with written authorization releasing a portion or all of said funds;
ARTICLE 10 DEFINITIONS &INTERPRETATION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
9.6.4.2.3 An irrevocable letter of credit provided by a bank or other similar reputable financial institution with an office in Connecticut either without an end date or automatically renewed without action by the Town for the duration of the bond;
9.6.4.2.4 Any other form of security satisfactory to the Finance Officer and the Town Attorney; or
9.6.4.2.5 Cash deposited with the Town.
9.6.4.2.6 All such security shall be subject to the approval as to form and content by the Finance Officer and the Town Attorney.
9.6.4.3 Bond Calculation and Approval. The developer or permittee may prepare a detailed breakdown of improvements to be bonded and shall submit the breakdown to the Town Engineer for review and approval. The amount of the bond shall be recommended by the Town Engineer using prices that would be the cost to the Town to complete the improvements or the implementation of such erosion controls plus a contingency amount not to exceed ten percent of such costs considering that the Town will not perform the work until the applicant has been given ample time to complete the work. Upon consideration of the recommendation, the Commission shall set the bond amount.
9.6.4.4 Failure to Complete Improvements. Where a Bond has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the provisions of these regulations and as may have been extended by the PZC, the PZC may declare the Bond to be in default, demand the entire amount of the bond be deposited with the Finance Officer and cause all the improvements to be installed through contractors engaged by the Director of Public Works and paid from the bond deposit. Upon completion of the installation of all improvements required by the approved plans, any excess in the bond deposit shall be returned to the surety.
9.6.4.5 Reduction or Release of Bonds. The Developer may file a written request for reduction of the bond with the Town Planner that states the work that has been completed justifying the reduction. The Town Planner shall immediately refer the request to the Town Engineer who shall inspect the work and file a report with the PZC so that the PZC can act upon the request within 65 days of the request. The PZC may reduce the security in such amount as it determines appropriate or deny any reduction. Any such action will be delivered by the Town Planner to the Finance Officer on the 7th business day following PZC action to reduce a bond and the FO shall record the reduction on his records and advise the Developer and surety of the reduction.
Should the Town Engineer find that additional work is necessary to complete the work described in the request, he will describe such additional requirements in his report and adjust any recommended reduction accordingly. A copy of the report will be provided to the applicant within that 65 day time frame and an additional request for reduction/release will be required. Under the Designed Multi-Family regulations no more than 85% of the total project bond shall be released prior to issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance for the last unit.
(Section 9.6 added Effective 2/15/2012, to formalize post approval procedures and to address changes to State Statute to comply with Public Act 11-79
ARTICLE 10 DEFINITIONS &INTERPRETATION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
ARTICLE 10 DEFINITIONS & INTERPRETATION
Section 10.1 INTERPRETATION
Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in these regulations shall carry their customary meanings. Words used in the present tense include the future, and the plural includes the singular; the word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" is considered to be mandatory; "used" or "occupied" shall be considered as though followed by the words "or intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied".
Section 10.2 DEFINITIONS
Accessory Apartment. A subordinate dwelling unit that is intended for use as a complete, independent living facility located in a residence constructed as, and having the character of, a single-family residence, which subordinate dwelling unit does not substantially alter the character and appearance of the residential structure or its conformity with the character of the neighborhood.
Accessory Building or Use. A building or use subordinate to and on the same lot with a principal building or use.
Agriculture. The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, the growing of crops, raising of livestock, and the storing, processing and sale of agricultural and horticultural products and commodities, including those defined in Connecticut General Statute Section 1-1q, as incidental to agricultural operations. (Amended: 12-15-2010)
Agricultural Buildings and Structures. Buildings, structures and portions thereof, used in connection with agriculture, including shelter for livestock and storage for farm machinery, equipment and supplies; excludes farm stores and seasonal farm stands. (Added 11-22-2010, Effective 12-15-2010)
Agriculturally Related Uses. Events of limited duration on a farm that are incidental to agricultural uses, including events such as corn mazes, pick-your-own, harvest festivals, educational demonstrations, hay rides, petting zoos, or other uses. (Added 11-22-2010, Effective 12-15-2010)
Amusement Enterprise. Includes arena, bowling, dance hall, pool, skating rink.
Apartment House, Garden Apartment, Multi-Family Dwelling. A building used by three or more families living independently of each other.
Antenna. A device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves. Examples include, but are not limited to whip antennas, panel antennas and dish antennas.
Basement. A story partly underground, but having less than half of its clear height below finished grade.
Billboard. A paper, plastic or similar material sign which is posted or otherwise fastened to a surface, the purpose of which is to advertise.
Board. The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Ellington.
Boarding House, Rooming House. The renting of rooms by not more than three unrelated persons, provided that the homeowner permanently reside in the home and no interior or exterior structural changes to the building be made outside of those necessary for ADA requirements or as provided for in the Accessory Apartment section of these regulations. This definition shall not extend to any residential occupancy within a two-family or multi-family configuration where such boarding/rooming use is prohibited. (Modified 7-15-11)
ARTICLE 10 DEFINITIONS &INTERPRETATION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Brewery. A facility used for manufacturing, bottling and storage of beer and beer products, including tastings, tours, and wholesale and retail sale of sealed bottles or other sealed containers of beer produced on the premises for offsite consumption.
Brew Pub. A facility that operates in conjunction with a brewery and includes retail sale of beer produced on site for consumption on the premises with or without the sale of food or entertainment.
Building. An independent structure having a roof supported by walls or columns and resting on its own foundation. It includes sheds, garages, stables, etc., but does not include trailers.
Building, Height of is the vertical distance measured from the average level of the ground along all walls of the building to the highest point of the roof. Chimneys, spires, masts, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar projections shall not have an aggregate greater than 25 per cent of the roof area. In any single-family detached residence, 25 percent of the perimeter of the structure may consist of a walk out basement or above grade basement wall which, if it does not exceed 9’0” in height, will not be included in the building height measurement.
Building Setback Line. The line established in these regulations as the minimum distance from the property line to the nearest point of the building. (Amended: 15 June 2008)
Business. Customary commercial pursuits and transactions.
Certificate of Zoning Compliance. A certificate issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer stating that work done under the Zoning Permit complies with the plans authorized.
Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate issued by the Building Official stating that work done under the Building Permit complies with the plans authorized, and that the building may be occupied.
Club or Lodge. An organization of persons incorporated pursuant to the provisions of the membership corporations law or the benevolent orders laws, which is the owner, lessee or occupant of an establishment operated solely for a recreational, social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain and includes the establishment so operated.
Co-Location. The locating wireless communication facilities from more than one provider or source on a single antenna tower.
Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of Ellington, Connecticut.
Communication Tower - A structure that is intended to support equipment used to receive and/or transmit electromagnetic waves. Design examples of towers include: self-supporting lattice, guyed and monopole.
Communication Tower, Height of. The vertical distance measured in feet from the average ground elevation of antenna tower to the topmost point of the tower including any antenna or other appurtenances.
Composting Facility. A site at which materials capable of being composted are collected separated, processed, recovered, or otherwise made capable of reuse or use in a different form. Such materials may also be sold at such site. This definition is intended to be limited to the composting of organic materials.
Connecticut Grown Products. Produce and other farm products that have a traceable point of origin within Connecticut. (Added 5-23-16, Effective 6-15-16)
Convalescent, Nursing Hospital. A dwelling in which two or more persons, other than members of the family of the person owning or renting said dwelling, and who suffer from abnormal physical conditions or the infirmities of old age, are provided with lodging.
Cultural, Educational Center. A building having the character of a single-family home but possessing unique architectural, historical, or other features in its design, use, or natural condition such that it offers the general community an opportunity for unusual cultural and educational experiences otherwise not
ARTICLE 10 DEFINITIONS &INTERPRETATION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
available. The Commission reserves the right to determine what constitutes a Cultural, Educational Center under the Special Permit Requirements. (Added 4-15-08)
Dwelling. A building (or portion thereof) used for human habitation.
Dwelling, One-Family. A building designed for and occupied as a home or residence for not more than one family.
Dwelling, Two-Family. A building designed for and occupied as a home or residence for two families.
Dwelling, Multi-Family. Any building or group of buildings erected or used under one ownership or corporate ownership and designed and intended to be occupied by three or more families living independently of each other.
Family. One or more persons living together as a single, housekeeping unit.
Farm. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land of 3or more acres under single ownership and/or leasehold and used for agriculture. (Amended 12-15-2010)
Farm Products. Any fresh fruits, vegetables, mushrooms, nuts, shell eggs, honey or other bee products, maple syrup or maple sugar, flowers, nursery stock and other horticultural commodities, livestock food products, including meat, milk, cheese and other dairy products, food products of aquaculture, as defined in subsection (q) of section 1-1, including fish, oysters, clams, mussels and other molluscan shellfish taken from the waters of the state or tidal wetlands, or products from any tree, vine or plant and their flowers, or products made from raw materials that have been processed with Connecticut-Grown products, including, but not limited to, baked goods. (Added 5-23-16, Effective 6-15-16)
Farm Store. A permanent structure used by a farm for the year-round sale of raw and/or processed agricultural and horticultural products, services and activities. (Added 11-22-2010, Effective 12-15-2010)
Flea Market. An occasional or periodic sales activity held within a building, structure, or open area where groups of individual sellers offer goods, new and used for sale to the public, not to include private garage or tag sales.
Floor Area. That area which has a minimum headroom of seven feet when measured vertically upward from a finished floor; but in the area next below the roof, such space shall be counted only if it is connected with the floor below by a permanent, fixed inside stairway. Basement rooms, garages or any other form of attached structure, cellars, rooms for heating equipment, and open or enclosed porches shall not be included.
Garage, Private. An accessory building or structure, attached or not to the main building for the storage of vehicles.
Garage, Public. A building other than a private or community garage used for maintenance, repair and storage of motor vehicles as well as sale, lease and hire of vehicles and equipment.
Highway Line. The boundary line of the right of way between that land owned by the Town or State and the private property in question.
Home Occupation. Any product-based or service-based commercial or industrial use conducted within a dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof.
Hotel. A building designed as a temporary abiding place for more than 10 persons or having 6 or more sleeping rooms in which lodging with or without meals is provided.
Impervious Surface. Any material which increases surface runoff, reduces infiltration of water, and increases the volume of stormwater runoff, including but not limited to: buildings; parking areas and driveways regardless of surface material; all walkways regardless of surface material; all equipment pads and platforms, etc. (Added: 7-15-07)
ARTICLE 10 DEFINITIONS &INTERPRETATION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Industrial Park, Buildings. An area in which one or more industries form a unit and for which a plan of development of the site is required.
Industry. Manufacturing, fabricating, assembling, finishing, packaging, processing or research and development.
Junk. Any article or material or collection thereof which is worn out, cast off or discarded and which is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion. Two or more unregistered, inoperative automobiles stored outdoors.
Junk Yard. The use of any area, whether inside or outside of a building, for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, or scrap or discarded materials, or the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
Kennel. A building or buildings of more than 200 cubic feet total volume for the keeping or breeding of dogs or other permitted small animals.
Licensed Medical Marijuana Dispensary. A place of business where medical marijuana may be dispensed or sold to qualifying patients and primary caregivers by a pharmacist licensed in Connecticut on premises for which the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection has issued a dispensary license under Public Act 12-155 and Sections 21a-408 to 21a-408q of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Licensed Medical Marijuana Producer. A person or organization that is licensed by the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection whose purpose is to cultivate marijuana exclusively for medicinal use, including selling, delivering, transporting or distributing medical marijuana, but only to licensed dispensaries under Public Act 12-155 and Sections 21a-408 to 21a-408q of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Licensed Medical Marijuana Production Facility. A secure, indoor facility where the production of marijuana occurs exclusively for medicinal use and that is operated by a medical marijuana producer licensed by the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection under Public Act 12-155 and Sections 21a-408 to 21a-408q of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Livable Area. Any permanent, soundly constructed enclosed portion of a dwelling with a height from floor to ceiling of 7 feet or more, excluding cellar, basement, porch, garage, utility room, furnace room, outside vestibules, etc., or areas in accessory buildings. In multi-family dwellings, common stairways and common halls are not considered livable area. Any area above the first floor not accessible by a fixed, permanent stairway shall not be considered as livable area.
Lot. A parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied by a building or buildings and accessory buildings or uses. It includes the open spaces required herein and such open spaces as are also used in connection with the building.
Lot, Area. The contiguous area contained within the property lines of the lot. (Added: 7-15-11)
Lot, Corner. A parcel of land at the junction of and fronting on two or more intersecting streets.
Lot, Coverage. That percentage of the lot area that is covered by the building footprint and all other impervious surfaces on the lot.
Lot, Developable Area. The lot area of land being developed excluding any area classified as inland wetlands, watercourses, 100-year floodplain, or having slopes in excess of 25 percent.
(Added: 7-15-11)
Lot, Through. A lot abutting more than one public street where front yard setback requirements shall be maintained on all street frontages. (Added: 15 June 2008)
Lot, Width. The width of a lot taken at the street line, except in the case of a “pie-lot” or rear lot.
ARTICLE 10 DEFINITIONS &INTERPRETATION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Manufacture & Assembly from Prepared Material. Includes Boxes, Ladders, Staging, Toys, Stationery, Novelties, Paper Products, Toilet Preparations, Drugs, Perfumes, Flavoring Extracts, Medical and Hygienic Appliances, Textiles, Hats, Leather & Sporting Goods, Mattresses, Store and Office Equipment; Signs, House, Theater and Playground Equipment; Musical Instruments, Art Goods, Industrial Models, Tools, Appliances and Electrical Goods.
Metal Fabrication, Heavy. Includes Forging, Casting, Rolling Structural Iron and Steel, Wire Products, Rod Drawings, Steel Doors, Sash, Pipes and Boilers
Metal Fabrication, Light. Includes Sheet Metal, Ducts, Gutters, Leaders
Motel. A building or group of buildings containing one or more guest rooms for transient guests, and includes Motor Court, Motor Hotel, and Tourist Cabins.
Net Floor Area. Net floor area shall mean the floor area used, designed or intended to be used for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients, patients or members, including those areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for the display and/or sale of merchandise. In the case of residential dwelling units, net floor area shall mean that area used as living space. Net floor area shall not include areas used principally for non-public purposes such as storage and incidental repair, for rest rooms, for utilities or for required stairways or elevators.
Nonconforming Building or Use. One which legally existed before the adoption of zoning and does not conform to these Zoning Regulations.
Parking, Commercial. Parking for the use of employees, customers or visitors of any non-residential activity when not located on the same lot as the activity it serves, including the parking of up to 3 commercial vehicles.
Parking, Off Street. Space occupied by automobiles on premises other than streets.
Parking Lot. An area used for the parking of more than 3 cars or other vehicles, whether or not for a fee.
Parking, Private. Accessory parking, including parking for more than one commercial vehicle, for vehicles of over 2 ton capacity, or of more than one vehicle for hire.
Performance Bond or Bond. Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the Commission.
Permit. A permit shall mean any special permit issued in accordance with these regulations or zoning permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer in accordance with this regulation.
Personal Services Shops: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision services of a personal nature. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, beauty and barber shops, shoe repair shops, and tailor shops.
Planned Commercial. An area in which one or more businesses form a unit and for which a plan of development of the site is required.
Pool, Swimming. A structure of relatively impervious material intended for bathing or swimming purposes, located either indoors or outdoors and provided with a controlled water supply. Plan and permit required.
Quarry. An open excavation or an area for excavation of sand, gravel, stone, peat or other earth products.
Rear Lot. Any lot which does not contain the required lot width at the street line or setback line on an accepted town road or state highway, or private street used for travel otherwise approved by the Commission as part of a subdivision approved after July 1999. .
Recreation, Commercial. Recreation offered to the public for a fee.
ARTICLE 10 DEFINITIONS &INTERPRETATION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Refuse. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes including garbage, rubbish, ashes and solid commercial and industrial wastes, but excluding human and animal intestinal wastes and dead animals. Ashes or incinerator residue containing unburned material shall be considered refuse.
Retail Business. Premises used for the retail sale of goods for personal or household uses, with storage or processing occupying not more than 50% of the gross floor area, and also premises used for personal, business or household services.
Riding Academy, Stable. A building and land in which horses, ponies and similar equestrian animals may be kept for remuneration, hire or sale together with accessory uses such as riding rings, indoors or outdoors, and tack shop.
Sanitary Land Fill Area, Dump, Refuse Disposal area. Land used for the depositing of refuse. (See Refuse)
Seasonal Farm Stand. A structure used by a farm for the temporary, seasonal sale of raw and/or processed agricultural and horticultural products, services and activities. (Added 11-22-2010, Effective 12-15-2010)
Sign. Any natural or artificial structure, device, light, material, or object which shall use any letter, word, number, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, logo, device, to attract attention to identify, advertise, announce, or represent any object, project, place, activity, person, institution, organization, firm, group, commodity, enterprise, business, or industry and which is intended to be seen from a public street.
Sign –Agricultural. A permanent free-standing or attached sign on a farm or farm stand that is associated with an agriculturally related use. (Added 11-22-2010, Effective 12-15-2010)
Sign –Agricultural Directional. A permanent directional sign approved by the State Department of Agriculture. (Added 11-22-2010, Effective 12-15-2010)
Sign, Detached. A sign supported by one or more supports placed in or upon the ground.
Sign, Off-Premises. Sign located on property other than the place where the product or service advertised is performed or offered for sale.
Slaughtering, Commercial. The slaughtering of animals for other than home use by the owner.
Street. An existing public town street used for travel, a proposed public or private street used for travel and approved by the Commission as part of a subdivision plan, or state highway.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground, or anything attached to something having a location on the ground. Includes private greenhouse, sheds, carports, swimming pools, shelters, garden houses and similar structures, but excludes signs. (Amended 1-27-14, Effective 2-15-14)
Theater, Drive-in. An open lot or part thereof with its appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the showing of moving pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis, to patrons in automobiles or on outdoor seats. Includes accessory structures such as ticket booths, projection booth, screen, retail sale of food products, toilet facilities and playground space.
Trailer, Boat. A device which may be attached to a vehicle for use in transporting a boat. Includes the boat. (Amended 1-25-10, Eff. 2-15-10)
Trailer, Camp(er) or Travel. A unit which is designed to ordinarily provide temporary sleeping or living quarters for travel, camping or recreational purposes including, but not limited to, a recreational vehicle, a collapsible tent trailer, or motor home, but excluding mobile homes. (Amended 1-25-10, Eff. 2-15-10)
Trailer, Construction. A unit which is designed to ordinarily provide temporary working quarters during active construction, alteration or repair. (Added 1-25-10, Eff. 2-15-10)
ARTICLE 10 DEFINITIONS &INTERPRETATION
Ellington Zoning Regulations Amended 2-25-2019, Effective 3-15-2019
Trailer, Livestock. A unit which may be attached to a vehicle for transporting livestock. (Amended 1-25-10, Eff. 2-15-10)
Trailer, Utility or Box. A unit which may be attached to a vehicle for transporting goods, materials or equipment, whether or not permanently affixed to the bed of a trailer. (Amended 1-25-10, Eff. 2-15-10)
Use District. An area zoned for particular uses.
Yard. An unoccupied space, open to the sky on the same lot with the building or structure.
Yard, Front. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the front line of the building or structure projected to the side line of the lot.
Yard, Rear. An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied except as hereinafter permitted, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building or structure projected to the side of the lot.
Yard, Side. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, situated between the building or structure and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line.
Zoning Permit. A permit required under these regulations issued by the Zoning Officer which allows construction to begin.

SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
for the
TOWN OF ELLINGTON, CONNECTICUT
FIRST ADOPTED DECEMBER, 1954
AMENDED THROUGH MARCH 15, 2013
ELLINGTON SUDIVISION REGULATIONS
LIST OF AMENDMENTS
Appendix A, Section A.07 - Digital Submission Requirements
Section removed pursuant to Declaratory Ruling dated March 1, 2010
Amended 6-28-2010, Effective 7-15-2010
Section 4.17: Open Space – Reduced open space exaction from minimum 20% to 10% in exchange for
the new density-based residential zoning regulations
Amended 6-27-2011, Effective 7-15-2011
Section 4.11: Water – Removed requirement of public water supply on lots less than 40,000 square feet
in order to remove obstacle to new density-based residential zoning regulations and add easement ability
to the non-contamination radius in Private Wells.
Amended 6-27-2011, Effective 7-15-2011
Section 2.04: Application Requirements – Removed Fee Language and brought Wetlands Clearance in
line with State Statute
Amended 6-27-2011, Effective 7-15-2011
Section 1.02: Definitions – Repeal “bond” definition and replace with definition in Section 3.01 to
formalize post approval process currently administered “in house” and address changes to State Statute
necessary to comply with Public Act 11-79.
Amended 1-30-2012, Effective 2-15-2012
Section 3.01: Bond; Section: 3.02 Failure to Complete Improvements; Section 3.03: Partial Release;
Section 3.04: Final Release and Section 3.05: Maintenance of Improvements – Repealed and replaced
with new Sections 3.01 through 3.07 to formalize post approval process currently administered “in
house” and address changes to State Statute necessary to comply with Public Act 11-79.
Amended 1-30-2012, Effective 2-15-2012
Section 4.11: Ownership of Detention Facilities and 4.12: Drainage/Detention Design added and existing
subsequent section renumerated to detail options for ownership of drainage basins and define
maintenance responsibilities.
Amended 1-30-2012, Effective 2-15-2012
Multiple Sections regarding fire hydrants and bonding
Section 4.11: Ownership of Detention Facilities – Repealed in its entirety.
Amended 2-25-13, Effective 3-15-2013
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. GENERAL PROVISIONS ......................................................................................................... 1
1.01 AUTHORITY ........................................................................................................ 1
1.02 DEFINITIONS ....................................................................................................... 3
1.03 PURPOSES ............................................................................................................ 5
1.04 JURISDICTION ..................................................................................................... 6
1.05 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT, AND SEPARABILITY ................................. 6
1.06 AMENDMENTS ................................................................................................... 6
1.07 CONDITIONS ....................................................................................................... 6
1.08 PENALTIES .......................................................................................................... 6
1.09 SELF-IMPOSED RESTRICTIONS ...................................................................... 7
1.10 PLATS STRADDLING MUNICIPAL BOUNDARIES ....................................... 7
1.11 CHARACTER OF THE LAND ............................................................................ 7
1.12 WAIVER ................................................................................................................ 7
1.13 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ..................................................... 8
1.14 EFFECTIVE DATE ............................................................................................... 8
II. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS ......................................................................................... 9
2.01 INFORMAL CONSIDERATION .......................................................................... 9
2.02 PUBLIC HEARINGS ............................................................................................ 9
2.03 SUBMISSION ....................................................................................................... 9
2.04 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS ...................................................................... 9
2.05 CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED SUBDIVISION .........................................11
2.06 FILING AND RECORDING .................................................................................12
III. ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS ........15
3.01 BONDS AND SECURITY ....................................................................................15
3.02 BOND CALCULATION AND APPROVAL .......................................................16
3.03 FAILURE TO COMPLETE IMPROVEMENTS ..................................................16
3.04 PARTIAL RELEASE - REDUCTION OF BONDS .............................................16
3.05 FINAL RELEASE .................................................................................................16
3.06 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS ............................................................17
3.07 WARRANTY OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS ...................................................17
IV. DESIGN STANDARDS ..........................................................................................................18
4.01 GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS ............................................................................18
4.02 LOT IMPROVEMENTS AND ACCESS ..............................................................19
4.03 LOT DIMENSIONS ..............................................................................................20
4.04 SOLAR ACCESS ..................................................................................................20
4.05 STREET - GENERAL ...........................................................................................21
4.06 CUL-DE-SAC OR DEAD END ............................................................................23
4.07 DESIGN STANDARDS ........................................................................................23
4.08 INTERSECTIONS .................................................................................................25
4.09 DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS .................................................................25
4.10 DRAINAGE DESIGN ...........................................................................................27
4.11 DRAINAGE/DETENTION DESIGN ....................................................................28
4.12 WATER .................................................................................................................28
4.13 SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES .....................................................................29
4.14 SIDEWALKS .........................................................................................................29
4.15 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN .......................................29
4.16 UTILITIES .............................................................................................................29
4.17 PRIVATE STREETS .............................................................................................30
4.18 OPEN SPACE ........................................................................................................31
4.19 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS ..........................................................................36
APPENDIX A
ADMINISTRATIVE SPECIFICATIONS: STANDARDS FOR MAPS AND PLANS ...............39
A.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS .............................................................................39
A.02 SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN .............................................................................40
A.03 CONSTRUCTION PLANS ...................................................................................41
A.04 GRADING PLAN ..................................................................................................41
A.05 RECORD SUBDIVISION MAP ...........................................................................42
A.06 APPROVED MAPS ..............................................................................................44
APPENDIX B
ADMINISTRATIVE SPECIFICATIONS: SANITARY REPORT FOR ONSITE SEWAR
DISPOSAL SYSTEMS......................................................................................................45
B.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS .............................................................................45
B.02 TEST RESULTS AND ENGINEERING EVALUATION ...................................45
APPENDIX C
TOWN OF ELLINGTON HIGHWAY SPECIFICATIONS .........................................................47
C.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS .............................................................................47
C.2 MATERIALS .........................................................................................................47
C.3 CONSTRUCTION .................................................................................................48
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 1
I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.01 AUTHORITY - The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Ellington,
Connecticut, in exercise of its power as authorized by the Connecticut General Statutes,
hereby adopts these Regulations which shall hereafter be known, cited, and referred to as
the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Ellington.
These Regulations supersede Regulations previously in effect.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 2
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 3
1.02 DEFINITIONS - For the purpose of these Regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations,
terms, and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this
section.
Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense
include the future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; the word
"herein" means "in these Regulations"; the word "Regulations" means "these
Regulations". A "person" includes a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated
association of persons such as a club; "shall" is always mandatory; a "building" includes a
"structure"; a building or "structure" includes any part thereof; "used" or "occupied" as
applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended,
arranged, or designed to be used or occupied".
Words and Terms shall be defined as follows:
Administrative Specification - Details as to the form and content of maps, plans,
designs, legal instruments, reports, calculations, and other data required to ensure
compliance with there Regulations.
Agricultural Purposes - The raising of crops and/or the keeping of livestock and poultry
on a farm.
Applicant - The owner of the land proposed to be subdivided, or his representative.
Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises when the Applicant is
other than the owner.
Base Flood - A flood having a frequency of occurring once every 100 years.
Commission - The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Ellington.
Developer - The owner of land proposed to be subdivided, or his representative. Consent
shall be required from the legal owner of the premises when the applicant is other than
the owner.
Dwelling, Seasonal - A dwelling lived in or used for a period extending from June 1st to
November 1st and which may be lived in or used between November 1st and June 1st for
a total of not more than thirty (30) days.
Farm - An area devoted to farm uses for gain or expectation of gain, in the raising of
agricultural products, livestock, and/or poultry, and/or the production of dairy products.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 4
Lot, Plot, Parcel - A plot or parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one
principal building determining the land use form and the accessory buildings, structures,
or uses customarily incident to it, including such open spaces as are required by the
Zoning Regulations. A piece of land saleable as a unit.
Reserve Strip - A privately owned strip of land which controls access to land dedicated,
or to be dedicated, to public use.
Resubdivision - A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision or
resubdivision if such change
(a) Affects any street layout shown on such map;
(b) Affects any area reserved thereon for public use; or
(c) Diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional
building lot, if any of the lots thereon have been conveyed after the
approval or recording of such map.
Street - Any street, avenue, lane or any right of way dedicated or used for purposes of
vehicular traffic.
Subdivision - The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more parts or lots
made subsequent to December 1, 1954, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
sale or building development expressly excluding development for municipal,
conservation, or agricultural purposes, and including resubdivision.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 5
1.03 PURPOSES - These Regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
i. To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
Town of Ellington.
ii. To guide the future growth and development of the Town of Ellington in
accordance with the Plan of Development:
iii. To provide for light, air, privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood, and other
danger; and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of
population:
iv. To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and
efficient transportation, water, sanitary facilities, schools, parks, and other public
requirements and facilities:
v. To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings
and the circulation of traffic throughout the community, so that proposed street
shall be in harmony with existing or proposed streets, especially in regard to safe
intersections and be so arranged and of such width as to provide an adequate and
convenient system for present and prospective traffic needs:
vi. To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and
resubdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use of land: and to ensure
proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land:
vii. To ensure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to
serve the proposed subdivision:
viii. To assure the adequacy of drainage facilities: to safeguard to groundwater quality:
and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout
the community in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the
community and the value of the land.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 6
1.04 JURISDICTION - These Regulations shall apply to the subdivision and resubdivision of
land herein defined, located within the corporate limits of the Town of Ellington.
No subdivision or resubdivision of land shall be made by any person, firm or corporation
until an application for such subdivision or resubdivision has been submitted to and
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and a map thereof has been endorsed
by the Commission and filed by the applicant in the Office of the Ellington Town Clerk.
Before any construction, grading or other activities for the purpose of Residential,
Industrial or Commercial Development begins, there shall be a Plan of Development filed
with the Planning and Zoning Commission.
1.05 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT, AND SEPARABILITY
Interpretation - In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these
Regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
Conflict - These Regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or provision of law. Where any provisions of
these Regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other
provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards
shall control.
Separability - If any part or provision of these Regulations or application thereof to any
person or circumstance is adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
judgment shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these Regulations or
the application thereof to other persons or circumstances.
1.06 AMENDMENTS - For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety and general
welfare, the Commission may from time to time amend these Regulations in accordance
with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes.
1.07 CONDITIONS - Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable
conditions is a valid exercise of police power delegated by the State to the municipality.
The developer has the duty to comply with reasonable conditions imposed by the
Commission to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
1.08 PENALTIES - Any person, firm, or corporation making any subdivision or resubdivision
of land without the approval of the Commission shall be subject to penalties in
accordance with the General Statutes of Connecticut.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 7
1.09 SELF-IMPOSED RESTRICTIONS - If the owner places restrictions on any of the land
contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the Zoning Regulations, or
these Regulations, such restrictions or reference thereto shall be indicated on the
subdivision map.
1.10 PLATS STRADDLING MUNICIPAL BOUNDARIES - Whenever access to the
subdivision is required across land located in another municipality, the Commission may
request assurance that the access is legally established, and that the access road is
adequately improved, or that a performance bond has been duly executed and is sufficient
in amount to assure the construction of the access road. In general, lot lines should be
laid out so as not to cross municipal boundary lines.
1.11 CHARACTER OF THE LAND - Land which the Commission finds to be unsuitable
for subdivision or development, due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock
formation, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features
which will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the present
or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be
subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and
approved by the Commission to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land
conditions.
1.12 WAIVER - The requirements of these Regulations may be waived by three-quarters vote
of the Commission when it is demonstrated that strict compliance with such regulations
will cause an exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship. The Commission shall not grant
a waiver unless it finds the following conditions are met:
i. The property for which the waiver is sought is uniquely affected by these
Regulations:
ii. Physical features of the property or its location cause exceptional difficulty or
unusual hardship in meeting the requirements of these Regulations:
iii. The granting of a waiver will not have a significantly adverse effect upon adjacent
property or the public health and safety:
iv. The granting of a waiver will not be in conflict with the Plan of Development:
v. Where it is proposed to vary any engineering standard contained in these
Regulations, a favorable report from the Town Engineer has been received.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 8
Waiver Request - A request for waiver shall be submitted in writing by the applicant at
the time application for subdivision approval is made. The request shall detail the extent
of the waiver requested and contain sufficient data for the Commission to make the
finding required above. Late filing may be permitted at the discretion of the Commission.
1.13 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT - The Office of the Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall be responsible for the administration of these Regulations. Enforcement of
these regulations shall be by the Commission or its duly authorized representative.
1.14 EFFECTIVE DATE - The effective date of these Regulations shall be October 17, 1986.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 9
II
APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
AND PROCEDURE
2.01 INFORMAL CONSIDERATION - Prior to submission of a formal application for
approval of a subdivision or resubdivision, the applicant may prepare an informal plan of
the subdivision or resubdivision for informal review by the Commission. If the plan is
presented in preliminary rather than final form, any alterations or changes recommended
by the Commission may be made more readily and economically by the applicant.
Neither the informal plan nor the informal review by the Commission, however, shall be
deemed to constitute any portion of the official and formal procedure of applying for and
approving subdivisions or resubdivisions under the provisions of Chapter 126 of the
General Statutes of Connecticut.
Informal Plan - The informal plan should show sufficient information to allow the
Commission to make a general planning review under the standards of these Regulations.
It is recommended that the informal plan meet the standards for a Site Development
Plan.
Review - When an informal plan is submitted, the Commission may hold a discussion
with the applicant and may recommend any changes or improvements in the plan in order
to guide the applicant in preparing maps and plans for formal application.
2.02 PUBLIC HEARINGS - Public hearings shall be held on all subdivision and
resubdivision applications.
2.03 SUBMISSION - All applications, maps, plans, documents, and data required by these
Regulations shall be submitted to the Planning Department in writing, and when
requested by the Commission or the Planning Department in electronic format. The date
of receipt of such applications shall be determined in accordance with the General Statues
of Connecticut. (Updated, March 15, 2013)
2.04 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS - In order to make formal application for approval
of a subdivision or resubdivision, the application shall submit the following:
Application - Application for approval of a subdivision or resubdivision shall be made in
writing on forms prescribed by the Commission. The application shall be signed by the
applicant or his lawful agent; and, if the subdivision or resubdivision is proposed by a
person, firm or corporation other than the owner of the land to be subdivided or
resubdivided, the application shall also be signed by the owner of the land or his lawful
agent. Fees shall be as prescribed in this section. Applications shall be submitted not
less than 15 days prior to the next scheduled meeting. (Amended: 14 April 1997)
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 10
Wetlands Clearance – All applications for Subdivisions shall be submitted with
documentation that demonstrates that either, the site is completely free of all wetlands
subsequent to an Inland Wetlands Referral, or that an application has already been made
to the Ellington Inland Wetlands Agency for the proposed subdivision and any
improvements associated with the proposed subdivision. No subdivision application will
be complete without application or referral to the Ellington Inland Wetlands Agency.
Record Subdivision Map - A record subdivision or resubdivision map shall be
submitted with the application and shall conform to all of the appropriate requirements of
the administrative specifications appended to and made part of these Regulations.
Sanitation Report - Every application for approval of a subdivision must include
satisfactory evidence that the site has suitable physical characteristics to adequately
satisfy all the current requirements of both the Town, the Connecticut State Department
of Health, Department of Environmental Protection, North Central District Health
Department or other regulatory agency for subsurface sewage disposal, or that the
proposed lots can be connected to an operational public sanitary sewer. The sanitary
report for on site systems shall be prepared by a professional engineer and meet the
requirements of the administrative specifications. When it is proposed to connect to
public sanitary sewers, a sewer feasibility study, as required by the Town Engineer, shall
accompany the subdivision application and the approval of the Water Pollution Control
Authority is required before the Public Hearing on the Application.
Additional Data - The following data shall be provided as appropriate, and when, in the
judgment of the Commission, the scale, scope of work and complexity of the subdivision
warrant.
1. Construction Plans - Plan and profile drawings and typical cross sections,
including the design of sanitary sewers, catch basins, manholes, ditches,
watercourses, headwalls, sidewalks, gutters, curbs, bridges, culverts, and
other structures and improvements required by these Regulations.
2. Site Development Plan - A site development plan shall conform to all the
requirements of the administrative specifications.
3. Grading Plan - A grading plan showing existing and proposed grades and
other data as required by the administrative specifications.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 11
4. Hydrological Report - Design of the storm drainage system to include
special structures, shall be supported by a hydrological report prepared by
a civil engineer licensed as a P.E. in the State of Connecticut. This report
shall, at the minimum, include a copy of the base map used to determine
watershed and drainage patterns, and the methodology used to compute
runoff and pipe sizes.
5. Easements and Deeds - Copies of all easements and deeds necessary to
carry the subdivision plan into effect, including instruments proposed to be
executed or delivered after approval of the application.
6. Cost Estimate - An engineer's estimate of the cost of construction of
public improvements.
7. Permits and Agreements - Copies of State and Federal permits, if issued,
and copies of proposed agreements with utility companies.
8. Supplemental Data - Other data and information may be required from
the applicant in order to establish that the proposed subdivision complies
with the requirements of these Regulations.
9. Names and addresses of property owners within 500 feet of each property
line as well as the footprint locations of existing structures on land
adjacent to the proposed development. (Updated, March 15, 2013)
2.05 CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED SUBDIVISION - After the above application
requirements have been met to the satisfaction of the Commission, the Commission shall
consider the application in accordance with the following procedures:
Hearing - Public hearings shall be held as required by Section 2.02 of these Regulations.
Notice of any public hearing shall be given as required by Connecticut General Statutes.
Notice shall also be given, in writing, to owners of property adjoining and to owners of
property directly across any street from the proposed subdivision.
Decision - The Commission shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove,
any subdivision application and maps and plans submitted therewith within sixty-five
(65) days after the date of completion of the public hearing thereon. An extension of time
not to exceed a further period of sixty-five (65) days may be had with the consent of the
applicant.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 12
Approval - The Commission shall give approval to the subdivision if it finds that the
subdivision map and plans and accompanying certificates, documents, and data conform
to the requirements and are consistent with the purposes of these Regulations.
In granting approval, the Commission may attach such conditions that it deems necessary
to modify the subdivision map, plans, or documents, and to preserve the purpose and
intent of these Regulations.
2.06 FILING AND RECORDING - Any plan for subdivision shall upon approval, or when
taken as approved by reason of the failure of the Commission to act, be filed or recorded
by the applicant in the Office of the Town Clerk within ninety (90) days of the date such
plan is delivered to the applicant and any plan not so filed or recorded within the
prescribed time shall become null and void, except that the Commission may extend the
time for such filing for two additional periods of ninety (90) days upon the written request
of the applicant and the plan shall remain valid until the expiration of such extended time.
All such plans shall be delivered to the applicant for filing or recording promptly after
the time for taking an appeal from the action of the Commission has elapsed and in the
event of an appeal, promptly upon the termination of such appeal by dismissal,
withdrawal, or judgement in favor the applicant. No such plan shall be recorded or filed
by the Town Clerk until its approval has been endorsed thereon by the Chairman or
Secretary of the Commission, and the filing or recording of a subdivision plan without
such approval shall be void. (Updated, January 29, 2001)
Certificate/Bonding - Prior to filing and recording the map, a Certificate of Completion
for all required subdivision improvements shall be submitted, together with a statement
from the Town Engineer reflecting that the public improvements called for in the
subdivision plan have been completed. In lieu of the completion of such work and
installation previous to the filing of the subdivision map, the First Selectman may, on
behalf of the Commission, accept a bond in accordance with the provisions of Section
3.01.
Conditional Approval - In lieu of either the completion of the work or the furnishing of
a bond as previously provided for, the Commission may authorize the filing of a plan
with a conditional approval endorsed thereon. Such approval shall be conditioned on
(1) The actual construction, maintenance and installation of any
improvements or utilities prescribed by the Commission; or
(2) The provision of a bond.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 13
Upon the occurrence of either such events, the Commission shall cause a final approval to
be endorsed thereon in a manner provided for by these Regulations. Prior to such final
approval, no lot may be offered for sale, nor shall any building permits be applied for or
issued for lots granted conditional approval. A note to this effect shall be placed on the
subdivision map. Any such conditional approval shall lapse on the date specified by the
Commission, which period shall not exceed five (5) years from the date such approval is
granted. The applicant may apply for and the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a
renewal of such conditional approval for an additional period of up to five (5) years. Any
person, firm or corporation who, prior to such final approval, sells any lot subdivided
pursuant to a conditional approval shall be fined in accordance with the provisions of
State Statute.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 14
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 15
III
ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION
AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
3.01 BONDS and SECURITY. (Effective 2/15/2012, 3.01 through 3.05 repealed and replaced)
3.01.1 Definition – Bond. A contractual agreement by the Developer or Permittee agreeing
to construct all public improvements within the time provided in these regulations and
as authorized by the Commission or upon failure to do so to provide a stated amount
to be paid to the Town sufficient for the Town to accomplish the construction. The
Bond shall be duly executed on forms provided or approved by the Town, with proper
references to all maps and plans showing the streets, drainage and other
improvements covered by the bond in a penal amount established pursuant to Sec.
3.02.
3.01.2 Definition – Security. A financial guarantee from a source recognized by the Town
to have available cash equal to the penal sum of the bond it secures.
For the purposes of this section, security shall mean one of the following:
3.01.2.1 A Surety Bond from a company licensed to do business in the State of
Connecticut accompanied by a power of attorney of the person executing
the Bond for the company;
3.01.2.2 A Pledge of a passbook, statement savings account or Certificate of
Deposit acknowledged by the bank that the account has been pledged to
the Town until such time that the Town provides the financial institution
with written authorization releasing a portion or all of said funds;
3.01.2.3 An irrevocable letter of credit provided by a bank or other similar
reputable financial institution with an office in Connecticut either without
an end date or automatically renewed without action by the Town for the
duration of the bond;
3.01.2.4 Any other form of security satisfactory to the Finance Officer and the
Town Attorney; or
3.01.2.5 Cash deposited with the Town.
3.01.2.6 All such security shall be subject to the approval as to form and content by
the Finance Officer and the Town Attorney.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 16
3.02 BOND CALCULATION AND APPROVAL. The developer or permittee may prepare
a detailed breakdown of major public improvements to be bonded and shall submit the
breakdown to the Town Engineer for review and approval. The amount of the bond shall
be recommended by the Town Engineer using prices that would be the cost to the Town
to complete the improvements plus a contingency amount not to exceed ten percent of
such costs considering that the Town will not perform the work until the applicant has
been given ample time to complete the work. Upon consideration of the recommendation,
the Commission shall set the bond amount. (Updated, March 15, 2013)
3.03 FAILURE TO COMPLETE IMPROVEMENTS. Where a Bond has been posted and
required improvements have not been installed within the provisions of these regulations
and as may have been extended by the PZC, the PZC may declare the Bond to be in
default, demand the entire amount of the bond be deposited with the Finance Officer and
cause all the improvements to be installed through contractors engaged by the Director of
Public Works and paid from the bond deposit. Upon completion of the installation of all
improvements required by the approved plans, any excess in the bond deposit shall be
returned to the surety.
3.04 PARTIAL RELEASE – REDUCTION OF BONDS. The Developer may file a written
request for reduction of the bond with the Town Planner that states the work that has been
completed justifying the reduction. The Town Planner shall immediately refer the request
to the Town Engineer who shall inspect the work and file a report with the PZC so that
the PZC can act upon the request within 65 days of the request. The PZC may reduce the
security in such amount as it determines appropriate or deny any reduction. Any such
action will be delivered by the Town Planner to the Finance Officer on the 7th business
day following PZC action to reduce a bond and the FO shall record the reduction on his
records and advise the Developer and surety of the reduction.
Should the Town Engineer find that additional work is necessary to complete the work
described in the request, he will describe such additional requirements in his report and
adjust any recommended reduction accordingly. A copy of the report will be provided to
the applicant within that 65 day time frame and an additional request for reduction/release
will be required. Under the MF, ARCHZ or WCHZ regulations no more than 85% of the
total project bond shall be released prior to issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance
for the last unit.
3.05 FINAL RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE BOND. Bond will not be released until the
following conditions have been met:
3.05.1 The applicant’s engineer or surveyor has provided detailed “as-built plans”
certified as accurate with a separate or special certification that the layout of the
line and grade of all public improvements and as-built topography of all drainage
basins is in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision;
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 17
3.05.2 The applicant's surveyor has certified in writing that all pins and monuments required
by the approved plan are installed;
3.05.3 The Town Engineer has submitted a certificate stating that he has reviewed the
applicant’s engineer’s certifications and finds them satisfactory;
3.05.4 All documents required by the "Acquisition Agreement for a Public Right-of-
Way" (aka “Deed”) have been presented and all conditions and requirements of
the Commission’s approval of the subdivision application have been satisfied;
3.05.5 All public improvements, including roads, called for in the final plan have been
accepted by the Town;
3.05.6 The applicant has paid the Town for cost of inspections, snow removal on streets
and sidewalks, if required;
3.05.7 If fee-in-lieu of open space (FILO) has been agreed upon, a FILO Lien shall be
recorded on the land records for all unpaid fees.
3.06 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS. The applicant shall be required to maintain
all improvements until acceptance of said improvements by the Town as set forth in Sec.
3.05 – Final Release.
3.06.1 Upon issuance of a CO for any residence in a subdivision accessible by a subdivision
road not yet accepted by the Town, and in order to provide necessary access to that
residence for emergency vehicles and to provide the residents winter access, the Town
through its Public Works Department will provide snow plowing and winter road
maintenance for so much of the newly constructed road as required to provide access
to occupied homes at the Developer’s expense. The Developer will be notified prior
to December 1 of each year of the charges that will be made and will receive a bill for
actual service on or about April 30 of each year payable when received which amount
the Developer agrees to pay by accepting the subdivision approval and CO for any
residence accessible only by a subdivision road not yet accepted.
3.07 MAINTENANCE BOND. The applicant shall be required to file a Maintenance Bond, also
known as a warranty of public improvements, and financial guarantee as provided for in
Section 3.01.2 with the Town prior to acceptance, in order to assure the satisfactory condition
of the required improvements, for a period of one (1) year after the date of their acceptance
by the Town. The guarantee shall be no less than equal to 15% of the original cost of
improvements. (Added, March 15, 2013)
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 18
IV
DESIGN STANDARDS
4.01 GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS - Subdivisions and resubdivisions, including related
streets, drainage, and other improvements required by these Regulations, shall be
planned, designed, and constructed in accordance with the standards hereinafter specified.
Plan of Development - Subdivisions shall be planned and designed in general conformity
with the Plan of Development, adopted by the Commission for the Town under Chapter
126 of the Connecticut General Statutes, particularly with regard to:
i. Location and classification of streets.
ii. Sanitary sewer, water supply, and drainage system service area.
iii. Reservation of land for parks, recreation, and open space.
Subdivision Name - The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too
closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the Town.
Open Spaces – Open space is land set aside within or in conjunction with a subdivision
or other development to preserve the open and natural character of the land, to be
developed as a park or a playground pursuant to CGS, Section 8.2, or other similar public
use. Open space land is not to be developed for residential or business purposes or part of
the infrastructure of the town unless the public use intended compliments specifically the
use of the open space land.
Monuments - Permanent reference monuments shall be placed within the subdivision as
follows:
i. Town road right-of-way merestones, perimeter boundary and lot corners
shall conform to Class A-2 of Code of Recommended Practice for
Standards of Accuracy of Maps, as amended. A land surveyor registered
in the State of Connecticut shall certify as to the correctness of the
placement of such monuments.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 19
ii. Highway lines shall be monumented at all angle points, PC's, PT's, and
PRC's. The maximum distance between highway merestones will be 500
feet on tangent or curved sections of the highway line. Highway
merestones will be set to the accuracy of Class A-2 of the Connecticut
Technical Council, Inc. The proposed highway line will be tied into
existing highway lines by distance and bearing. Additional highway
merestones may be required at locations on the highway line as required
by the Town Engineer.
iii. All lot boundaries shall be permanently located by iron or steel stakes at
least 3/4 inch in diameter and thirty (30) inches in length. Pins shall be
placed at each corner and/or at each change of bearing. Each lot number
shall be identified by a legible durable sign until a house number is
assumed.
4.02 LOT IMPROVEMENTS AND ACCESS
Lot Arrangement - The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable
difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to
build on all lots in compliance with the Zoning Regulations and Health Codes and in
providing driveway access to buildings on such lots from an approved street.
Double Frontage - Double frontage and reversed frontage lots may be required where
necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials or to
overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
Lot Access - Where driveway access from a major or secondary arterial street may be
necessary for several adjoining lots, the Commission may require that such lots be served
by a combined access drive in order limit possible traffic hazard on such street.
Rear Lots - In general, rear lots shall be avoided. However, where topography or
unusual shape of a parcel dictates, in the opinion of the Commission, that the best use of
the land would be as a rear lot, said lots may be permitted.
Lot Arrangements on Existing Streets - Lots proposed for existing streets shall, in
addition to meeting other applicable standards of these Regulations, be arranged to
confirm with following:
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 20
i. Where no street lines have been established on an existing street, front
property lines for subdivision lots shall not be closer than 25 feet from the
center of the road or 50 feet from and parallel to an established street line
on the opposite side of the street. The title to all land between the center
of the road and the front property lines of the subdivision lots shall be
dedicated to the Town in accordance with the legal requirements for such a
procedure.
ii. Where the grade of the existing street will be materially higher or lower
than the proposed lots fronting on it, the Commission may, for reason of
providing adequate sight distance on driveways, alleviating excessive or
hazardous slope, or excessive runoff, require any lot or any part of such lot
to be regraded as necessary.
iii. Where the finished grading of a lot fronting on an existing street will cause
drainage problems in that street, the developer shall, at his expense, install
drains in the street or make such other provisions as may be necessary to
correct the condition.
iv. Surface of existing public streets shall be capable of providing safe access
to proposed lots. The Commission may require repairs by Developer, if
necessary. Amended 2-19-88
4.03 LOT DIMENSIONS - Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the
Zoning Regulations. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or
radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or
lot plan.
Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings and
individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for
the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water
from each lot to adjacent lots.
Water Bodies and Watercourses - If a tract being subdivided contains a water body, or
portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn that responsibility for safe maintenance of the
water body is assured.
4.04 SOLAR ACCESS - The applicant shall demonstrate to the Commission that the
subdivision planning process has considered site design techniques that promote solar
energy use. The site design techniques shall include, but not be limited to, house
orientation, street and lot layout, use of landscaping and natural vegetation, natural and
manmade topographic features, and protection of solar access within the development.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 21
Lots shall be arranged, where possible, to provide for orientation of buildings to the south
in order to encourage solar energy use.
Streets should have an East-West orientation to the greatest extent possible to permit
orientation of buildings to the south and thereby encourage solar energy use.
4.05 STREET - GENERAL - No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be
subdivided shall have access from a public street which is suitably improved and paved.
Unless approved by the Commission as private streets in accordance with Section 416 of
these regulations, all proposed new streets within a subdivision shall become public
streets and shall be deeded to, and accepted by the Town upon certification by the Town
Engineer that they have been properly constructed. (Updated July, 20 1999)
It shall be adequate if the point of access is a road shown on an improved Subdivision
Plan which is still under construction provided such approved road is subject to a
performance bond to guarantee completion and such work is not in default.
Proposed subdivision abutting on an existing town street or state highway shall provide
for proper widening of the right of way of such street or highway by the Commission.
The applicant shall be responsible for improving the roadway to the point where the
existing public road meets or exceeds then current standards of the Ellington Department
of Public Works as adopted by the Board of Selectmen.
Plans shall be prepared showing the extent of the improvements and include a survey
definition to Class A-2 as defined in the Code of Practice for Standards of Accuracy of
Surveys and Maps adopted December 10, 1975 as amended by the Connecticut
Association of Land Surveyors, Inc. Where the locations of such roadlines is in dispute
with abutting property owners, boundary line agreements and/or deeds of conveyance to
the town shall be obtained to fix such line according to the survey.
Plans showing required road improvements shall be prepared by the applicant and
submitted to the Town Engineer for review prior to a Public Hearing being scheduled.
An applicant may choose to seek either conditional or final subdivision approval in
accordance with Section 2.06 of these regulations. Bonding shall be required to insure
the completion of all required road improvements in accordance with Section 3.01 of
these regulations. Amended 2-19-88
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 22
Street Grading and Improvement - Streets shall be graded and improved and conform
to Town construction standards and specifications and shall be approved as to design and
specifications by the Town Engineer. Streets shall be related appropriately to the
topography. Local streets shall be curved wherever possible to avoid conformity of lot
appearance. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the
building site at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as
closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves
shall be avoided.
Traffic Circulation Plan - All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of streets and dedicated rights-of-way as established in the Circulation
Plan of the Plan of Development. Additionally, all streets shall be properly related to
specific traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches, and
shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land
uses.
Street Extensions - Where required by the Commission, rights-of-way shall be provided
for extending streets to adjoining unsubdivided property. Land in such rights-of-way
shall be deeded to the Town.
Where a proposed subdivision abuts an approved subdivision containing a future street
rights-of-way, the developer of the proposed subdivision shall construct the street and all
required improvements from the proposed subdivision to the approved street in the
existing subdivision.
New streets shall be extended to the boundaries of the subdivision to provide access to
adjoining property, and shall intersect with other streets where designated by the
Commission or as shown in the Plan of Development.
Temporary Dead End Streets - Where a temporary turnaround is provided on a street
that is to be extended in the future, the 50 foot street right-of-way to the subdivision
boundary shall be deeded to the Town, and the segments of the turnaround outside the 50
foot street shall be deeded to the abutting lot owners subject to an easement to the Town
for street purposes. When such street is extended beyond the turnaround, the subdivider
constructing the extended street shall remove the road construction in the segments of the
temporary turnaround, fill with earth and loam and seed in an appropriate manner.
Street Names - All street names shall be shown on subdivision plans and shall be
approved by the Commission. Proposed street names shall be substantially different from
any present names to avoid confusion in sound or spelling. Streets that become
extensions of existing streets shall generally bear the same name.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 23
Street Lighting Facilities - The applicant shall be required to install one lighting pole at
each intersection, together with any additional lighting poles as the Commission may
require, to prevent hazard. The location of such poles shall be shown on the Construction
Plans under Section 2. The cost of all lighting fixtures, poles, and installation shall be the
responsibility of the developer. The developer shall bond such lighting facilities with all
other public improvements.
Street Name Signs - The developer shall be responsible for the cost and installation of
street name signs. Such signs shall be placed at each intersection with existing streets as
well as at each intersection within the development. The developer shall bond such street
name signs with all other public improvements.
Traffic Control Devices - The developer shall be responsible for the cost and installation
of any traffic control devices deemed necessary by the Traffic Authority. The developer
shall bond such traffic control devices with other public improvements. Necessary state
permits for work related to state highways shall be the responsibility of the developer and
shall be coordinated through the office of the Local Traffic Authority.
Reserve Strips - The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a
proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to such street.
4.06 CUL-DE-SAC OR DEAD END - A temporary turnaround shall be provided on all
temporary cul-de-sac streets, with the notation on the subdivision map that land outside
the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abutters whenever the street is continued.
Permanent Cul-de-sac - Permanent cul-de-sac may be permitted providing such a design
will not
(i) Impede the circulation requirements of the Plan of Development;
(ii) Cause undue concentrations of traffic;
(iii) Be prejudicial to the needs of public health and safety by unduly delaying
or inhibiting access to lots. A permanent dead end street shall not exceed
1000'.
4.07 DESIGN STANDARDS - In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width, and
improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police,
fire fighting, snow removal, sanitation, and road maintenance equipment, and to
coordinate streets so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to
adjoining properties, the following design standards for streets shall be adhered to:
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 24
TABLE 1
Street
Class
R-O-W
Width
Pavement
Width
Maximum
Grade
Minimum
Grade
Speed Design
Cross Slope
Collector 50 ft. 32 ft. 8% 1% 35 MPH 1/4"/ft.
Local 50 ft. 26 ft. 8% 1% 30 MPH 1/4"/ft.
Street classification may be indicated on the Plan of Development; otherwise it shall be
determined by the Commission. Streets of a higher classification, i.e. primary and
secondary arterial shall, at the minimum, meet collector street standards.
Local streets are defined as those streets intended to provide access to other roads from
individual residential properties.
Grade - The maximum grade shown in Table 1 may be increased to 10% for collector,
12% for local street, and 14% for limited local, upon recommendation of Town Engineer.
Curbs - Curbs shall be required on all new streets and shall conform to construction and
design standards of the Town. Note that on curves of less than 100' radius, concrete curbs
are required.
Guide Rails - Guide rails shall be provided where the side slope on fill is steeper than
one vertical to four horizontal. Such rails shall conform to the standards and
specifications adopted by the Town.
Street Pavement - All street pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and structures,
curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards and
specifications adopted by the Town.
Right-of-Way - The full width of the street right-of-way shall be graded in accordance
with the highway specifications of the Town. This requirement may be modified where,
in the opinion of the Commission and upon recommendation of the Town Engineer, the
existing character of the land creates unusual difficulty or will require removal of
desirable natural growth, and where the location and type of street appears not to require
sidewalks in the future.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 25
4.08 INTERSECTIONS - Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible as
possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an angle of less
than eighty (80) degrees or more than one hundred (100) degrees shall not be acceptable.
An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be
approximately at right angles for at least one hundred (100) feet there from. Not more
than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the
Commission.
Proposed New Intersections - Proposed new intersection along one side of an existing
street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite
side of such street. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be
permitted. Where streets intersect major streets (collector class and higher), their
alignment shall be continuous.
Curb Radius - Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two (2) local streets shall be at
least twenty-five (25) feet; and minimum curb radius at an intersection involving a
collector street shall be at least thirty (30) feet.
Cross Section - At street intersections, the normal cross section of the main street shall
be maintained. The center line grade of the secondary street shall begin at the curb line of
the main street and have a maximum grade of 2% for at least fifty (50) feet from said curb
line. Maximum may be increased to 4% at the discretion of the Commission, when the
proposed street is a permanent cul-de-sac less than 400 feet in length.
Street Intersections - Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing
vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility,
the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with
the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent required by the Commission to
provide adequate sight distance. A sight line easement shall be shown on the subdivision
map limiting future plantings within this area to ensure the continuance of adequate sight
lines.
4.09 DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS - The developer shall be fully responsible for
constructing adequate facilities for the control, collection, conveyance and acceptable
disposal of storm water, other surface water and subsurface water, whether originating
within the subdivision area or in a tributary drainage area. All drainage facilities shall be
designed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Connecticut. The storm
water drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system.
Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by methods as approved by the Town
Engineer.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 26
Location of Storm Water Facilities - Drainage facilities shall be located in the street
right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements, where necessary.
Such easements shall be at least twenty (20) feet in width.
When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the
subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the map.
The applicant may be required to dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or conservation
easement, land on both sides of existing watercourses to a distance to be determined by
the Commission and the Town Engineer.
Flood Plains - Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing
during storm periods shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage
ways. No use shall be permitted in a flood plain except by special permit.
Drainage Discharge - The discharge of all storm water from a subdivision shall be into
suitable streams or other acceptable and suitable storm water drainage facilities having
adequate capacity to carry the additional water. Where the discharge will be into private
property, proper easements and discharge rights shall be secured for the Town by the
applicant from all affected property owners. Such easements must be acceptably
executed before acceptance of drainage plan and recording of the subdivision map.
Where a new street intercepts an existing street which has no underground drainage
system or has a drainage system of insufficient capacity to carry the additional flow,
appropriate facilities shall be installed by the developer to intercept and dispose of any
drainage from the new street which would otherwise be discharged onto the surface of the
existing street or into its drainage system.
Subdivision Standard for the Flood Plain District - All subdivision proposals and
other proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine whether such proposals
will be reasonably safe from flooding. If any part of a subdivision proposal or other new
development is located within the Flood Plain District established under the Regulations
it shall be reviewed to assure that:
i. The proposal is designed consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage, and
ii. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage, and
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 27
iii. Adequate drainage systems shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards, and
iv. Base flood elevation (the level of the 100-year flood) data shall be
provided for proposals greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the
lesser, for that portion within the Flood Plain District.
4.10 DRAINAGE DESIGN - All designs shall be based on the maximum ultimate
development of the entire watershed as permitted by the Zoning Regulations at the time
of the application. All bridges and culverts shall be designed such that the required head
and backwater produced by the structure shall not cause flooding of abutting property.
On watersheds one square mile or over, the design of culverts, bridges and through
watercourses shall be based upon not less than a 100-year storm. On watersheds of less
than one square mile, the design for the through drainage system shall be for not less than
a 50-year storm.
The drainage system for roads, including catch basins, inlets, pipes, underdrains, and
gutters within or abutting the subdivision shall be designed for not less than a 10-year
storm.
Adequate underdrains shall be constructed whenever, in the opinion of the Town
Engineer, drainage conditions require it. They may be required even though not shown
on the approved construction plans. Design shall be as approved by the Town Engineer.
Drainage ditches will, in general, not be permitted where it is feasible to install
underground pipe. Lead-off culverts shall be extended to grade.
Culverts under streets shall be extended at least to the edge of the right-of-way of the
street. Headwalls, paving, flared ends, and/or riprap, adequate to prevent erosion, shall be
provided at the ends of all culverts, as approved by the Town Engineer.
Detention basins shall be generally avoided unless other design approaches are approved
by the Town Engineer, zero increase in rate of storm water runoff shall be the criteria
utilized in the design of the drainage system for the proposed subdivision. For the
purposes of this section, zero increase shall mean that the rate of storm water discharge at
a given discharge point for the 50 year storm after development shall be equal to or less
than the rate of storm water discharge prior to development.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 28
4.11 DRAINAGE/DETENTION DESIGN (Effective 2/15/2012)
Regardless of the ultimate ownership or maintenance responsibility of any
drainage/detention basin, each shall be designed by a professional engineer, who shall
also supervise and inspect the construction and shall file a report on said inspections upon
completion of the project and prior to acceptance of said improvements. The report shall
include results of compaction tests; analysis of materials used in the embankment, shall
demonstrate compliance with the approved plans and shall certify to the Town that the
basin and all of its components has been constructed in accordance with the approved
plans.
4.12 WATER - A potable, adequate, and dependable water supply shall be provided for every
lot or dwelling unit. Such supply must be constructed and installed in accordance with
applicable state and local requirements.
Public Water Supply - Public water supply shall be required to serve all of the
following:
i. Any subdivision within the required distance of an existing public water
service, which has a supply adequate to serve such subdivision as
determined by the following formula: Ultimate number of lots times 100
feet equals distance of extension.
Fire Hydrants - Where a public water main is extended, fire hydrants shall be installed at
no expense to the Town, at specific locations and with properly sized mains and laterals
as required by the Fire Marshal using national standards or State of Connecticut
Department of Public Health standards as guides. The Fire Marshal may also require a
report from the applicant that demonstrates adequate volumes and pressures. (Updated,
March 15, 2013)
Private Wells - In a subdivision which is located where a public water service is not
required, a private well shall be permitted for each lot provided that:
(1) Topographic and geological conditions are satisfactory;
(2) Each well can be designed, located and constructed in accordance with the
standards and requirements of the Connecticut Department of Health;
(3) Each well shall have the approval of the Health Director.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 29
(4) Any proposed well for potable water consumption shall be so situated as to
have a minimum seventy-five (75) foot non-contamination radius located
entirely in the lot it is servicing or has the benefit of an easement over the
adjacent property to be encumbered by said easement. (Effective date:
9/15/2008)
4.13 SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES - Every application for approval of a subdivision
must include satisfactory evidence that the site has suitable physical characteristics to
adequately satisfy the current requirements of the Health Code, Department of
Environmental Protection, North Central District Health Department, or other regulatory
agency for subsurface Connecticut Public sewage disposal or that the proposed lots can
be connected to an operational public sanitary sewer. The extension of any public sewer
shall be in accord with plans as adopted by the Water Pollution Control Authority.
Sanitary Sewage Systems shall be constructed as follows:
Where a public sanitary sewage system is reasonably accessible, the applicant shall
connect with same and provide sewers accessible to each lot in the subdivision.
Where sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably accessible, individual disposal systems
may be utilized. Such systems must be approved, constructed and installed in accordance
with the current local and state regulations and requirements.
4.14 SIDEWALKS - Sidewalks shall conform to the design requirements of the Town.
Except as otherwise provided in Section 4.16, (Updated, July 30, 1999) Sidewalks shall be
required on one side of the street. The opposite side of the street shall be graded to
accommodate, if necessary sidewalks at a future date.
4.15 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN - Where the cumulative area
of disturbance will exceed 1/2 acre, a plan meeting the standards contained in
"Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control" (1965) shall be
submitted and followed in the development of the subdivision, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
4.16 UTILITIES - All utility lines shall be located underground except that the Commission
may approve overhead electrical and telephone lines in subdivisions not involving new
streets, or where physical conditions make underground installations impractical.
Underground locations shall generally comply with the following:
i. Sanitary sewers - Center line of street.
ii. Storm sewers - Edge of street opposite water line.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 30
iii. Water line - Within right-of-way above and at least 10 feet from sanitary
sewer line or sewage disposal system.
iv. Electric, telephone, and cable TV - Within right-of-way opposite the
water line.
4.17 PRIVATE STREETS (Effective July 30, 1999)- Not withstanding any provision of Section
4.05 above to the contrary, and applicant may propose to construct a private street, or to
utilize an existing private street, to serve two or more lots and the Commission may
approve such subdivision provided the street complies with the terms hereof.
The Commission shall not approve the establishment of a private street when such street
is proposed to connect with two or more public streets or when the Commission requires
such street to be extended off site either in the present or future and such adjoining land is
not under the control of the applicant at the time of the application.
When a private street is propose to serve five (5) lots or less, provisions for the ownership
and maintenance of such street(s) may be provided by agreement between all
homeowners or by the establishment of a homeowner’s association under terms of the
Connecticut Common Interest Ownership Act. The Commission shall approve the entity
which owns such street(s). When a private street is proposed to serve more than five (5)
lots, the ownership and maintenance of such street(s) shall be by the establishment of a
homeowner’s association under the terms of the Connecticut Common Interest
Ownership Act.
Number of Lots R-O-W Width Pavement Width
Turnaround /
Culdesac
1 to 3 50 feet 18 feet None Required
4 to 5 50 feet 20 feet None Required
6 to 20 50 feet 22 feet Yes
21 or more 50 feet 26 feet Yes
The following design standards shall apply to private streets, based upon the number of
lots being served by the private street, and these standards shall control in the event of
any inconsistencies with standards found elsewhere in these Regulations.
The subdivider of an approved subdivision containing a private street shall provide a
bond to guarantee the completion of all common drainage and private streets, in
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 31
conformance with Section 111, of the Regulations. A maintenance bond will not be
required.
Sidewalks, curbing, drainage, grade slope, and other design standards shall be as required
by the Town Engineer.
4.18 OPEN SPACE (Effective date: 2/15/08)
The commission has found that development of land for residential or business use will
cause an increase in the population, the intensity of land use, and the need for open space,
parks, or playgrounds to serve the residents of the town. To meet this need, it is the
policy of the Town of Ellington to preserve open space in accordance with the
requirements set forth herein.
These open space and recreation requirements have been prepared from a regional
perspective in an effort to preserve wildlife habitat, flora and fauna, while preserving for
the citizens of the region an area in which to enjoy nature, with an opportunity to walk,
jog, cross country ski, bicycle, picnic, fish, wade, sit, or otherwise spend time in a natural
setting. In addition to these passive activities, these requirements recognize the
importance of areas which may be used for active recreational activities which include
competitive sports. In addition, these requirements recognize the importance of the
Town’s agricultural areas, which the town strives to preserve in an effort to provide
locally grown fruits and vegetables, dairy products, trees, shrubbery, and similar products.
The open space and recreation requirements outlined herein are based on the Town Plan
of Conservation and Development and the Plan of Conservation (aka Open Space Plan).
In determining the appropriateness of an open space and/or recreation area disposition,
the Commission shall consider initiatives of the aforementioned plans, the advisory
opinion of the Ellington Conservation Commission, and the characteristics of the subject
site with respect to the following objectives: The conservation and protection of wildlife
and natural or scenic resources including lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, streambelts, inland
wetlands, riparian buffer zones, aquifers, significant woodlands, ridges, ravines, ledge
outcroppings and other unusual physical features; the protection of historic or
archeological sites; the expansion of existing open space, and recreational areas and the
meeting of neighborhood and/or community-wide recreational needs. In determining the
location of open space, the Commission may consider potential for combination with
existing or proposed open space on adjoining properties owned by any public or private
institution.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 32
4.18.1 FLEXIBILITY OF APPROACH
1. In accordance with Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS), such
preservation may be accomplished through the dedication of one or more parcels of
open space land in the subdivision or through the provision of a fee-in-lieu-of
dedication of land or both.
2. The Commission is aware that it is not desirable in all situations to require the
dedication of open space land in all subdivisions, particularly those which are small,
and because there is a need to treat all subdividers equally, the Commission may, at
its discretion, accept a fee-in-lieu-of land dedication from the subdivider for all or any
part of the open space, in accordance with the provisions of section 8-25 of the CGS.
4.18.2 DECLARATION AND CONSIDERATION
1. At the time of filing the formal application to the Commission for subdivision
approval, the subdivider shall indicate on the application and final plans whether ten
(10%) of the land will be dedicated to open space purposes or a fee-in-lieu-of the land
for open space will be paid to the town or a combination of land dedication and fee is
proposed as advised by the Ellington Conservation Commission.
2. The Commission shall consider the proposal and make the final determination after
discussing with the subdivider as to whether land shall be dedicated, or fee levied, or
any combination thereof.
4.18.3 DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS
1. Where the open space requirement will be met through the dedication of land, the
total area reserved for open space shall equal or exceed ten percent (10%) of the total
land area of the subdivision.
2. The location of open space parcels shall be designed in accordance with one or more
of the following factors appropriate to the site (some do conflict with others):
a. Where new roads are proposed, open space is located so as to create a buffer
between existing Town/State road(s) and the proposed lots.
b. The open space is designed as a buffer between the proposed and existing abutting
properties.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 33
c. The open space is located to preserve such natural features as scenic vistas, ridge
tops, significant tree groves, waterfalls, and environmentally scenic areas.
d. The open space is located in areas to preserve significant man made features such
as stone walls, canals, or historic structures.
e. The open space is located so as to preserve primary and secondary agricultural
lands.
f. The open space is located in areas which connect existing open space or areas
with the greatest potential for future open space and facilitates recreational and
green space corridor and/or trails.
g. The open space is suitable for public active recreational use.
3. The open space land shall be of a similar ratio of buildable land to unbuildable land as
the entire subdivision or shall, in the opinion of the Commission, preserve
environmentally sensitive areas such as river corridors, wildlife sanctuaries, or other
natural features.
4. All open space shall abut or have direct access to a street through a right-of-way
dedicated to public use. The right-of-way shall not be included in the required open
space area, shall be at least fifty (50) feet wide and shall be suitable for foot traffic. In
acceptable circumstances the Commission may reduce or waive this requirement.
5. An attempt shall be made to preserve a location for the parking of vehicles within
areas that can provide public access to existing and proposed open space, particularly
those areas which provide access to new and existing trails and recreational areas.
6. The Commission may permit a reduction in the ten percent (10%) requirement, and
thereby permit an equal increase in density, where the application proposes to
construct public facilities, such as ball fields, and other recreational facilities provided
the value of the construction is equivalent to the value of the land and the additional
lots obtained as a result of open space reduction.
7. To satisfy all or a portion of the open space requirements of a subdivision, the
Commission may consider lands located elsewhere in Ellington.
8. When a subdivision is a portion of a larger parcel of land, the Commission may
consider dedication of an area of land in the undeveloped part of the parcel but
outside of the proposed area of the subdivision.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 34
9. The ultimate ownership of dedicated open spaces, parks, and playgrounds, be it the
Town of Ellington, a land trust, homeowner’s association, or a recognized
conservation organization , should be determined by the Commission on a case by
case basis at the time of subdivision approval.
a. In the event that the Board of Selectmen declines to accept the offered open space
land as part of the town property, then the developer must return to the
Commission and implement another alternative as described above.
10. The Commission reserves the right to make the final decision on the suitability of
open space land and the means of preservation.
11. Monuments are required at all corners and angles of town open space and must be
easily identified, except where land characteristics cannot accept the monuments.
4.18.4 DEDICATION FOR OTHER MUNICIPAL PURPOSES
1. In the event the subdivider desires to transfer to the Town land for other municipal
purposes such as future schools, fire houses, etc., the dedication provisions of this
regulation shall be complied with. The Commission may consider such a municipal
dedication as a credit toward any open space and/or recreational area disposition
requirements.
4.18.5 DEED RESTRICTIONS
1. Any land dedicated for open space purposes shall contain appropriate covenants and
deed restrictions (approved by the Town Attorney for Town-dedicated property)
ensuring that:
a. The open space area will not be further subdivided in the future.
b. The use of the open space will continue in perpetuity for the purpose specified.
c. Appropriate provisions will be made for the maintenance of the open space, if
necessary.
d. The open space shall not be converted into a commercial for-profit enterprise.
e. The rights of public access are provided when appropriate.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 35
4.18.6 FEE-IN-LIEU-OF REQUIREMENTS
1. In lieu of providing all or part of the open space land as required above, an applicant
may, with the Commission’s approval, pay a fee. This fee shall not exceed 10% of
the fair market value of the land to be subdivided prior to the approval of the
subdivision.
2. The fair market value shall be determined by an appraiser jointly selected by the
Commission and the applicant, with the cost to be borne by the applicant. The
Planning Department maintains a Commission-approved list of appraisers.
3. A fraction of such payment the numerator of which is one and the denominator of
which is the number of approved parcels in the subdivision shall be made at the time
of sale of each approved parcel of land in the subdivision and placed in a fund which
shall be used for the purpose of preserving open space or acquiring additional land for
open space or for recreational or agricultural purposes.
4. The Commission encourages the applicant to consider paying the entire fee prior to
the filing of the subdivision map on the land records.
4.18.7 EXEMPTIONS
1. The open space requirements of this section shall not apply if the transfer of all land
in a subdivision of less than five (5) parcels is to a parent, child, brother, sister,
grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle, or first cousin for no consideration provided that
this exemption be noted on the subdivision map to be filed on the land records along
with a notice stating that any lot subject to the exemption shall be liable for its
proportional share of the 10% pre-subdivision fair market appraisal at the time of
subsequent sale or transfer to a person not exempt under this subsection if such a sale
or transfer occurs within five years of the original subdivision approval.
2. The open space requirements of this section shall not apply if:
a. A subdivision meets the requirements for an affordable housing development
under Section 8-30g of the Connecticut General Statutes.
b. The Commission elects to exempt the proposed subdivision since it will contain
affordable housing equal to twenty percent (20%) or more of the total housing to
be constructed in such subdivision.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 36
4.19 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS (Effective, November 15, 2007)
Landscaping shall be provided as part of subdivision design along streets and at
subdivision entrances.
Where plant material is to be removed, or where it does not exist, such as in flat open
land or in gravel pits or other similar conditions, the applicant shall provide a replanting
program to protect public health and to enhance and preserve the environment.
In all cases, planting of invasive, or non-native species, shall be avoided. The
identification and removal of existing invasive species is encouraged.
A. Landscape Plan
1. Requirements.
A landscape plan shall be submitted with each subdivision application which contains
five (5) or more lots and/or new road(s). The plan shall identify the existing tree line
plus existing mature trees, and proposed trees, shrubs and ground covers; natural
features such as rock outcroppings; and other landscaping elements. The plan shall show
the location, or proposed location, of these attributes and planting and/or construction
details.
B. Street Trees
1. Requirements.
At a minimum, each lot shall have one tree for every 50 lineal feet of frontage or
fraction thereof. Shade trees of varieties acceptable to the Commission shall be
provided along existing and proposed streets by planting new trees or preserving
existing trees. Such trees shall be located between the building line and ten (10) feet
inside the lot line. New trees shall be not less than two and one-half (2 1/2) inches in
caliper (DBH) and shall be guaranteed for one season’s growth by the developer. All
new street trees shall be located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any existing
or proposed septic system or septic reserve area. In addition, consideration should be
given to future possible locations of driveways, sidewalks, sight lines, and utility
connections. The location of existing trees and new trees shall be shown on the plot
plan submitted for zoning permit approval.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 37
2. Street trees waiver.
The Applicant may request a waiver where topography or site conditions are not
suitable for street trees. Such waiver request must be in written form and submitted
with the subdivision application. The Commission reserves the right to grant or deny
any such waiver.
C. Site Protection and Planting Requirements
1. Removal of debris.
All stumps and other tree parts, litter, brush, weeds, excess or scrap building materials
or other debris shall be removed from the site and disposed of in accordance with the
law. No tree stumps, or portions of tree trunks or limbs shall be buried anywhere in the
development without prior approval from the Town Engineer and Wetlands
Enforcement Officer; and in no instance shall they be buried in regulated wetlands,
conservation easements, and/or areas of high groundwater.
2. Protection of existing plantings.
Maximum effort should be made to save existing vegetation. No material or temporary
soil deposits shall be placed within four (4) feet of shrubs or within the drip line of trees
designated on the landscape plan to be retained. Proposed limits of clearing shall be
clearly marked onsite and verified by a surveyor to be consistent with the approved
subdivision plan upon submission of each plot plan for a zoning permit. Any deviations
from the approved subdivision plan may be approved by the Ellington Planning
Department in the event conditions warrant. Removal of any amount of vegetation,
whether approved or not, may require an equivalent amount of plantings in an additional
area of each plot plan.
3. Additional screening.
In residential subdivisions, besides the street trees required, additional plantings or
landscaping elements may be required throughout the subdivision where necessary for
privacy or other reasons in accordance with the landscape plan approved by the
Commission and taking into consideration cost constraints. For example, where lots
have back yards fronting on a street, the Commission may require screening between the
street and the back yard, or along the front lot line in the case of a rear lot abutting a
frontage lot.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 38
4. Planting specifications.
Deciduous trees shall have at least a 2-1/2 inch caliper (DBH) at planting. Size of
evergreens and shrubs shall be allowed to vary depending on setting and type of
tree/shrub. All plant materials shall be of nursery stock quality; and all trees, shrubs,
and ground covers shall be planted according to accepted horticultural standards. Dead
and dying plants shall be replaced by the developer during the following planting
season. The plant species selected should be hardy for this area, and appropriate in
terms of function and size.
D. Bonding
In the event that the required street trees and/or additional plantings or screening cannot
be completed due to seasonal weather constraints, bonding may be secured in the form
and amount that is acceptable to the Town Engineer and/or the Zoning Enforcement
Officer (ZEO). Any such bonding is required prior to the issuance of the Certificate of
Zoning Compliance (CZC) issued by the ZEO.
E. Sight Lines
In all instances, sufficient sight line requirements shall be maintained in accordance with
the Ellington Zoning Regulations, as amended
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 39
APPENDIX A
ADMINISTRATIVE SPECIFICATIONS
STANDARDS FOR MAPS AND PLANS
A.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS - The maps and plans required by these Regulations
shall show the information and be prepared in accordance with the standards hereinafter
specified. All such maps and plans shall be prepared by, and shall bear the name and seal
of, a land surveyor and/or engineer licensed as such by the State Board of Registration for
Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors of the State of Connecticut. Pertinent survey
data and computations shall be presented by the applicant to the Town Engineer for
review if requested by him.
A.02 SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN - The Site Development Plan shall be drawn to a scale
of not less than 1"=100' on a sheet size of 24" x 36". The plan shall show existing
conditions and the proposed layout of lots, streets and improvements for the proposed
subdivision and all contiguous land of the applicant that may be subdivided in the future,
in order to allow the Commission to complete a general planning review of the proposed
subdivision including its relationship to the future subdivision of contiguous land of the
applicant. Eight (8) blue or black line prints shall be submitted. The plan shall show at
least the following information:
i. Title of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate the title of any
previous subdivision in the Town.
ii. Name of the owner of the land to be subdivided.
iii. Date, scale, north point, key map at 1" = 1000'.
iv. Existing and proposed property and street lines; indication of
adjoining property lines and street lines for a distance of 200 feet; and the
names of all adjacent subdivision or property owners.
v. Existing contours at an interval not exceeding two (2) feet based on field
or aerial survey and using official Town, State or U.S. bench marks, which
shall be noted on the plan.
vii. Proposed lots and lot numbers, existing and proposed open spaces for
parks, playgrounds, stream protection and other open spaces. Lots shall be
numbered using the existing or proposed Assessor Parcel Numbers and the
existing or proposed street numbers. (Updated January 29, 2001)
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 40
viii. Existing permanent buildings and structures.
ix. Principal wooded areas.
x. Ledge outcrops and existing stone walls and fences within the
subdivisions.
xi. Approximate dimensions on all proposed property and street lines;
approximate lot area and the total acreage of land included in the
subdivision. Total wetlands and wetlands area of influence in accordance
with the appropriate section of the Ellington Inland Wetlands Regulations
for each lot in the subdivision. (Updated January 29, 2001)
xii. Proposed width of all streets, rights-of-way and easements; the proposed
width of all pavement; and proposed street names.
xiii. Existing and proposed monuments; any municipal
boundary line and zoning districts.
xiv. Existing and proposed storm drains, catch basins, manholes, ditches,
watercourses, headwalls, sidewalks, gutters, curbs and other structures;
and existing and proposed water mains, sanitary sewers, and related
facilities.
xv. Spot elevations on both existing and proposed roads to indicate tentative
grading.
xvi. The approximate location of any test holes, test pits and borings.
xvii. The limits of any areas proposed for regrading
by excavation or filling; and the limits of areas proposed to be reserved
and protected from excavation or filling.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 41
A.03 CONSTRUCTION PLANS - Twelve (12) sets (Updated January 29, 2001) of blue or black
line print plan and profile drawings of all proposed streets, storm drains, sanitary sewers,
catch basins, manholes, ditches, watercourses, headwalls, sidewalks, gutters, curbs and
other structures shall be submitted on a sheet size of 24" x 36" and drawn to a horizontal
scale of 1" = 40' and a vertical scale of 1" = 4'. Profile drawings and elevations shall be
based on Town, State or U.S. bench marks or other permanent bench marks approved by
the Town Engineer; the bench marks used shall be noted on the plan. All construction
plans, plans for streets, storm drainage, water supply, and other utilities and structures
shall be designed by, and bear the seal of, a professional engineer licensed to practice in
the State of Connecticut. Plan-profile drawings shall show at least the following
information in accordance with good engineering practice and as appropriate for the
particular subdivision or resubdivision.
i. Title of subdivision or subdivision, date, scale, Town and State.
ii. For streets, the existing grades at the center lines and both street lines
and the proposed grade at the center line and both street lines; width of
pavement, and typical cross section of roads with specifications.
iii. Depth, invert, slope and size of all pipes, ditches, culverts, manhole,
catch basins, headwalls, and watercourses; typical ditch and watercourse
cross sections.
iv. Approximate location of lot lines intersecting the street line; lot numbers
and street names.
v. Sidewalks, curbs, gutters, and special structures to include street lights.
vi. Detail drawings of any bridges, box culverts, deep manholes, and other
special structures.
vii. Notation and details on erosion and sedimentation control methods to
be employed.
A.04 GRADING PLAN - The area shown on the grading plan may be limited to the portion of
the subdivision or resubdivision affected by the proposed major regrading, cuts, fills, or
soil or rock removal. Four (4) blue or black line prints of the grading plan shall be
submitted. The grading plan shall be drawn on a sheet size of 24" x 36" and to the scale
of 1" = 40' or larger, and shall bear the seal of an engineer licensed to practice in the State
of Connecticut. Contours and elevations shall be based on the same bench marks as
provided in Paragraph A.03. The grading plan shall show at least the following
information:
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 42
i. Title of the subdivision or resubdivision.
ii. Name of the owner of the land to be subdivided.
iii. Date, scale, north point, Town and State.
iv. Layout of existing and proposed lot lines and streets lines.
v. Existing and proposed contours at an interval not exceeding two (2) feet
based on field and aerial survey.
vi. Existing and proposed drainage and watercourses.
vii. Existing permanent buildings and structures, including well and septic
locations.
viii. Locations of all test holes, test pits, or borings.
ix. Cross section drawings covering proposed excavation areas.
x. Notations and details on erosion and sedimentation control methods
to be employed.
A.05 RECORD SUBDIVISION MAP - The subdivision map shall be prepared with an
accuracy meeting, or exceeding, standards for a "Class A-2 Transit Survey" as defined
by the Connecticut Technical Council, Inc. The map shall be clearly and legibly drawn
on a sheet size of "24 x 36" and submitted in eight (8) copies of blue or black line prints.
The map shall be drawn to a scale of 1" = 40'. The maps shall show the following:
i. Title of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate the title of any
previous subdivision in the Town.
ii. Name of the owner of the land to be subdivided.
iii. Date, scale, north point, Town and State.
iv. Existing and proposed property and street lines; indication of adjoining
property lines and street lines for a distance of 200 feet; and the names of
all adjacent subdivisions or property owners.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 43
v. Existing and proposed watercourses and ponds, conservation areas,
easements and rights-of-way; the location and limits of all easements or
reservation areas for the protection of swamps, floodplains, or other land
subject to potential flooding.
vi. Proposed lots and lot numbers; existing and proposed open spaces for
parks, stream protection, and other open spaces; the square footage or
acreage of all lots and open spaces, and the total acreage of land included
in the subdivision.
vii. Existing permanent buildings and structures.
viii. Dimensions of all lines to the hundredth of a foot; all bearings or
deflection angles on all straight lines, and the central angle, tangent
distance and radius of all arcs.
ix. The width of all streets, rights-of-way and easements; street names.
x. Existing and proposed monuments; any municipal boundary line.
xi. A location map showing the location of the subdivision in relation to
existing streets in the Town at a scale of 1" = 1000'.
xii. An index map, if the proposed subdivision if divided into sections or is of
such that more than one sheet is required, showing the entire subdivision
with lots, lot numbers, streets, street names and delineation of areas
covered by the section or sheet.
xiii. The survey relationship of proposed streets to nearby monumented
Town streets or state highways where practical.
xiv. The error of closure, which shall not exceed 1 in 5000.
xv. Approved street address numbers for each lot as assigned by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 44
xvi. The following signature block: (Amended: January 29, 2001)
a) Approved by the Town Planning and Zoning Commission of the
Town of Ellington on this _____ day of _____________ 20__. In
accordance with Section 8-26c of the Connecticut General Statutes,
all work in connection with subdivision must be completed by
____________ 20__.
Secretary Chairman
A.06 APPROVED MAPS - Upon approval of the subdivision, final plans shall be submitted
as follows:
i. Record Subdivision Map - 2 sets drawn on mylar drafting film.
ii. Construction and Grading Plan - 4 blue or black line paper sets.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 45
APPENDIX B
ADMINISTRATIVE SPECIFICATIONS
SANITARY REPORT FOR ON SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
B.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS - Where individual on site sewage disposal systems are
proposed, the subdivision plan shall be accompanied by four (4) copies of a Sanitary
Report prepared by a professional engineer. The report shall demonstrate the feasibility
for subsurface disposal of septic tank waste. The report should deal with the entire tract
discussing the following points:
i. General nature and development of surrounding areas shown on map
with explanation text.
ii. Topography and natural drainage pattern.
iii. Subsurface conditions as shown by subsurface investigation, including
soil absorption characteristics, groundwater level conditions, ledge rock,
and general nature of soil.
iv. General description of type of development contemplated, noting type
of dwelling units and structures, number of families per structure, and
number of bedrooms per dwelling unit.
v. Detailed description of proposed sewage disposal facilities, indicated
sizes for various ground conditions, materials to be used, and general
layout pattern to be used.
vi. Special precautions that may be necessary to provide proper functioning
of the proposed disposal systems.
vii. Flood heights of any nearby streams, brooks, or rivers.
B.02 TEST RESULTS AND ENGINEERING EVALUATION - The report shall contain
test results and engineering evaluation of test results based on an extensive subsurface
investigation. Investigation shall be made as to whether the soil is suitable for the
absorption of septic tank effluent and, if so, how much area is required. The soil must
have an acceptable percolation rate, without interference from groundwater or impervious
strata below the level of the absorption system.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 46
Subsurface Explorations are necessary to determine subsurface formulations in the area.
The minimum number of tests acceptable for subsurface investigation for a subdivision
will be:
i. Percolation Tests ...... 1 per acre or 1 per lot, whichever is the smaller
ii. Observation Holes ......1 per two acres
iii. Observation Pits ....... 1 per ten acres
iv. Probes for Rock ........ 1 per acre, unless rock is encountered, in which case
a sufficient number to locate and plot the general
ledge profile will be required
Testing procedures shall be as follows:
i. Percolation tests must be taken at or below the probable level of the
proposed disposal systems. A minimum depth of thirty-six inches will be
required for the percolation test holes.
ii. All other tests must be made to a depth of at least three feet below the
probable elevation of the disposal facilities. The same care taken in
selecting the location of the percolation test holes should be employed in
the location of the other tests. A minimum depth of six feet will be
required for these other tests.
Engineer's Statement - The report shall contain a statement by the engineer that, in his
professional opinion, the area is suitable for the installation of individual sanitary sewage
disposal systems of the general type and size described in his report. Any reservations or
special conditions considered necessary by the engineer shall be repeated in this portion
of his report.
Other Data - The sanitary report shall be a well written, comprehensive and documented
study, meeting all of the above requirements. If, in the opinion of the Health Director, the
sanitary report is incomplete as to the required information, he will require additional
documentation sufficient to correct the report's deficiencies.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 47
APPENDIX C
TOWN OF ELLINGTON HIGHWAY SPECIFICATIONS
These specifications are promulgated by the Ellington Town Engineer. They are an appendix to
the subdivision regulations as a convenience to the public.
C.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
1.1 The Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction
of the State Highway Department together with all amendments thereto now
adopted or which may hereafter be adopted are hereby adopted as the official
specification for construction in the Town of Ellington, and all materials and
construction methods shall conform to these specifications, except as amended
hereunder.
1.2 The Developer shall be responsible for notification to the indemnity company
underwriting the performance bond as required herein, and for furnishing copies
to said company, of any changes in the Plan and Profile on file as above stated or
changes in specifications required in this agreement.
1.3 In all matters pertaining to roadway construction and design, the Town or its duly
authorized representative, shall be the final judge as to proper practice.
1.4 The Developer shall be responsible for necessary laboratory tests and blueprints
necessary or required for construction.
C.2 MATERIALS:
2.1 Bank Run Gravel Subbase: This material shall consist of bank gravel
conforming to D.O.T. Form 814A, Article M.02.02.
2.2 Crushed Gravel Subbase: This material shall consist of crushed gravel
conforming to D.O.T. Form 814A, Article M.02.02.
2.3 Processed Aggregate Base:
Pavement Section Type A: This material shall conform to DOT 814A, Article
M.05.01, Coarse aggregate shall be CRUSHED TRAP ROCK, 6 inches thick.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 48
Pavement Section Type B: This material shall conform to DOT 814A, Article
M.05.01, Coarse aggregate shall be either broken stone or reclaimed
miscellaneous aggregate containing no more than 15% by weight of recycled
bituminous concrete, 6 inches thick. (Amended July 28, 2008)
2.5 Compacted Gravel Fill: This material shall consist of bank or crushed gravel
conforming to D.O.T. Form 814A, Article M.02.02
2.6 Bituminous Concrete Binder Course: The materials for the bituminous
concrete mixture, sources of supply, formula for the mix, mix tolerances, and the
control of the mixture shall conform to the requirements of D.O.T. Form 814A,
Article M.04.01, Class 1.
Pavement Section Type A 2”
Pavement Section Type B 3”
(Effective August 19, 2008)
2.7 Bituminous Concrete Surface Course: The materials for the bituminous
concrete mixture, sources of supply, formula for the mix, mix tolerances, and the
control of the mixture shall conform to D.O.T. Form 814A, Article M.04.01,
Class 2. The thickness for pavement sections Type A and Type B shall be 1- ½”.
(Effective August 19, 2008)
2.8 Bituminous Concrete Lip Curbing: Materials for this work shall conform to the
requirements of D.O.T. Form 814A, Article M.04.01, Class 3.
2.9 Portland Cement Concrete: Materials for this work shall conform to the
requirements of D.O.T. Form 814A, Article M.03.01, Class C.
C.3 CONSTRUCTION:
3.1 Construction Survey:
(a) The centerline of the road shall be located in the center of the right-of-way
and shall be run in the field with suitable construction ties established to
all control points. Stations shall be established at least at 50 foot intervals
and at all P.C.'s and P.T.'s.
(b) Construction offset stakes shall be placed at each station, clear of all
construction. The construction stakes shall be marked with the station
offset to centerline and the cut or fill to profile grade.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 49
(c) Reference Bench Marks shall be established throughout the length of the
project at a minimum of 1,000 foot intervals. This information shall be
noted on the construction plans. The datum for Bench Marks shall be
U.S.G.S. Any existing Town Bench Marks shall be identified on the
plans.
3.2 Excavation:
(a) All excavation shall be made in conformity with the requirements of the
plans, cross sections, or as directed by the Town Engineer.
(b) When tying into existing roads, the "Call Before You Dig" service shall
be notified such that existing utilities locations can be marked.
(c) Wherever ledge rock is encountered, it shall be removed to a depth that is
at least 12 inches below the subgrade.
(d) Blasting: If blasting is required in rock excavation, all necessary State
and Town permits shall be secured. OSHA regulations shall be complied
with. Copies of Certificates of insurance shall be provided, upon request
of the Town Engineer, in order to demonstrate adequate coverage.
Sufficient warning shall be given to all persons in the vicinity of the work
before blasting. Blasting shall not be done between the hours of 6:00 P.M.
and 7:00 A.M.
(e) Topsoil: When encountered, topsoil shall be excavated within the
pavement limits. Topsoil shall be stockpiled for finish grading on road
side on side areas and lots.
3.3 Embankments and Slopes:
(a) Embankments shall be constructed of earth, rock, or a mixture of earth and
rock. Stumps, trees, sod, or other organic matter shall not be incorporated
in embankments.
(b) The depth of each layer of fill shall not exceed 12 inches before
compaction.
(c) Frozen material shall not be used. No embankment layer shall be
deposited on surfaces of snow or ice, nor shall it be placed on frozen or
unstable surfaces.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 50
(d) No stone over 5 inches in its greatest dimension shall be placed within a
minimum of 12 inches below the elevation of the subgrade.
(e) When embankments are to be constructed on slopes steeper than 1 vertical
to 3 horizontal, the slope on which the embankment is to be placed shall
be plowed deeply or cut into steps before the filling is begun.
(f) The embankment shall be crowned or pitched to provide drainage at the
close of each day's operation. Erosion and Sedimentation control
measures shall be utilized.
(g) Embankments to an elevation 3 feet above the free water surface at the
time of filling, shall be constructed of rock or free draining material, or a
mixture of both. Free-draining material shall conform to the requirements
of D.O.T. Form 814A, Article M.02.07.
(h) When the excavated material consists predominantly of rock fragments of
such size that materials cannot be placed in horizontal layers of the
thickness specified above, such material may be placed in the embankment
in horizontal layers not exceeding 3 feet in thickness. Large stones shall
not be placed in nests, but shall be distributed over the area; and the
interstices shall be filled with spalls, finer fragments, or earth to form a
solid, compact mass. No rock fill shall be placed above an elevation
which is 2 feet below the top of the embankment.
(i) The entire area of each layer shall be compacted with rollers or
compactors, exerting a pressure of not less than 300 pounds per lineal inch
of bearing tread on the compression wheel of roller width.
(j) The dry density after compaction shall not be less than 95% of the dry
density for that soil when tested in accordance with AASHO T180,
Method D, except that the mold used in the test shall be 6.11 inches high.
(k) Slopes shall have a uniform surface as shown on the plans. All slopes,
except those in rock or ledge formations, shall be topsoiled and seeded in
accordance with these Specifications. This work shall be done as soon as
practicable in order to prevent erosion.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 51
3.4 Placement of Gravel Fill:
(a) Description: This material shall be used to replace unstable material on
slopes, in shoulders and elsewhere as ordered by the Town Engineer. It
shall consist of gravel conforming to the requirements of Paragraph C.2.4
of these standards.
(b) Construction Methods: When gravel fill is used to replaced unstable
material, it shall be deposited in layers not over 6 inches in depth, with
each layer thoroughly compacted before the addition of other layers.
3.5 Subgrade:
(a) Description: The area of the roadbed upon which the pavement structure
is placed shall be known as the subgrade. After all grading for the roadbed
has been substantially completed and all drains and other underground
utilities laid, the subgrade shall be brought to the lines, grades, and crosssection
shown on the plans.
(b) Unsuitable Material Replacement: All soft and yielding material which
will not compact readily when rolled, vibrated or tamped shall be
removed, and all loose rock and boulders over 6 inches in size shall be
removed to a depth of not less than 1 foot below subgrade. Removed
material shall be replaced with compacted gravel fill conforming to
requirements of Paragraph C.2.85 of these Standards.
(c) Construction Methods: Grading and compaction of the subgrade shall be
in accordance with D.O.T. Form 814A, Article 2.09.03.
(d) Stabilization Fabric: Synthetic filter material may be utilized to stabilize
the subgrade provided that a detailed design is submitted to and approved
by the Town Engineer.
3.6 Subbase:
(a) Description: The subbase shall consist of bank run gravel or crushed
gravel, placed in accordance with the typical section for designation of the
street being constructed. Materials shall conform to the requirements of
Paragraphs C.2.1 or C.2.2 of these standards.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 52
(b) Construction Methods: Preparation of the foundation for the subbase,
placing the subbase, and compaction of the subbase shall be in accordance
with D.O.T. Form 814A, Article 2.13.03. The use of vibratory rollers or
compactor is encouraged for compaction.
3.7 Processed Aggregate Base:
(a) Description: The base shall consist of one or more courses of processed
aggregate constructed on the prepared subbase, placed in accordance with
the typical section for the designation of the street being constructed.
Materials shall conform to the requirements of Paragraph C.2.3 of these
Standards.
(b) Construction Methods: Preparation of the foundation for the base,
placing the base, and compaction of the base shall be in general
accordance with D.O.T. Form 814A, Article 3.04.03. The use of vibratory
rollers or compactors is required.
3.8 Two-Course Bituminous Concrete Pavement:
(a) Description: The paved surface shall be constructed of two courses of
bituminous concrete. The first course of paving, which shall be placed
directly on the processed aggregate base, is hereafter referred to as the
"Binder Course". The second course of paving which shall be placed on
the Binder Course, is hereafter referred to as the "Surface Course".
(b) All bituminous concrete shall be placed in compliance with D.O.T. Form
814A, Article 4.06. All joints in the surface course shall be offset at least
12 inches from joints in the binder course.
(c) Thickness: The depth of the Courses shall be as shown on the Street
Cross Section. Attention is called to the Recommended Minimum
Placement Temperatures shown in the Appendix of these Standards.
(d) Where new pavement joins existing pavements, the existing pavement
shall be cleanly cut and the new pavement shall be joined to create a
smooth transition.
(e) The contact surfaces of existing pavements, catch basins, and other
structures in the pavement shall be painted thoroughly with a thin uniform
coating of bitumen, specification RC-70 or RS-1 just before the new
paving mixture is placed against them.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 53
(f) The edges of paving placed around catch basins or other structures, if
necessary, shall be hand tamped before compacting by rolling.
3.9 Other Pavement Design:
All requirements of these Standards are minimum requirements. Engineering
design of subbase, base, and surface shall be prepared using current accepted
practices when field conditions warrant.
3.10 Bituminous Concrete Lib Curbing:
(a) Description: Bituminous Concrete Lip Curbing shall consist of machine
laid bituminous concrete, constructed on the pavement to the dimensions
and details shown on the plans. Materials shall conform to the
requirements of Paragraph C.2.9 of these Standards.
(b) Construction Methods: Construction shall conform to D.O.T. Form
814A, Section 8.15.03.
3.11 Concrete Curbing:
(a) Description: Concrete curbing shall consist of precast or cast in place,
curbing constructed according to the details of the Ellington Highway
Standards. Material shall conform to Section C.2.10 of these Standards.
(b) Construction methods shall conform to D.O.T. Form 814A, Section 8.11.
3.12 Cut-Off Date for Paving:
No paving shall be permitted after October 15th or before March 15th of any year
or whenever the mean temperature on the day of paving is below 50 degrees F.
3.13 Drainage:
(a) Size of pipe shall be adequate to carry the flow. Minimum pipe size for
storm drains shall be 15 inches. Within the highway right-of-way line,
reinforced concrete pipe shall be used. All pipe shall conform to
specifications acceptable to the State Highway Department. Laying length
shall be not less than 4 feet.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 54
(b) Minimum gradient of storm water pipe shall be 1% wherever possible.
Minimum cover shall be 3 feet. Pipes shall be laid on one side of the
street wherever possible.
(c) Catch basins or manholes shall be located at changes in grade or
alignment of the storm water drain. Maximum distance between catch
basins and manholes shall be 400 feet. The face of the curb on catch basin
tops shall be set on the road curb line.
(d) Underdrains shall be constructed wherever, in the opinion of the Town
Engineer, drainage conditions require it. They may be required even
though not shown on the approved construction plans. They shall be of
perforated plain concrete pipe, perforated plastic pipe or perforated
asphalt-coated corrugated metal pipe. Minimum diameter shall be 6
inches with perforations on the bottom. Where drainage conditions are
poor, trenches for storm water drains shall be back-filled with concrete
sand, broken stone or screened gravel, and wrapped in filter fabric. Pipe
shall be laid with open joints.
(e) Drainage ditches will in general not be permitted where it is feasible to
install underground pipe.
(f) Headwalls or flared pipe end sections shall be installed at open ends of
storm water drains.
(g) Bituminous concrete curbing shall be provided to protect adjoining
properties from storm water wash. Storm water shall not be permitted to
run on the street for a distance of more than 400 feet without providing for
its removal by a catch basin or approved lead-off. Where radius is 100
feet in diameter or less, lip curbing shall be Portland Cement concrete.
(h) Drainage easements and flowage rights shall be furnished by the
Developer in the name of the Town of Ellington where they may be
required to install or maintain drainage installations outside roadway
limits. Such easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width. The
Developer shall be fully responsible for obtaining permits to connect any
and all roads of the subdivision to State Highways and for meeting such
requirements as the State Department of Transportation and or the State
Traffic Commission may impose as a condition thereto.
Town of Ellington
Subdivision Regulations
As Amended Through 15 March 2013
Page 55
3.14 Utilities:
(a) All utilities are to be placed underground, unless the Commission
approves overhead installation due to unique conditions of the area. All
utilities shall be installed together with service extensions to the street
right-of-way line for each lot within the proposed development area.
Underground utilities shall be installed prior to the placement of the base
course. Positions of utilities shall be in accordance with the typical
placement section.
(b) All utilities are to be shown on the plans and profiles to preclude any
potential conflicts during the construction stage.
(c) If directed by the Commission, street lights shall be installed at street
intersections. Pole types and luminaries shall be approved by the
Commission. Locations shall be shown on the plans.
(d) Hydrant locations, as approved by the Fire Marshal, shall be shown where
a public water system exists. The Fire Marshal may also require a report
which demonstrates adequate volumes and pressures. Dry hydrants may
also be required by the Fire Marshal. (Updated, March 15, 2013)

AN ORDINANCE PRESCRIBING CERTAIN LAND USE FEES
BE IT ENACTED BY THE TOWN OF ELLINGTON:
Section 1: APPLICATION FEES
WHEREAS, it is necessary for the Town of Ellington to incur certain expenses in order to
administer the Zoning, Subdivision and Inland Wetlands Regulations of the Town which
includes the expense of required legal advertisements, administrative review of applications,
engineering and legal expenses to assure the Town that construction is in accordance with the
regulations and approved plans; and
WHEREAS, it is appropriate to assess the expense incurred by the Town in processing and
administering land use applications and construction against those who precipitate and benefit by
that work;
NOW THEREFORE pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-1c the Town of
Ellington hereby adopts the following Schedule of Fees for various land use activities:
PLANNING AND ZONING FEES
Bond Reduction Processing Fee $200.00
Earth Removal Renewal Fee (Requires Additional Special Permit Fee) $300.00
Subdivision and Re-subdivision Processing Fee (Plus below)
New Road Fee
Existing Town / State Road Fee
$500.00 or
$150 / lot,
whichever is greater
$200.00/100 lin.ft
$50.00/100 lin.ft
Subdivision Re-Approval/Modification (NOT RESUBDIVISION) $100.00
Regulation Amendment Processing Fee $300.00
Zoning Map Amendment Processing Fee (Zone Change) $300.00
Site Plan Review – Entire Site Area
0 to 25,000 sq ft.
25,001 sq ft. to 50,000 sq ft.
50,001 sq ft. and greater
$250.00
$350.00
$550.00
Site Plan Modification – Total Modification Area
0 to 5,000 sq ft.
5,001 sq ft. to 25,000 sq ft.
25,001 sq ft. and greater
$100.00
$200.00
$400.00
Special Permit $200.00
Location approval for motor vehicle dealer’s and repairer’s license $100.00
Zoning Permit – Less than $20,000 construction $20.00
Zoning Permit – Greater than $20,000 construction $150.00
Use Variance $250.00
Bulk Variance (Setback, coverage, height, area, or similar), Appeal of Decision of ZEO $150.00
WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES FEES
Permitted and Non-regulated Uses
Permitted uses as of right
0 to 5 acres of direct impact
5 to 10 acres of direct impact
10 acres and above of direct impact
Nonregulated uses
$75.00
$150.00
$250.00
$50.00
Regulated Uses
Administrative Permits
Agency Permits
Nonsignificant Activity
Significant Activity Base Fee; plus fees below (Fees for significant activities
located within a mapped watershed of a public water supply company are
double the requirements.):
- $5.00 / lineal foot of watercourse directly affected, plus;
- $75.00 each new or modified watercourse crossing, plus;
- $25.00 / acre upland review area not protected by easement, plus;
an additional fee for inland wetland soils directly affected as
follows:
• 1 to 500 sq ft $75.00
• 501 to 2,500 sq ft $150.00
• 2,501 to 10,000 sq ft $500.00
• 10,000 sq ft and above $750.00
$50.00
$250.00
$250.00
Map and Regulation Amendments $150.00
The Wetlands Agency may recover the costs of any expert retained by the Agency to
offer an opinion, substantiate, or refute any subject related to an application for permit
from the Applicant in accordance with CGS Section 22a-42a(e).
THE ELLINGTON PLANNING DEPARTMENT SHALL COLLECT ALL OTHER
FEES OR SURCHARGES AS REQUIRED BY THE CONNECTICUT GENERAL
STATUTES.
Section 2. PRE-APPROVAL DEPOSITS AND FEES
It is anticipated that the fees in Section 1 will reimburse the Town for actual expenses incurred in
the processing of each of the applications to a decision. In addition, as to all applications for
Subdivision, Resubdivision, Special Permit, Site Plan Approval or Modification, and Wetlands
Applications requesting water course crossing or relocation of wetlands, then the land use
department receiving the application will require a deposit equal to the anticipated cost of
materials and services to be performed by professionals other than town employees including but
not limited to the review of the applications for conformance with the Regulations of the
Inland/Wetlands and Watercourse Agency and the Planning and Zoning Commission including
the computation of the cost to construct improvements subject to bonding requirements. Such
sums shall be deposited with the Town and all bills received from professionals other than Town
employees in connection with that Application shall be charged against that deposit. If the
deposit is exhausted, then an additional deposit will be required before any further action is taken
on the Application. Upon approval of the Application and issuance of the requested Permit, any
excess deposit shall be refunded to the Applicant not later than sixty (60) days thereafter.
Section 3: POST-APPROVAL DEPOSIT AND FEES
Prior to issuance of the Permit following approval by the appropriate Land Use Commission or
Agency, the professional who has been engaged to review the Application shall provide to the
Land Use Agency an estimate of the cost for said professionals other than Town employees, to
inspect construction at reasonable intervals to insure that construction complies with the
approved Plan, conformance with the Phase II Regulations of the Connecticut Clean Water Act,
inspections for reductions of Performance Bonds, review of Plan Revisions and documents
necessary to implement or complete the Plans, and review and inspection of all improvements
necessary for Town acceptance of the Project Infrastructure or for issuance of a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance. A fee equal to that estimated cost shall be paid to the Town through the
agent issuing the Permit prior to the recording of any Plan in the land records and prior to the
issuance of any Permit for construction in accordance with the approval. All charges thereafter
by said professionals in connection with a Permit shall be charged against the deposit. If the
deposit is exhausted, then an additional amount shall be collected based upon the professional’s
additional estimate of costs before any further work or inspections are conducted. Failure to
make an additional deposit shall be grounds for the appropriate Enforcement Officer to issue a
Stop Work or Cease and Desist Order. Upon completion of the Project and acceptance by the
Town of any Project infrastructure or issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, any excess
funds shall be returned to the applicant not later than sixty (60) days following said event.
Section 4: EXPERTS
Nothing herein shall prohibit any agency of the Town from requiring the applicant or permittee,
at his expense, to provide professional consultant reports or certification as to conditions before
or after construction [or test results] nor shall this ordinance in any way impact bonding
requirements set forth in any of the land use regulations.
Section 5: EXEMPTIONS
The Town of Ellington and all of its boards, commissions, agencies and departments are exempt
from the payment of any and all of the fees or deposits required by this ordinance. Charities,
churches and non-profit organizations are not exempt.
This Ordinance shall be effective on May 24 , 2006.
APPROVAL RECORD FOR ORDINANCES
Board of Selectmen Recommend Adoption: March 13, 2006
Public Hearing Notice Published On: April 3, 2006
Public Hearing Held On: April 10, 2006
Town Meeting Notice Published On: April 25, 2006
Approved by Town Meeting On: May 1, 2006

TOWN OF ELLINGTON
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. TITLE AND AUTHORITY ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 2
II. DEFINITIONS --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 3
III. INVENTORY OF REGULATED AREAS ----------------------------------------------------------- 8
IV. PERMITTED AND NON-REGULATED USES --------------------------- -------------------------8
V. ACTIVITIES REGULATED BY THE STATE ----------------------------------------------------- 10
VI. REGULATED ACTIVITIES TO BE LICENSED ------------------------------------------------- 11
VII. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS ----------------------------------------------------------------- 12
VIII. APPLICATION PROCEDURES ------------------------------------------------------------------- 19
VIX. PUBLIC HEARINGS --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 20
X. CONSIDERATIONS FOR DECISION -------------------------------------------------------------- 21
XI. DECISION PROCESS AND PERMIT -------------------------------------------------------------- 23
XII. BOND AND INSURANCE --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 25
XIII. ENFORCEMENT ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 26
XIV. AMENDMENTS ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 27
XV. APPEALS ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 28
XVI. CONFLICT AND SEVERANCE ------------------------------------------------------------------ 28
XVII. OTHER PERMITS ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 29
XVIII. EFFECTIVE DATE OF REGULATIONS ----------------------------------------------------- 29
APPENDIX A (Fee Schedule) ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 30
APPENDIX B (Application Form)
APPENDIX C (State DEEP Form)
APPENDIX D (Permitted & Non-Regulated Use Requirements)
Revisions through December 16, 2013, Effective January 15, 2014.
NOTE: These regulations are annotated with paragraph footnotes relating to amendments. The footnotes appear for
illustrative purposes and are not officially regulations in and of themselves.
2
SECTION I TITLE AND AUTHORITY
1.1 The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an indispensable and
irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the state have been endowed.
The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential to an adequate supply
of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion; to
the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to the existence of many forms of animal,
aquatic and plant life. Many inland wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are in
danger of destruction because of unregulated use by reason of the deposition, filling or removal of
material, the diversion or obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures and other uses, all
of which have despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such unregulated
activity has had, and will continue to have, a significant, adverse impact on the environment and
ecology of the state of Connecticut and has and will continue to imperil the quality of the
environment thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and recreational values and
benefits of the state for its citizens now and forever more. The preservation and protection of the
wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary, undesirable and unregulated uses,
disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare and safety
of the citizens of the state. It is, therefore, the purpose of these regulations to protect the citizens
of the state by making provisions for the protection, preservation, maintenance and use of the
inland wetlands and watercourses by minimizing their disturbance and pollution; maintaining and
improving water quality in accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state or local
authority; preventing damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other
beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats
thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; protecting the quality of
wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic, aesthetic, recreational and other
public and private uses and values; and protecting the state's potable fresh water supplies from the
dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, misuse and mismanagement by providing an orderly
process to balance the need for the economic growth of the state and the use of its land with the
need to protect its environment and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people of the
state, the safety of such natural resources for their benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and
enjoyment of generations yet unborn.
1.2 These regulations shall be known as the "Town of Ellington Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Regulations.”
1.3 The Inland Wetland and Watercourses Agency of the Town of Ellington was established
pursuant to an ordinance adopted May 1, 1974. The Agency shall implement the purposes
and provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act in the Town of Ellington
1.4 These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in
accordance with the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and these
regulations.
1.5 The Agency or its agent shall enforce all provisions of these regulations and shall issue,
issue with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, and deny permits for all
regulated activities proposed to be located within regulated areas in the Town of
Ellington pursuant to Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended. The Agency or its agent shall also review proposed permitted and
non-regulated uses in order to determine that, based on the information provided; the
proposed permitted or non-regulated use does not include regulated activities requiring
approval by the Agency or its agent.
3
1.6 The Agency’s duly appointed agent shall have the authority to approve certain regulated
activities proposed within regulated upland review areas, and as provided for in Section 6
of these regulations and CGS 22a-42a (c) (2).
SECTION II DEFINITIONS
2.1 As used in these regulations:
a. "Act" means the Inland Wetland and Watercourses Act, Sections 22a-36 through
22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
b. “Administrative Permit” is a permit issued by the Agency’s agent pursuant to
Section 6 of these regulations, for certain limited activities to be located within
the regulated upland review area.
c. "Agency" means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency of the Town of
Ellington
d. “Agency Permit” is a permit issued by the Agency, as opposed to an
administrative permit issued by its agent.
e. “Best Management Practices” (“BMPs”) means a practice, procedure, activity,
structure or facility designed to prevent or minimize pollution or other
environmental damage or to maintain or enhance existing environmental quality.
Such management practices include, but are not limited to: erosion and
sedimentation controls, restrictions on land use or development, construction
setbacks from wetlands or watercourses, proper disposal of waste materials,
procedures for equipment maintenance to prevent fuel spillage, construction
methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of wetlands and watercourses,
procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows, confining construction that
must take place in watercourses to times when water flows are low and fish and
wildlife will not be adversely affected.
f. "Bogs" are watercourses distinguished by evergreen trees and shrubs underlain by
peat deposits, poor or very poor drainage, and highly acidic conditions.
g. “Clean Fill” means uncontaminated natural soil, rock, concrete or asphalt which is
inert and poses no threat, present or future, of pollution to surface or groundwater.
Clean fill excludes demolition or construction waste or debris such as but not
limited to, stumps, trees, solid waste, bulky waste, and refuse (ref. RCSA 22a-
209).
h. "Clear-cutting" is the harvest of timber products in a fashion which removes all
species of trees down to a 2" diameter at breast height.
i. "Commission member" means a member of the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Agency of the Town of Ellington.
j. "Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection" means the
Commissioner of the State of Connecticut Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection (DEEP).
k. “Conservation Easement" is a restrictive covenant running from the property
owner to the Town of Ellington, which restrictive covenant shall attach to and run
4
with the land and be binding upon the property owner and his heirs, successors
and assigns. The conservation easement shall be a legal agreement between the
property owner and the Town, wherein the property owner agrees to perpetually
preserve, protect, conserve and maintain in a natural scenic and open condition,
all land contained within the legal description encompassing the conservation
easement. By natural, scenic and open conditions it is hereby meant that the land
must remain undisturbed (i.e. no construction; no filling or excavation; no other
activities detrimental to drainage, flood control, water conservation, erosion
control, soil conservation or the preservation of wildlife). A fee simple interest in
the land contained within the conservation easement shall remain with the owner
of the land subject to the conservation easement in favor of the Town.
Conservation easements may with the Agencies approval and in its sole
discretion, also run to a responsible agency or non-profit land trust.
l. “Construction Limits” are the limits of any activity, including but not limited to,
clearing, land grading, site access, stockpile areas and other such uses, associated
with a regulated activity, non-regulated activity, or permitted activity proposed to
be located within a regulated area. Also known as “limits of development,”
“project limits,” and “limits of activity.”
m. “Continual Flow” is flow of water which persists for an extended period of time,
but that may be interrupted for short periods during periods of drought or during
low flow periods of the annual hydrological cycle, June through September, but it
recurs in prolonged succession.
n. "Deposit" includes, but shall not be limited to fill, grade, dump, place, discharge
or emit.
o. "Discharge" means emission of any water, substance, or material into waters of
the State, whether or not such substance causes pollution.
p. "Disturbing the natural and indigenous character of the land" means to alter the
inland wetlands and watercourses by reason of removal or deposition of material,
clear-cutting, alteration or obstruction of water flow, or will result in the pollution
of the wetlands or watercourse.
q. “Erodable Soils” are any soils classified by the USDA Soil Conservation Service
as being moderately or highly erodable.
r. “Essential to the farming operation” means that the proposed activity is necessary
and indispensable to sustain farming activities on the farm.
s. "Farming" shall be consistent with the definition as noted in Section 1-1(q) of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as may be amended.
t. “Feasible” means able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound
engineering principles.
u. “Functional and Qualitative Assessment” is an analysis describing in detail, the
functions and values of the affected and potentially affected regulated areas,
inland wetlands and watercourses, and generally following the standards and
5
format of the US Army Corp of Engineers, State DEEP or other Commission
approved method.
v. "Gardening" means the tilling of soil, planting, cultivating and harvesting of
plants.
w. "Grazing" means using any tract of land to feed or supply farm animals with grass
or pasture, to tend farm animals, or feeding or growing silage and herbage.
x. "Harvesting of Crops" means gathering plants or animals or plant or animal
products which have been grown to be harvested.
y. “Intermittent Watercourse” is a watercourse with a defined permanent channel
and bank and at least two of the following characteristics; evidence of scour or
deposits of recent alluvium or detritus; the presence of standing or flowing water
for a duration longer than a particular storm incident; or the presence of
hydrophytic vegetation.
z. “License” see permit.
aa. “Marshes” are watercourses that are distinguished by the absence of trees and
shrubs and the dominance of soft-stemmed herbaceous plants. The water table in
marshes is at or above the ground surface throughout the year and areas of open
water six inches or more in depth are common, but seasonal water table
fluctuations are encountered.
bb. "Material" means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including
but not limited to: soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, mud, debris,
sand, refuse or waste.
cc. "Municipality" means the Town of Ellington, Tolland County, Connecticut.
dd. "Nurseries" means land used for propagating trees, shrubs or other plans for
transplanting, sale or for use as stock for grafting.
ee. "Permit" means the whole or any part of any license, certificate or approval or
similar form of permission which may be required of any person by the provisions
of these regulations under the authority of the Inland Wetlands Agency or its
agent.
ff. "Permittee" means the person to whom a permit has been issued.
gg. "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including
municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
hh.. "Pollution" means harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering
unclean or impure of any waters of the state by reason of any waste or other
materials discharged or deposited therein by any public or private sewer or
otherwise so as directly or indirectly to come in contact with any waters. This
includes, but is not limited to, erosion and sedimentation resulting from any
filling, land clearing or excavation activity.
6
ii. “Prudent” means economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social
benefits to be derived from the proposed regulated activity provided cost may be
considered in deciding what is prudent and further provided, a mere showing of
expense will not necessarily mean an alternative is imprudent.
jj. “Regulated Activity” means any operation within or use of a wetland or
watercourse involving clear cutting, removal of material, deposit of material, or
any obstruction, construction, alteration or pollution, of such a wetland or
watercourse, but shall not include the specified activities in Section 22a-40 of the
Connecticut General Statutes and the specified activities in Section 4 of these
regulations, subject to the conditions therein, Furthermore:
1. Any clearing, grubbing, filling, grading, paving, excavating, constructing,
depositing or removal of material, or discharging of stormwater on land within
one hundred (100) feet measured horizontally from the boundary of a
wetlands or watercourse area or two-hundred and fifty (250) feet measured
horizontally from the boundary of a wetlands or watercourse area located
within an area designated as a watershed by a Water Company is a regulated
activity.
2. The Commission may rule that any activity that alters the existing rate, or
quality of any stormwater discharge conveyed to a regulated area or upland
review area, is likely to impact or affect wetlands or watercourses and is a
regulated activity.
3. The Commission may rule that any other activity located within the regulated
area, or in any other non-wetland or non-watercourse area, is likely to impact
or affect wetlands or watercourses and is a regulated activity.
kk. "Regulated area" means any inland wetland, watercourse or upland review area as
defined in these regulations.
ll. "Remove" includes, but shall not be limited to, drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge,
suck, grub, bulldoze, dragline or blast.
mm. "Rendering unclean or impure" means any alteration of the physical, chemical or
biological properties of any of the waters of the state, including, but not limited
to, change in odor, color, turbidity or taste.
nn. "Significant activity" means any activity, including, but not limited to, the
following activities which may have a major effect on the area for which an
application has been filed or on another part of the inland wetland or watercourse
system:
1. Any activity involving a deposition or removal of material which will or
may have a substantial effect on the regulated area or on another part of
the inland wetland or watercourse system, or
2. Any activity which substantially changes the natural channel or may
inhibit the natural dynamics of a watercourse system, or
3. Any activity which substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an
inland wetland or watercourse to support aquatic, plant or animal life and
7
habitats; prevent flooding, supply water, assimilate waste, facilitate
drainage, provide recreation or open space or other functions, or
4. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause
substantial turbidity, siltation or sedimentation in a wetland or
watercourse, or
5. Any activity which causes a substantial diminution of flow of a natural
watercourse, or groundwater levels of the regulated area, or
6. Any activity which causes or has the potential to cause pollution of a
wetland or watercourse, or
7. Any activity which creates conditions which may adversely affect the
health, welfare and safety of any individual or the community, or
8. Any activity which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse
areas having demonstrable scientific or educational value.
oo. “Significant Slope” a land surface having a slope of 20% or more for a linear
distance (cross slope) of fifty (50) feet or more.
pp. "Soil Scientist" means an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards
set by the federal Office of Personnel Management.
qq. "Submerged lands" are those lands which are inundated by water on a seasonal or
more frequent basis.
rr. “Swamps” are watercourses that are distinguished by the dominance of wetland
trees and shrubs.
ss. "Town" means the Town of Ellington, Tolland County in the State of
Connecticut.
tt. "Upland Review Area" means an area within 250 feet of any watercourse or
wetland as defined by these regulations in areas designated as a Watershed Area
of a Water Company as defined in Section 16-1 of the General Statues and within
100 feet of all other watercourses or wetlands.
uu. "Waste" means sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive,
which may pollute or tend to pollute any of the wetlands and watercourses of the
Town or State.
vv. "Watercourses" means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes,
swamps, bogs, and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or
intermittent, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border
upon the Town or any portion thereof, not regulated pursuant to Section 22a-28
through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and
bank and the occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics; evidence
of scour or deposits of recent alluvium or detritus, the presence of standing or
flowing water for a duration longer than a particular storm incident, or the
presence of hydrophytic vegetation.
8
ww. "Wetlands" means land, including submerged land not regulated pursuant to
section 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes,
which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly
drained, alluvial and flood plain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as it
may be amended from time to time, of the Natural Resources Conservation
Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Such areas may include
filled, graded, or excavated sites which possess an aquic (saturated) soil moisture
regime as defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey.
SECTION III INVENTORY OF REGULATED AREAS
3.1 The map of regulated areas, entitled "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, Ellington,
Connecticut," delineates the general location and boundaries of inland wetlands, the
general location of watercourses and the general location of regulated upland review
areas. Copies of this map are available for inspection in the office of the Town Planner
or Town Clerk.
In all cases, the precise location of regulated areas shall be determined by the actual
character of the land, the distribution of regulated soil types, and locations of
watercourses. Such determinations shall be made by field inspection and testing
conducted by a certified soil scientist where soil classifications are required, or where
watercourse determinations are required, by other qualified individuals deemed
acceptable to the agency or its agent. The Agency may use aerial photography, remote
sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils maps, site inspection observations or other
information in determining the location of the boundaries of wetlands and watercourses.
3.2 Any person may petition the agency for an amendment to the map. All petitions for a
map change shall be submitted in writing and shall include all relevant facts and
circumstances which support the change. The petitioner shall bear the burden of proof
regarding the proposed map amendment. Such proof shall be in accordance with Section
14 of these regulations.
3.3 The Inland Wetland and Watercourses Agency or its designated agent(s) shall monitor
and maintain general surveillance of all regulated areas and a current inventory of
regulated areas within the town.
SECTION IV PERMITTED & NONREGULATED USES
4.1 The following operations and uses shall be permitted within regulated areas as of right:
a. Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops and farm ponds of
three acres or less essential to the farming operation, and activities conducted by,
or under the authority of the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection
for the purposes of wetland and watercourse restoration or enhancement or
mosquito control.
The provisions of this section shall not be construed to include road construction
or the erection of buildings not directly related to the farming operation,
9
relocation of watercourses with continual flow, filling or reclamation of wetlands
or watercourses with continual flow, clear cutting of timber except for the
expansion of agricultural crop land, or the mining of top soil, peat, sand, gravel or
similar material from wetlands or watercourses for the purposes of sale;
b. A residential home for which a building permit has been issued or on a
subdivision lot provided the permit has been issued or the subdivision approved
by the Ellington Planning and Zoning Commission as of July 1, 1974, and further
provided no residential home shall be permitted as of right pursuant to this
subdivision unless the building permit was obtained on or before July 1, 1987.
The applicant shall document this right by providing a certified copy of the
building permit and approved site plan showing proposed and existing
topographic contours, house and well locations, septic systems, driveways,
approval dates or other information necessary to document his or her right
hereunder;
c. Boat anchorage or mooring, not to include dredging or dock construction;
d. Uses incidental to the enjoyment or maintenance of residential property, such
property defined as equal to or smaller than the largest minimum residential lot
site permitted anywhere in the municipality. Such incidental uses shall include
maintenance of existing structures and landscaping, but shall not include removal
or deposition of significant amounts of material from or onto a wetland or
watercourse, or diversion or alteration of a watercourse.
e. Construction and operation, by water companies as defined by Section 16-1 or by
municipal water supply systems as provided for in Chapter 102 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs and other facilities necessary to the
impounding, storage and withdrawal of water in connection with public water
supplies except as provided in Sections 22a-401 and 22a-403 of the General
Statutes.
f. Maintenance relating to any drainage pipe which existed before the effective date
of any municipal regulations adopted pursuant to section 22a-42a or July 1, 1974,
whichever is earlier, provided such pipe is on property which is zoned as
residential but which does not contain hydrophytic vegetation. For purposes of
the subdivision “maintenance” means the removal of accumulated leaves, soil,
and other debris whether by hand or machine, while the pipe remains in place;
and
g. Withdrawals of water for fire emergency purposes.
(Section 4.1g added 12/12/11, Eff.1/15/12, Pursuant to 2011 Legislation and Regulations Advisory –DEEP.)
4.2 The following operations and uses shall be permitted as nonregulated uses within
regulated areas, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of a
wetland or watercourse by removal or deposition of material, alteration or obstruction of
water flow or pollution of the wetland or watercourse:
a. Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shell-fish, and wildlife;
10
b. Outdoor recreation including play and sporting areas, golf courses, field trails,
nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin diving, camping, boating,
water skiing, trapping, hunting, fishing and shell-fishing where otherwise legally
permitted and regulated; and
c. The installation of a dry hydrant by or under the authority of a municipal fire
department, provided such dry hydrant is only used for firefighting purposes and
there is no alternative access to a public water supply. For purposes of this
section, “dry hydrant” means a non-pressurized pipe system that: (A) is readily
accessible to fire department apparatus from a proximate public road, (B)
provides for the withdrawal of water by suction to such fire department apparatus,
and (C) is permanently installed into an existing lake, pond or stream that is a
dependable source of water.
(Section 4.2c added 12/12/11, Eff.1/15/12, Pursuant to 2011 Legislation and Regulations Advisory –DEEP.)
4.3 Any dredging or any erection, placement, retention or maintenance of any structure, fill,
obstruction or encroachment, or any work incidental to such activities, conducted by a
State Agency, which activity is regulated under sections 22a-28 to 22a-35 inclusive, or
sections 22a-359b to 22a-363f inclusive, shall not require any permit or approval under
sections 22a-36 to 22a-45 inclusive.
4.4 All activities in regulated areas involving filling, excavation, dredging, clear-cutting,
clearing grading and excavation or any other alteration or use of a regulated area not
specifically permitted by this section and otherwise defined as a regulated activity by
these regulations shall require a permit from the Agency or its agent in accordance with
Section 6 of these regulations.
4.5 To carry out the purposes of this section, any person proposing to carry out a permitted or
nonregulated operation or use within a regulated area shall, prior to commencement of
such operation or use, notify the Agency or its agent on a form provided by it, and
provide the Agency or its agent with sufficient information to enable it to properly
determine that the proposed operation and use is a permitted or nonregulated use within a
regulated area.
The Agency or its designated agent shall rule that the proposed operation or use or
portion of it is a permitted or a nonregulated use or operation or that a permit is required.
Such ruling shall be in writing and shall be made no later than the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Agency following the meeting at which the request was
received. The Town Planner or his or her designee, acting as the designated agent for the
Agency, may make such ruling on behalf of the Agency at any time.
SECTION V ACTIVITIES REGULATED BY THE STATE
5.1 The Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection shall have exclusive
jurisdiction over regulated activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses, undertaken
by any department, agency or instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except any
local or regional board of education pursuant to sections 22a-22a-45a of the Connecticut
General Statues.
11
5.2 The Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection shall have exclusive
jurisdiction over tidal wetlands designated and regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28
through 22a-35 of the General Statutes, as amended.
5.3 The Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection shall have exclusive
jurisdiction over activities authorized under a dam repair or removal order issued by the
Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection under section 22a-402 of the
Connecticut General Statues or a permit issued by the Commissioner of Energy and
Environmental Protection under sections 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statues.
Any person receiving such dam repair or removal order or permit shall not be required to
obtain a permit from a municipal wetland agency for any action necessary to comply with
said dam order or to carry out the activities authorized by said permit.
5.4 The Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection shall have exclusive
jurisdiction over the discharge of fill or dredged materials into the wetlands and
watercourses of the state pursuant to Section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as
amended, for activities regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404
of the Federal Clean Water Act.
SECTION VI REGULATED ACTIVITIES TO BE LICENSED
6.1 No person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first obtaining a permit
for such activity from the Inland Wetland and Watercourses Agency of the Town of
Ellington or its agent.
6.2 The Agency or its agent shall regulate any operation or use within any upland review
area, wetland or watercourse involving removal or deposition of material, or any
obstruction, construction, alteration or pollution, within such wetlands, watercourses and
upland review areas, and any other regulated activity, unless such operation or use is
permitted or non-regulated pursuant to Section 4 of these regulations.
6.3 Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a regulated activity without the prior
authorization of the Town of Ellington Inland Wetland and Watercourses Agency or its
agent, or violating any other provision of these regulations, shall be subject to the
enforcement proceedings and penalties prescribed in Section 13 of these regulations and
any other remedies as provided by law.
6.4 The Agency’s duly authorized agent shall have the authority to approve administrative
permits for decks, patios, detached accessory structures, grading, fill, excavation and
clearing on residentially zoned land or after receipt by the Agency, the Agency may
delegate to its Agent the authority to approve or extend an activity on commercially or
industrially zoned land where all activity related to such uses will be located a minimum
of twenty-five (25) feet from any wetland or watercourse. Said improvements shall not
be approved by the agent unless the agent finds that the conduct of such activity would
result in no greater than a minimal impact on any wetlands or watercourse, and provided
such agent has completed the comprehensive training program developed by the
Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection pursuant to section 22a-39 of the
Connecticut General Statutes. (Amended 11/20/06, Effective 12/08/06, to allow Agent permits for some regulated
activity on commercial/industrial zoned property)
12
Requests for such approval shall be made on a form provided by the Agency and shall
contain the information listed under Section 7 of these regulations and any other
information the Agency or its agent may reasonably require. Not withstanding the
provisions for receipt and processing applications prescribed in these regulations, such
agent may approve or extend such an activity at any time.
In evaluating an application for an administrative permit pursuant to this section, the
agent shall consider the decision criteria described in section 10 of these regulations as
applicable. In addition, the agent shall have the right at any time, to forward the request
to the Agency for its review. The Agency, upon reviewing such request, may determine
that an Agency permit is required.
6.5 Any person receiving an administrative permit shall, within ten (10) days of the date of
such approval, publish, at the applicant’s expense, notice of the action in a newspaper
having a general circulation in the town wherein the activity is located. Any person may
appeal the agent’s decision to the Agency within fifteen (15) days after the publication
date of the notice of action and the Agency shall consider such appeal at its next regularly
scheduled meeting, provided such meeting is no earlier than three business days after
receipt by the agency or its agent of such appeal. Any person may appear and be heard at
the meeting held by the Agency to consider the subject appeal. The Agency shall, at its
discretion, sustain, alter, or reject the decision of its agent or require an application for a
permit to be considered by the Agency in accordance with the requirements of these
regulations.
SECTION VII APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
7.1 Any person wishing to undertake a regulated activity, to renew or amend an existing
permit or requesting review regarding notification to the Agency of a proposed nonregulated
or permitted use, shall apply for a permit or review on a form entitled "Town of
Ellington Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency - Application for Permit." A
complete initial application shall include fifteen copies of the information listed in
Section 7.4. All applicants who are not owners of the subject property, shall submit the
written consent of the property owner or owners to the Agency at the time of initial
application.
By submitting the application, the applicant;
a. is expressly authorizing access to the subject site for the Agency and its staff;
b. is certifying that the information provided with the application is true and
accurate to the best of their knowledge;
c. is certifying that they are aware of and understand the application
requirements and regulations, and;
d. acknowledges that any permit issued on the basis of inaccurate, misleading or
faulty information may be deemed void by the Agency.
7.2 No application shall be deemed sufficient unless it shall be in such form and contain such
information as the Agency or its agent deems necessary in order to determine compliance
with applicable requirements of these regulations. The Agency shall inform the applicant
13
in writing of any request for additional information, data, studies or other support
documentation beyond that required in section 7.4 herein.
7.3 If an application to the Town of Ellington Planning and Zoning Commission for
subdivision or resubdivision involves land containing a wetland or watercourse, the
applicant shall, in accordance with CGS 8-3(g), 8-3c or 8-26 as applicable, submit an
application for a permit to the agency in accordance with this section, no later than the
day the application is filed with such Planning and Zoning Commission.
7.4 All initial applications and notifications shall include the following information.
Submission of these items shall constitute a complete application sufficient for receipt
and initiation of the formal application review process. Sufficiency for purposes of
receipt shall not be construed to mean that an initial application is sufficient with respect
to compliance with all applicable standards and decision criteria, although the Agency in
its sole discretion may after review, deem the initial application to be sufficient in regards
to compliance with all applicable standards and decision criteria. Subsequent to the
initial submittal, receipt and review of a complete initial application, the Agency, upon its
review of the initial submittal and in order to properly evaluate the proposal, may require
additional technical or other support documentation, as described in section 7.5 herein.
In addition, the Agency or its agent may waive, in whole or in part, any of the
requirements of sections 7.4 and 7.5, if they determine that such information will not
assist them in their evaluation of the proposed activity.
Requirements for Initial Agency and Administrative Permit Applications
a. A complete application form entitled “Town of Ellington Inland Wetland and
Watercourses Agency Application.” These forms are available in the offices of
the Town Planner and in appendix B of these regulations.
b. The required fee per the fee schedule listed in appendix A of these regulations.
c. A list of abutting parcels, including parcels across any streets (based on a
projection of the subject parcel property lines), the owners of such parcels as of
the date of application submittal according to the Ellington land evidence records,
parcel APN’s per the assessor’s records, and the mailing addresses for said
owners, according to the latest records available in the Ellington Assessor’s
Office.
d. A complete State DEEP Inland Wetland and Watercourses Activity Reporting
Form, including all necessary attachments. This form and the required
attachments are available in the office of the Town Planner.
e. A written and signed certification in regards to the following;
1. Whether or not any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is
proposed is located within 500 feet of an adjoining town;
2. Whether or not a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project will
use streets within an adjoining town to exit or enter the site;
3. Whether or not sewer or water drainage from the project will flow through
and impact the sewer or water drainage system of an adjoining town; and/or
14
4. Whether water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other
municipal or private property within an adjoining town.
f. A written and signed certification whether or not the proposed activity will affect
land located within the mapped watershed of a public water supply company.
g. A detailed narrative describing the proposed activity and its purpose. Such
narrative shall include at a minimum, the following:
1. The amount, in square feet and linear feet (as applicable) of regulated
upland review area affected, of inland wetlands affected, and of
watercourses affected by the proposed activity. These areas should be
described in terms of the overall (aggregate) area affected, as well as with
regard to permanent versus temporary impacts.
2. The general characteristics of the regulated areas being affected by the
proposal in terms of land cover, vegetation, soil types, slope, and
relationship to other regulated areas on and off the project site.
3. For all uses, the purpose and a description of the proposed activity and
proposed erosion and sedimentation controls and other best management
practices and mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition
of issuing a permit for the proposed regulated activity including, but not
limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other
environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental
quality, or (3) in the following order of priority, restore, enhance and
create productive wetland or watercourse resources.
4. For commercial and industrial uses, a general description of the business
operations, including but not limited to, the type of business, production
and manufacturing procedures, handling and disposition of any process
wastewaters, cooling waters, and/or stormwater, types of materials used
and stored on site, spill contingency plans, septic disposal (unless tied to
sewers), waste/refuse storage, handling and disposal, and similar
operations.
5. For commercial and industrial uses, a list of current State of Connecticut
and Federal environmental and land use permits issued for the facility.
Such list shall also include a disclosure of any enforcement action taken
by the State DEEP regarding the facility, either current or within the
previous five years from the date of the subject application, including any
consent orders, fines, penalties and/or resolution of such enforcement
actions.
6. A construction or project narrative describing items such as the method of
construction, duration of construction activity, methods to control
stormwater and limit erosion before, during and following construction,
type of equipment to be used, type and location of access to the regulated
area, storage and disposal of excess materials or stockpiles, type and
composition of any fill material, removal and disposition of trees and
stumps, measures to dewater, divert flows, and similar activities.
15
7. A description of any changes to water velocity, volume or course, the
anticipated impacts of these changes, and measures to mitigate those
impacts.
8. A list of any other local, State of Connecticut or U.S. environmental or
land use approvals required for the proposed regulated activity such as but
not limited to, DEEP Construction or Commercial Stormwater Permit
Registration, Army Corp permits, ConnDOT, STC, and waste water or
process water discharge permits.
9. Where stormwater systems are proposed, detailed storm drainage
calculations, construction details and other support documentation,
certified by a Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the State of
Connecticut.
10. If the area to be disturbed is ½ acre or more in area, a detailed erosion
control plan and narrative, in compliance with the latest State DEEP
Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
11. A disclosure listing any previous Ellington inland wetland permit
applications and Ellington wetland enforcement actions regarding the
subject parcel(s).
12. A graphic and textual description of all alternatives to the proposed
regulated activity considered which would cause less or no environmental
impact to wetlands or watercourses, and a general discussion of each,
including the reason or reasons for choosing the proposed alternative as
set forth in the application. This requirement relates to the evaluation of
the initial application only, and shall not be construed as a conclusion by
the Agency or its agent that the proposed activity is “significant.” The
determination of significance shall be made by the Agency or its agent
after review of the initial application, and if the proposed regulated
activity or any component of that activity is deemed “significant,” the
applicant may be required by the Agency or its agent to submit a more
detailed analysis of alternatives, in order to allow the Agency to make the
necessary findings with respect to prudent and feasible alternatives.
h. A Site Plan as follows:
1. Administrative Permits
A site plan, drawn to scale (typically 1:20 or 1:40) and meeting the
standards of a “class D” survey, depicting the parcel boundaries, existing
topography at 2 foot contours, location of wetlands or watercourses on or
within 100 feet or within 250 feet of the proposed activity, upland review
area limits, limit of the 100 year flood boundary, existing structures,
driveways, parking areas, utilities, easements, septic fields, potable water
supply, ground cover, drainage rights, public watershed boundary, and a
title block with applicant’s name, owner’s name, parcel street address,
APN, plan date and scale.
16
The site plan shall also depict in detail, all proposed regulated activities,
including but not limited to, construction limits, site access, structures,
utilities, clearing, fill, excavation, grading, material, equipment and
stockpile locations, erosion and stormwater controls, final stabilization and
construction details.
2. Agency Permits
Agency permit applications shall include a site plan depicting at least the
information required for an administrative permit site plan, but shall also
meet the following additional minimum standards;
a. The plan shall meet A-2 standards for accuracy.
b. The plan shall depict the location of regulated wetland soils and
watercourses, and include the certification by the soil scientist who
field located such regulated areas.
c. The plan shall include a certification by a licensed professional
engineer regarding any grading or construction proposed.
d. The plan shall show the location of abutting properties, including
across any streets, and the owners and APN’s of said properties.
e. The plan shall include a location map showing the subject parcel in
relationship to parcels, streets, wetlands, watercourses, dedicated open
space and conservation easement locations, and potable water supply
watershed boundaries within 1,000 feet of the subject parcel.
f. The plan shall show any proposed mitigation areas and related details,
if such mitigation is proposed or required to comply with applicable
standards.
7.5 If the Agency determines, based upon its review of the initial submittal that either the
proposed activity involves a significant activity as determined by the Agency, or
additional technical or other information is necessary in order to properly and fully
evaluate the proposed activity, any or all of the additional information listed below, may
be required. Requests for approval of significant activities shall only be approved by the
Agency.
a. Engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the
proposed project and any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic
modifications to watercourses or watershed areas;
b. Mapping of all soil types consistent with the categories established by the
National Cooperative Soil Survey of the U.S. Soil Conservation Service;
c. A functional and qualitative analysis, describing the ecological communities
and functions of the wetlands, watercourses and upland review areas affected
by the proposed regulated activity and the effects of the proposed regulated
activities on these communities and wetland functions. Such analysis shall be
prepared by a professional having demonstrated competence by virtue of
17
relevant education and experience in the fields of wetland ecology, plant
biology, hydrology and related areas;
d. Description of how each alternative considered by the applicant would change,
diminish, or enhance the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands
or watercourses involved in the application; and a description of why each
alternative not chosen which would cause less or no environmental impact to
wetlands or watercourses was deemed neither prudent nor feasible;
e. Analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material;
f. Existing and anticipated alkalinity, salinity, Ph, nitrate, phosphate, turbidity,
bacteria levels, temperature, dissolved oxygen levels, and similar attributes of
any affected watercourses or water bodies directly affected by the proposed
activity;
g. State DEEP groundwater and surface water quality designations for existing
water resources on and within 1,000 feet of the subject activity, as well as the
State DEEP’s target classification for these same areas;
h. An indication whether or not any endangered, threatened or species of special
concern (plant and animal) are located within 1,000 feet of the subject activity,
but limited to species that are wetland dependent, and based on the most recent
State DEEP Natural Diversity Database mapping.
i. Location of any State designated fisheries within 1,000 feet of the subject
activity.
j. Measures that would mitigate the impact of the proposed activity. Such
measures include, but are not limited to, plans or actions which avoid
destruction or diminution of wetland or watercourse functions, recreational
uses and natural habitats, which prevent flooding, degradation of water quality,
erosion and sedimentation and obstruction of drainage, or which otherwise
safeguard water resources.
7.6 Any application to extend the expiration date of a previously issued permit shall be filed
with the Agency not later than thirty-five (35) days prior to the expiration date for the
permit in accordance with Subsections 8.4 through 8.8 of these regulations. Any
application for renewal or extension shall be made in accordance with this Section
provided:
a. The application may incorporate by reference the documentation and record of the
original application;
b. The application shall state the reason why the authorized activities where not
initiated or completed within the time specified in the permit;
c. The application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved
with or affecting wetlands or watercourses or the property for which the permit
was issued;
d. The Agency may accept an untimely application to extend the expiration date of a
permit if the authorized activity is ongoing and allow the continuation of work
18
beyond the expiration date if in it judgment, the permit is likely to be extended
and the public interest or environment will be best served by not interrupting the
activity. The application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time
of filing and the schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit.
e. The Agency shall evaluate the application pursuant to Section 10 of these
regulations and grant the application as filed, grant it with any terms or
limitations, or deny it without prejudice with respect to the filing of a new permit
application.
f. Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon request of the permit
holder, unless the Agency finds that there has been a substantial change in
circumstances which requires a new permit application or an enforcement action
has been undertaken with regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was
issued, provided no permit shall be valid for more than ten years, and further
provided that any permit issued prior to July 1, 2011 that did not expire prior to
May 9, 2011 shall be valid for no more than fourteen years.
(Section 7.6f amended 12/12/11, Eff.1/15/12, Pursuant to 2011 Legislation and Regulations Advisory –DEEP.)
7.7 For any permit application involving property subject to a conservation restriction or
preservation restriction, the following shall apply:
a. For purposes of this section, “conservation restriction” means a limitation, whether or
not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or conditions, in any deed,
will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described
therein, including, but not limited to, the state or any political subdivision of the state,
or in any order of taking such land whose purpose is to retain land or water areas
predominantly in their natural, scenic or open condition or in agricultural, farming,
forest or open space use.
b. For purposes of this section, “preservation restriction” means a limitation, whether or
not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed,
will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of land, including, but
not limited to, the state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of
taking of such land whose purpose is to preserve historically significant structures or
sites.
c. No person shall file a permit application, other than for interior work in an existing
building or for exterior work on an existing building that does not expand or alter the
footprint of such existing building, relating to property that is subject to a
conservation restriction or a preservation restriction unless the applicant provides
proof that the applicant has provided written notice of such application, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the party holding such restriction, including, but not
limited to, any state agency that holds such restriction, not later than sixty days prior
to the filing of the permit application.
19
d. In lieu of such notice pursuant to subsection 7.7c, the applicant may submit a letter
from the holder of such restriction or from the holder’s authorized agent, verifying
that the application is in compliance with the terms of the restriction.
(Section 7.7(a-d) added 2/14/11, Eff. 3/15/11, Pursuant to 2010 Legislation and Regulations Advisory –DEP.)
SECTION VIII APPLICATION PROCEDURES
8.1 All applications shall be filed with the Planning Department, as the designated office of
the Commission, in writing and when requested by the Commission or its Agent in
electronic format. (Amended 12/10/12, Eff. 1/1/2013, Pursuant to Jan. 2012 CT Practice Book Changes)
8.2 Where any portion of the wetland or watercourse on which the regulated activity is
proposed is located within 500 feet of the boundary of Vernon, East Windsor, South
Windsor, Enfield, Somers, Willington, Stafford, or Tolland, the applicant shall give
written notice of the proposed activity, certified mail return receipt requested, to the
adjacent municipal wetland agency on the same day of filing an inland wetland permit
application with the Ellington Inland Wetland and Watercourses Agency.
Documentation of such notice shall be provided to the Ellington Inland Wetland Agency.
8.3 When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity
upon an inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within the watershed of a
water company as defined in Section 25-32a of the General Statues, the applicant shall
provide written notice of the application to the water company and the Commissioner of
Public Health in a format prescribed by said commissioner, provided such water
company or said commissioner has filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershed
on the Ellington Land Records and with the Agency.
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed
not later than seven days after the date of the application. The water company and the
Commissioner of Public Health, through a representative, may appear and be heard at any
hearing on the application. Documentation of such notice shall be provided to the
Agency. (Amended 4/25/07, Effective 5/18/07, to include notice requirement to the Commissioner of Public Health.)
8.4 The Agency shall, in accordance with CGS 8-7b(f) and 22a-42b notify the clerk of any
adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request or
plan concerning any project on any site in which;
a. Any portion of the property affected by a decision of the Agency, is within 500
feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use
streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow
through and significantly impact the sewage or drainage system within the
adjoining municipality; or,
d. Water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or
private property within the adjoining municipality.
20
Notice of the pendency of such application shall be made by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the date of receipt
of the application, petition, appeal, request or plan.
8.5 The date of receipt of any application, petition, request or appeal shall be the day of the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency immediately following the day of
submission to the Agency or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal, or
thirty-five days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
8.6 At any time during the review period, the applicant shall provide such additional
information as the Agency may reasonably require in writing, and when requested by the
Commission or its Agent in electronic format. Requests for such additional information
shall not stay the time limitations as set forth in these regulations. All documents to be
considered by the Agency shall be filed with the Planning Department and available for
public inspection no less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of next scheduled
meeting. The Agency may refuse to consider any information that is submitted after the
aforementioned fifteen (15) day timeframe if it deems that it, staff or consultants have
had insufficient time to review such information or evidence properly before the
expiration of the timeline for decision and or any extension of time permitted pursuant to
the Connecticut General Statutes. However, nothing in this Section shall prohibit the
Agency, in exercise of its discretion, from receiving evidence from any person later than
the aforementioned date if adequate time is present to review the nature of the
information. (Amended12/10/12, Eff. 1/1/2013, Pursuant to Jan. 2012 CT Practice Book Changes & Amended 12/16/13, Eff.
1/15/14, to set a deadline for submission of application documents)
8.7 All applications shall be open for public inspection.
8.8 Incomplete applications may be denied, withdrawn or approved with conditions and/or
modifications.
SECTION IX PUBLIC HEARINGS
9.0 No later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of an application, the Agency may hold a
public hearing on such application. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five
(35) days of its commencement. Action shall be taken on applications within thirty-five
(35) days after completion of a public hearing. In the absence of a public hearing, action
shall be taken on applications within sixty-five (65) days from the date of receipt of the
application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions up to a maximum of
sixty-five (65) days total, or may withdraw such application. Failure of the Agency to act
within any time period specified in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be
deemed to constitute approval of the application.
The Agency shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless the Agency
determines that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or
watercourses, a petition signed by at least 25 persons who are 18 years of age or older
and who reside in the municipality in which the regulated activity is proposed requesting
a hearing is filed with the Agency no later than 14 days after the receipt of such
application, or the Agency finds that a public hearing regarding such application would
be in the public interest.
21
The Agency may issue a permit without a public hearing, provided no petition provided
for in this section is filed with the Agency on or before the 14th day after the date of
receipt of the application.
9.1 A public hearing shall be held on all applications involving a significant activity. All
applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection.
Any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by an agent or
an attorney.
9.2 Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than
two days, the first not more than fifteen days and not fewer than ten days, and the last not
less than two days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a general
circulation in each town where the affected wetland and watercourse is located.
9.3 Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the owner(s) of record of property within
100 feet of the subject parcel(s), by United States Post Office Certificate of Mailing by
the applicant no less than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. Said notice shall be in
such form as is prescribed by the Agency. The applicant shall at the time of the hearing
present proof of the measures taken to comply with this section. If the applicant has in
good faith taken reasonable measures to comply with this section, the failure of any
person entitled to notice hereunder to receive such notice shall not invalidate any decision
made by the Agency. In all cases, actual notice of a public hearing shall be the equivalent
of the receipt of notice as required hereunder.
9.4 In the case of any application which is subject to the notification provisions of Section
8.4 of these Regulations, a public hearing shall not be conducted if the clerk of the
adjoining municipality(s) has not received notice of the pendency of the application.
9.5 The Agency shall notify the applicant of its decision within fifteen (15) days of the date
of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the agency shall cause
notice of its order in the issuance or denial of the permit, to be published in a newspaper
having general circulation in the town wherein the inland wetland or watercourse lies. In
any case in which such notice is not published within such fifteen day period, the
applicant may provide for the publication of such notice within ten days thereafter.
SECTION X CONSIDERATIONS FOR DECISION
10.1 The Agency may consider the following in making its decision on an application:
a. The application and its supporting documentation;
b. Public comments, evidence and testimony from a public hearing;
c. Reports from other agencies, commissions, and town officials of the Town of
Ellington;
d. The Agency may also consider comments on any application from the North
Central Conservation District, the State DEEP, North Central Health District, US
ACOE, agencies in adjacent municipalities which may be affected by the
proposed activity, or other technical agencies or organizations which may
undertake additional studies or investigations.
22
e. Non-receipt of comments from agencies and commissions listed above shall
neither delay nor prejudice the decision of the Agency or its Agent.
10.2 Standards and Criteria for Decision. The Agency shall consider all relevant facts and
circumstances in making its decision, including but not limited to the following:
a. The environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or
watercourses.
b. The applicant’s purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the
proposed regulated activity, which alternatives would cause less or no
environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses;
c. The relationship between the short-term and long term impacts of the proposed
regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses, and the maintenance and
enhancement of long term productivity of such wetlands or watercourses;
d. Irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which
would be caused by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which
such activity would foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such
resources, and any mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition
of issuing a permit for such activity including, but not limited to, measures to
prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, maintain or
enhance existing environmental quality, or, in the following order of priority, to
restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
e. The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health, or the
reasonable use of property, which would be caused or threatened by the proposed
regulated activity,
f. Impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside
the area for which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with or
reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable
by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or
watercourses.
10.3 Where the Agency has held a hearing because it has deemed a proposed activity
significant, a permit shall not be issued for that activity unless the Agency finds on the
basis of the record that a feasible and prudent alternative to that activity does not exist. In
making this finding, the Agency shall consider the facts and circumstances set forth in
Section 10 of these regulations. This finding and the reasons therefore shall be stated on
the record in the decision of the Agency.
10.4 In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base
its decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in
the hearing record shall not be considered by the agency in its decision.
10.5 For purposes of this section, (1) “wetlands and watercourses” includes aquatic, plant or
animal life and habitats in wetlands and watercourses, and (2) “habitats” means areas or
environments in which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs.
10.6 A municipal inland wetlands agency shall not deny or condition an application for a
regulated activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact or
23
effect on aquatic, plant or animal life, unless such activity will likely impact or affect the
physical characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses.
10.7 In the case of an application where the applicant has provided written notice pursuant to
subsection 7.7c of these regulations, the holder of the restriction may provide proof to the
inland wetlands agency that granting of the permit application will violate the terms of
the restriction. Upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such
restriction, the inland wetlands agency shall not grant the permit approval. (Added 2/14/11, Eff.
3/15/11, Pursuant to 2010 Legislation and Regulations Advisory –DEP.)
10.8 In the case of an application where the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of
subsections 7.7c or 7.7d of these regulations, (1) the party holding the conservation or
preservation restriction, other than a state agency that holds such restriction, may, not
later than fifteen days after receipt of actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with
the inland wetlands agency, subject to the rules and regulations of such agency relating to
appeals. The inland wetlands agency shall reverse the permit approval upon a finding that
the requested land use violates the terms of such restriction; or (2) the state agency that
holds such restriction may, not later than thirty days after receipt of actual notice of
permit approval, file an appeal with the inland wetlands agency, subject to the rules and
regulations of such agency relating to appeals. The inland wetlands agency shall
immediately reverse such permit approval if the commissioner of the state agency that
holds such restriction certifies that the land use authorized in such permit violates the
terms of such conservation or preservation restriction. (Added 2/14/11, Eff. 3/15/11, Pursuant to 2010
Legislation and Regulations Advisory –DEP.)
10.9 Nothing in subsections 7.7c or 7.7d of these regulations shall be construed to prohibit the
filing of a permit application or to require such written notice when the activity that is the
subject of such permit application will occur on a portion of property that is not restricted
under the terms of such conservation or preservation restriction. (Added 2/14/11, Eff. 3/15/11,
Pursuant to 2010 Legislation and Regulations Advisory –DEP.)
SECTION XI DECISION PROCESS AND PERMIT
11.1 The Agency, or its duly authorized agent acting pursuant to Section 6 of these
regulations, may grant the application as filed; grant it upon such terms, conditions,
limitations or modifications necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act; or deny it.
Such terms may include any reasonable measures which would mitigate the impacts of
the regulated activity and which would (a) prevent or minimize pollution or other
environmental damage, (b) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (c) in
the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or
watercourse resources. Such terms may include restrictions as to the time of year in
which a regulated activity may be conducted, provided the Agency, or its agent,
determines that such restrictions are necessary to carry out these regulations and the
policy of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes. (Last
Sentence Added 12/10/12, Eff.1/1/13, Pursuant to 2012 Legislation and Regulations Advisory –DEEP.)
11.2 No later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of an application, the Agency may hold a
public hearing on such application. At such hearing any person or persons may appear
and be heard and may be represented by an agent or an attorney. The hearing shall be
completed within thirty-five (35) days of its commencement and action shall be taken on
applications within thirty-five (35) days after completion of a public hearing. In the
24
absence of a public hearing, action shall be taken on applications within sixty-five (65)
days from the date of receipt of the application.
The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in this
subsection provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than
sixty five (65) days or may withdraw such application. Failure of the Inland Wetlands
Agency to act within any time period specified in this subsection, or any extension
thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the application.
11.3 The Agency shall state upon its record the reasons and basis for its decision and, in the
case of any public hearing, such decision shall be based fully on the record of such
hearing and shall be in writing and shall as applicable and in accordance with section 10
of these regulations, incorporate a statement relative to the consideration of feasible and
prudent alternatives.
11.4 The Agency shall notify the applicant and any person entitled to such notice of its
decision within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail and the
Agency shall cause notice of its order in the issuance or denial of the permit, in a
newspaper having general circulation in the town wherein the inland wetland or
watercourse lies. In any case in which such notice is not published within such fifteen
day period, the applicant may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10)
days thereafter.
11.5 If an activity authorized by the inland wetland permit also involves an activity or project
which requires zoning or subdivision approval, a special zoning permit, variance or
special exception, a copy of the decision and report on the application shall be filed with
the Town of Ellington Planning and Zoning Commission.
11.6 If the Agency denies the permit without prejudice or if it grants a permit with terms,
conditions, limitations or modifications, the applicant may attempt to modify the proposal
to the Agency's satisfaction. The Agency shall determine whether the proposed
modification requires the filing of a new application. The rejection of a modified or
corrected application by the Agency shall be equivalent to the denial of an application for
the purposes of appeal.
11.7 Any permit issued by the Agency for the development of land for which an approval is
required under CGS chapter 124, 124b, 126 or 126a shall be valid until the approval
granted under such chapter expires or for ten years, whichever is earlier. Any permit
issued by the agency for any activity for which an approval is not required under CGS
chapter 124, 124b, 126 or 126a shall be valid for not less than two years and not more
than five years. Permit renewal and extension shall be at the discretion of the Agency and
may be subject to the calling of an additional public hearing. All permits shall expire
upon the completion of the acts specified herein. Notwithstanding other provisions of
these regulations, in allowing a regulated activity, the Commission may limit the duration
of work necessary to complete a permitted activity, once the activity has been
commenced in accordance with the permit. (Amended 12/10/12, Eff.1/1/13, Pursuant to 2012 Legislation and
Regulations Advisory –DEEP.)
11.7.1
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 11.7 of these regulations, any permit issued by
the Agency prior to July 1, 2011, that was in effect and did not expire prior to May 9,
25
2011, shall be valid for a period not less than nine years after the date of such approval.
(Amended 12/10/12, Eff. 1/1/13, Pursuant to 2012 Legislation and Regulations Advisory –DEEP.)
11.8 The Permittee shall notify the Agency of assignment, transfer, sublet or sale of a Permit.
Permits may be recorded on the Ellington land Records at the discretion of the permittee.
11.9 If a bond or insurance is required in accordance with Section 12 of these regulations, no
regulated activity shall commence until such bond or insurance has been provided to,
reviewed and approved by, the Town Planner.
11.10 The following General Provisions shall apply to all permits:
a. In evaluating applications in which the Agency relied in whole or in part on
information provided the applicant, if such information subsequently proves to be
false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the permit may be modified, suspended
or revoked.
b. All permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present
or future rights or powers of the Agency or the Town of Ellington, and are further
subject to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and
municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the property or activity.
c. If the activity authorized by the inland wetland permit also involves an activity or
a project which requires zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, variance
or special exception, no work pursuant to the wetland permit may begin until such
approval is obtained.
d. The permittee shall employ construction management practices, consistent with
the terms and conditions of the permit, to control storm water discharges and to
prevent erosion and sedimentation and to otherwise prevent pollution of wetlands
and watercourses.
SECTION XII BOND AND INSURANCE
12.1 Upon approval of the application and prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant may, at
the discretion of the Agency, be required to file a bond or other surety in a form approved
by the Agency. Said surety may be required by the Agency or its agent in order to assure
compliance with approved erosion control plans, for site stabilization, or for site
mitigation.
12.2 The bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of these
regulations and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit.
12.3 The Agency may require the applicant to certify that it has public liability insurance
against liability which might result from the proposed operation or use of the wetlands or
watercourses covering any and all damage which might occur within two (2) years of
completion of such operations, in an amount to be determined by the Agency
commensurate with the regulated activity.
12.4 Release or reduction of any surety shall be at the sole authority of the Agency, upon
receipt of a written request by the permittee, and following inspection, review and
recommendations by the Town Planner, Town Engineer or other appropriate town staff.
26
SECTION XIII ENFORCEMENT
13.1 The Agency may appoint an agent or agents to act in its behalf with the authority to
inspect property, except a private residence, and issue notices of violation or cease and
desist orders and to carry out other actions or investigations necessary for the
enforcement of these regulations.
13.2 The Agency or its agent may make regular inspections of all regulated activities for
which permits have been issued under these regulations.
13.3 If the Agency or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or
maintaining any activity, facility or condition which is in violation of the Act or these
regulations, the Agency or its duly authorized agent may:
a. Issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person
conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to immediately
cease such activity or to correct such facility or condition. Within ten (10)
calendar days of the issuance of such order the agency shall hold a hearing to
provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order
should not remain in effect. The Agency shall consider the facts presented at the
hearing and within ten (10) calendar days of the completion of the hearing notify
the person by certified mail that the original order remains in effect, that a revised
order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. The Agency shall publish
notice of its decision in a newspaper having general circulation in the
municipality. The original order shall be effective upon issuance and shall remain
in effect until the agency affirms, revises or withdraws the order. The issuance of
an order pursuant to this section shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to
Section 22a-44(b) of the General Statutes, as amended.
b. Issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or maintaining
such facility or condition, stating the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the
Agency, and prescribing the necessary action and steps to correct the violation
including, without limitation, halting work in wetlands or watercourses. The
Agency may request that the individual appear at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide a
written reply to the notice or to file a proper application for the necessary permit.
Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result in
issuance of the order provided in Subsection A of this Section or other
enforcement proceedings as provided by law.
13.4 The Agency may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the applicant has not
complied with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded
the scope of the work as set forth in the application including application plans. Prior to
revoking any permit, the Agency shall issue notice to the permittee, personally or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct which warrants
the intended action. At the public hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
show that it is in compliance with its permit and any and all requirements for retention of
the permit.
27
13.5 The permittee shall be notified of the Agency's decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a
permit by personal service or certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the date of its
decision.
SECTION XIV AMENDMENTS
14.1 These regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map for the Town of
Ellington may be amended, from time to time, by the Agency in accordance with the
Connecticut General Statutes.
14.2 An application filed with the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency which is in
conformance with these regulations as of the date of receipt shall not be required
thereafter to comply with any change in the Inland Wetlands Regulations including
changes to upland review area limits, taking effect on or after the date of such decision
and any appeal from the decision of such Agency with respect to such application shall
not be dismissed by the Superior Court on the grounds that such change has taken effect
on or after the date of such receipt. The provisions of this subsection shall not be
construed to apply:
a. To the establishment, amendment or change of boundaries of inland wetlands or
watercourses, or
b. To any change in regulations necessary to make such regulations consistent with
the provisions of Chapter 440 of the General Statutes as of the date of such
receipt.
14.3 These regulations and the Town of Ellington Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map
shall be amended in the manner specified in Section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended. The Agency shall provide the Commissioner of Energy and
Environmental Protection with a copy of any proposed regulations and notice of the
public hearing to consider any proposed regulations or amendments thereto, except
determinations of boundaries, at least thirty-five days before the public hearing on their
adoption.
14.4 Petitions requesting changes or amendments to the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Map, Ellington, Connecticut" shall contain at least the following information:
a. The applicant's name, address and telephone number;
b. The owner's name (if not the applicant), address, telephone number, and a written
consent to the proposed action set forth in the application;
c. Applicant's interest in the land;
d. The geographic location of the property involved in the petition including a
description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the disputed
wetland or watercourse areas;
e. The reasons for the requested action;
f. The names and addresses of adjacent property owners; and
g. A site plan showing proposed development of the property, where applicable.
28
14.5 The Inland Wetland and Watercourses Agency shall require the property owner to present
documentation by a certified soil scientist regarding site soils. Such documentation shall
include a map of the land in question signed by the certified soil scientist on which the
flag locations defining the boundaries of the regulated soil types are depicted, along with
their appropriate numerical designations at an accuracy of an A2 survey standard
established by the State of Connecticut Board or Registry for Professional Engineers and
Land Surveyors.
14.6 Watercourses shall be delineated by a competent soil scientist, geologist, ecologist or
other individual satisfactory to the Agency or its Agent.
14.7 A public hearing shall be held on petitions to amend the Inland Wetland and
Watercourses Map or regulations text. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the municipality where the land that is the
subject of the hearing is located, at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the
first not more than fifteen days nor less than ten days, and the last not less than two days,
before the date set for hearing. A copy of such proposed boundary or text change shall be
filed in the office of the town clerk, for public inspection at least ten days before such
hearing. All materials including maps and documents relating to the petition shall be
open for public inspection.
14.8 Within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of a complete petition for a change in the
mapped boundaries of any wetland or watercourse, or an amendment to the regulation
text, the Agency shall hold a public hearing to consider the petition. The Agency shall
complete the public hearing within thirty-five (35) days of its commencement. The
Agency shall act upon the changes requested in such petition within sixty-five (65) days
after completion of the hearing. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be
heard and may be represented by and agent or an attorney.
The petitioner may consent to one or more extensions of any periods specified in this
subsection provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than
sixty-five (65) days, or may withdraw such petition. The failure of the Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Agency to act within any time period specified in this subsection, or
any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the petition.
14.9 The Agency shall state in writing the reasons why the change in the Inland Wetland and
Watercourses Map and/or regulations was approved.
SECTION XV APPEALS
15.1 Appeal on actions of the Agency shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
Section 22a-43 of the General Statutes, as amended.
15.2 Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Agency and the Commissioner of Energy
and Environmental Protection.
SECTION XVI CONFLICT AND SEVERANCE
16.1 If there is a conflict between provisions of these regulations, the provision which imposes
the most stringent standards for the use of regulated areas shall govern. If there is a
29
conflict between the provisions of these regulations and any provisions of the Act, the
provisions of the Act shall govern. The invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, section,
part, subsection or provision of these regulations shall not nullify any other part of the
regulations.
SECTION XVII OTHER PERMITS
17.1 Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirements for the applicant to obtain any
other permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of Ellington, State of
Connecticut and the Government of the United States including any approval required by
the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers. Obtaining such permits or licenses is the sole responsibility of the
applicant.
SECTION XVIII EFFECTIVE DATE OF REGULATIONS
18.1 These regulations including the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map were initially
adopted on November 21, 1988.
30
APPENDIX A
TOWN OF ELLINGTON INLAND WETLANDS AND
WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
APPLICATION FEES
1.1 Method of Payment. All fees required by these Regulations shall be submitted to the Agency by check,
cash or money order payable to the Town of Ellington at the time the application is filed with the Agency.
1.2 No application shall be approved by the Agency unless the correct application fee is paid in full.
1.3 The application fee is not refundable. Amounts below DO NOT include the required State fee.
1.4 Fee Schedule. Application fees shall be based on the following schedule:
a. PERMITTED AND NONREGULATED USES - Section 4 of these regulations:
Permitted uses as of right (Section 4.1 a and b only)
0 to 5 acres of direct impact --------------------------------------$75.00
5 to 10 acres of direct impact-------------------------------------$150.00
10 acres and above of direct impact-----------------------------$250.00
Nonregulated uses (Section 4.2 a and b)---------------------------------- $50.00
b. REGULATED USES - Section 6 of these regulations:
1. Administrative Permit (Section 6.4)-------------------------------------------$50.00
2. Agency Permits:
Nonsignificant Activity-----------------------------------------------------$250.00
*Significant Activity--------------------------------------------------------$250.00 flat fee, plus;
$5.00/lineal foot of watercourse directly affected, plus;
$75.00 each new or modified watercourse crossing, plus;
$25.00/acre upland review area not protected by easement; plus
an additional fee for inland wetland soils directly affected as follows:
1 to 500 square feet---------------------------------------------$75.00
501 to 2,500 square feet-----------------------------------------$150.00
2,501 to 10,000 square feet-------------------------------------$500.00
10,001 square feet and above-----------------------------------$750.00
* Fees for significant activities located within a mapped watershed of a public water
supply company are double the above requirements.
c. Map and Regulation Amendments--------------------------------------------------$150.00
d. Regulations and Maps (non-digital paper copies):
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations--------------------------$10.00
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Map-----------------------------------$20.00
e. The Agency may recover the costs of any expert retained by the Agency to offer an opinion,
substantiate, or refute any subject related to an application for permit from the Applicant.
