Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Construction and Penalties
[Adopted 3-25-1980 as Title IA, §§ 4 and 6, of the 1980 Code of
Ordinances]
§ 1-1. General penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provision of any ordinance of this Town for
which no other penalty is provided shall be fined not more than $100.
§ 1-2. Word usage.
A. As used in this Code, the term "General Statutes" shall mean the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended from time to time.
B. Whenever any words in any section of this Code import the plural
number, the singular number shall be deemed to be included, and
whenever the singular number shall be used, it shall be deemed to
include the plural. Any word of masculine gender includes the feminine
and the neuter and may refer to a corporation or to a board or other body
or assemblage of persons, and when the sense so indicates, words of the
neuter gender may refer to any gender. Words used in the present tense
include the future. [Added 9-15-2014]
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-15-2014]
§ 1-3. Adoption of Code.
The compilation of the ordinances of the Town of Easton, codified and
consolidated into chapters and sections in the form attached hereto and
made a part hereof, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 430, is hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Town of
Easton, Connecticut," hereinafter called the "Code." All provisions
contained in the compilation provided for herein and known as the "Code of
the Town of Easton" shall be in force and effect on and after the effective
date of this ordinance.
§ 1-4. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code
by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date
from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are
hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Town.
§ 1-5. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Town of Easton which is not
in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full
force and effect.
§ 1-6. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or section of any ordinance contained
herein or if the application thereof to any person, firm, corporation or
circumstances for any reason is adjudged by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, said judgment shall not affect,
impair or invalidate the remainder of such ordinance and the application of
such provision to other persons, firms, corporations or circumstances but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, paragraph, or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment shall have been
rendered and to the person, firm, corporation or circumstances involved.
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk of the
Town of Easton and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Town Clerk of the Town of
Easton, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Town
Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during
all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this
ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-8. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
ordinances in the Code of the Town of Easton, or any new ordinances,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention that
they be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be inserted in said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-9. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of
the Code of the Town of Easton required to be filed in the office of the Town
Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances
adopted by the Town subsequent to the enactment of this ordinance in such
form as to indicate the intention that they be a part of said Code shall, when
finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of
copies of such changes until such changes are included as supplements to
said Code.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code; supplementation.
Hard copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased
from the Town Clerk of the Town of Easton or an authorized agent of the
Town Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by the Board of Selectmen.
The Town Clerk may also arrange for procedures for the periodic
supplementation thereof.
§ 1-11. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of
the Town of Easton, or who alters or tampers with such Code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Town of Easton
to be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other provision of this
ordinance, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more
than $100.
§ 1-7 EASTON CODE § 1-12
1:6
§ 1-12. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the Town of Easton, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided in Subsection B of this
section. Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention
of the Town Meeting that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances had been previously formally amended to read as
such.
B. The amendments as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made
a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective
date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number references are to
the ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
§ 1-13. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
1. Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
Chapter 7
AGING, COMMISSION FOR THE
§ 7-1. Membership; terms of office. [Amended 9-15-2014]
There shall continue to be a Commission for the Aging to develop and
coordinate programs for the aging in the Town. The Commission shall
consist of five electors of the Town of Easton, appointed for three-year
terms, at least three of whom shall be representative of the age group
concerned.
§ 7-2. Alternate members.
A. There shall be three alternate members of the Commission for the Aging
who are electors of the Town of Easton, appointed for three-year terms
which are to be staggered at the onset. Not more than two alternate
members shall be members of the same political party.
B. If a regular member of the Commission is absent or is disqualified, the
Chair of the Commission shall designate an alternate to so act, choosing
alternates in rotation so that they shall act as nearly equal a number
of times as possible. If any alternate is not available in accordance with
such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
§ 7-3. Duties.
The Commission shall:
A. Study the conditions and needs of elderly persons in Easton in relation to
housing, economic, employment, health, recreational and other matters;
B. Analyze the services for the aged provided by the community, by both
public and private agencies;
C. Develop and coordinate programs; and
D. Make recommendations to the Board of Selectmen regarding the
development and integration of public and private agencies in
cooperation with state and other services to the extent possible.
§ 7-4. Appropriations.
The Town may make appropriations for the expenses of the Commission and
may, with approval of the Board of Selectmen, participate in state, federal
and private programs and grants concerning the elderly.
§ 7-5. Gifts and contributions.
The Commission is authorized and empowered to accept gifts or
contributions for any of its purposes and shall administer the same for such
purposes in accordance with the terms of the gift as a separate fund subject
to appropriations approved by the Board of Finance.
Chapter 10
§ 1-13 EASTON CODE § 7-5
1:8
AGRICULTURAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Farming — See Ch. 286.
§ 10-1. Purpose.
There shall be an Agricultural Commission which shall act in an advisory
capacity to the Board of Selectmen and other Town boards and commissions
on agricultural matters.
§ 10-2. Membership; terms of office.
A. The Commission shall consist of five members who are electors of the
Town of Easton. The members of the Commission shall be appointed
by the Board of Selectmen. Members shall be appointed for terms of
three years, provided that in the first year of the Commission, the terms
of three members shall expire on the first business day in January not
more than three years after initial appointment and shall expire on the
first business day in January for two members not more than two years
after initial appointment. In making appointments to the Commission,
the Board of Selectmen shall give first consideration to persons engaged
or interested in agriculture, farm management or the promotion of
agriculture and recommendations made by the Commission.
B. There shall be two alternates who are electors of the Town of Easton.
Alternates shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for terms of
three years, provided that in the first year of the Commission, the term
of one alternate shall expire on the first business day in January not more
than three years after initial appointment and the term of one alternate
shall expire on the first business day in January not more than two years
after initial appointment.
§ 10-3. Organization.
The members of the Commission, at their first meeting and annually
thereafter at their first meeting in January, shall elect from among
themselves a Chair and a Secretary. They shall establish, and from time
to time reestablish, a regular schedule of meetings, with special meetings
as required. Special meetings may be called at any time by the Chair
or upon written or electronic request of any member. Three members
shall constitute a quorum. The Commission shall report to the Board of
Selectmen annually or as may be requested by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 10-4. Objectives.
The Commission shall:
A. Support, promote, and encourage agriculture and agricultural pursuits.
§ 7-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-4
1:9
B. Serve as a conduit between nonprofit agencies, civic organizations,
municipal boards and commissions, elected and appointed government
officials at the local, state and federal level, local businesses, local
farmers, and persons engaged in agricultural pursuits locally.
C. Advise the Board of Selectmen on issues relating to agriculture; the
land use boards, commissions and officials on land uses and areas
deemed especially useful for agricultural purposes and other zoning
and planning concerns related to agriculture; and other public bodies
and officials on agricultural issues within their respective purview, and
shall serve as a resource and have input into policy regarding laws and
regulations dealing with agriculture, agricultural equipment, buildings
and operations.
D. Support opportunities for new farmers.
E. Support local, regional and state vocational agricultural education
programs and enrichment programs within the Easton school system
with respect to agriculture.
F. Assist in the resolution of any conflicts between agricultural interests
and Town bodies or officials.
G. Support public education about the value and desirability of agricultural
pursuits, including but not limited to developing and updating
information and maps regarding agriculture in Easton.
H. Promote opportunities to preserve and expand farms in Easton and for
citizens to value and support local farms.
I. Conduct surveys of farmers and others in agricultural industry
concerning farming and farm-related activities and actions to maintain
and enhance agriculture within Easton.
J. Promote the use of agricultural products through the Town website,
displays, fairs, or otherwise.
K. Have oversight over farming activities on all Town-owned land.
Chapter 13
ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF
§ 13-1. Membership. [Amended 9-15-2014]
There shall continue to be a Board of Assessment Appeals consisting of
three members. Each such member shall be elected for a term of four years.
Not more than two members of said Board shall be members of the same
political party.
§ 13-2. Powers and duties.
The Board shall have all the powers and duties set forth in the General
Statutes.
§ 10-4 EASTON CODE § 13-2
1:10
Chapter 18
BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 252.
§ 18-1. Membership. [Amended 9-15-2014]
There shall continue to be a Building Board of Appeals consisting of five
members. Each such member shall be appointed in accordance with
§ 29-266 of the General Statutes for a term of five years. Not more than four
members of said Board shall be members of the same political party.
§ 18-2. Powers and duties. [Amended 9-15-2014]
The Board shall have all the powers and duties designated to boards of
building appeals as set forth in § 29-266 of the General Statutes.
Chapter 29
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch.
325.
§ 29-1. Membership; terms of office.
There shall continue to be a Conservation Commission consisting of seven
members appointed for three-year terms, but not more than five members
shall be members of the same political party.
§ 29-2. Meetings, records and reports.
The Commission shall hold regular meetings. Records shall be kept of all
meetings and activities and the Commission shall file an annual report with
the Board of Selectmen.
§ 29-3. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have all the powers and duties provided under
§§ 7-131a to 7-131n of the General Statutes, together with the power to
regulate activities affecting wetlands and watercourses, pursuant to
Chapter 440 of the General Statutes.
§ 13-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-4
1:11
§ 29-4. Alternate members. [Added 11-6-1986]
A. There shall be a panel of alternates consisting of three members. Each
alternate shall be appointed by the First Selectman for a term of three
consecutive years. Appointments shall be made so that not more than
two members of the panel shall be members of the same political party.
B. Alternate members may attend all meetings and executive sessions of
the Conservation Commission, and if a regular member of the
Commission is absent or is disqualified, the Chair of the Commission
shall designate an alternate to so act, choosing alternates in rotation
so that they shall act as nearly equal a number of times as possible. If
any alternate is not available in accordance with such rotation, such fact
shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
C. Such alternate members shall, when seated, have all the powers and
duties of a member of the Commission. The First Selectman may remove
any alternate for cause and may fill any vacancy.
Chapter 43
ELECTIONS
§ 29-4 EASTON CODE § 29-4
1:12
ARTICLE I
Board for Admission of Electors
[Adopted 3-25-1980 as Title IIA of the 1980 Code of Ordinances]
§ 43-1. Membership.
There shall continue to be a Board for Admission of Electors in accordance
with § 9-15a of the General Statutes. Said Board shall consist of the
Democratic Registrar of Voters, the Republican Registrar of Voters and the
Town Clerk.
§ 43-2. Alternate members.
Any member of said Board who is unable to attend a session for the
admission of electors shall designate another elected officer of the Town to
act for him by filing a statement of such designation in writing in the office
of the Town Clerk at any time prior to the opening of the session, provided
that if an Assistant Town Clerk is available he shall serve in the absence or
inability of the Town Clerk, and if a Deputy Registrar of Voters is available
he shall serve in the absence or inability of the Registrar.
§ 43-3. Quorum.
A quorum of said Board shall consist of a bare majority of the members of
such Board. An Assistant Town Clerk or a Deputy Registrar or any other
Town officer designated by and acting for a member of such Board pursuant
to the provisions of § 43-2 shall be included as a member of such Board for
purposes of ascertaining the existence of a quorum.
§ 43-4. Sessions.
The Registrars and the Town Clerk are hereby authorized to hold such
sessions as in their judgment are advisable and necessary to examine the
qualifications of the electors and to administer the elector's oath to those
who shall, in accordance with § 9-12 of the General Statutes, be found
qualified.
§ 43-5. Powers and duties.
Members of the Board shall have all the powers and duties as provided for
in Chapter 143 of the General Statutes.
§ 43-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-5
1:13
Chapter 46
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 43-5 EASTON CODE § 43-5
1:14
ARTICLE I
Department of Emergency Management
[Adopted 3-25-1980 as Title IE of the 1980 Code of Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 9-15-2014]
§ 46-1. Department continued.
There shall continue to be a Department of Emergency Management
pursuant to § 28-7 of the General Statutes.
§ 46-2. Director/Coordinator.
A. Said Department shall be under the supervision of a Director or
Coordinator of all disaster emergency functions appointed by the First
Selectman. The Director/Coordinator of the Department of Emergency
Management will serve at the will of the First Selectman and may be
removed by the First Selectman at any time. The Director/Coordinator
of the Department of Emergency Management shall report directly to
the First Selectman and will advise the First Selectman on matters
pertaining to civil preparedness and disaster emergency operations.
B. The Director/Coordinator of the Department of Emergency Management
will:
(1) Coordinate the activities of all Town agencies in disaster emergency
situations, but in no case will he assume command of any agency or
department other than the Department of Emergency Management
unless directly ordered to do so by the First Selectman;
(2) Coordinate the activities of all Department of Emergency
Management forces, both full-time and volunteer, and will be
responsible for the recruitment and training of needed civil
preparedness personnel;
(3) Assist the First Selectman in the preparation and updating of Town
emergency operations plans and standard operating procedures;
(4) Maintain contact with the Connecticut Civil Preparedness Area office
designated for the Town of Easton and will cooperate with the State
Department of Emergency Services and Public Protection in
preparation of required reports, procedures and other necessary
paperwork to ensure that the Town receives all possible funding,
equipment and other benefits available to the Town through state
and national civil preparedness; and
(5) Perform such other civil preparedness related functions as may, from
time to time, be assigned to him by the First Selectman of the Town
of Easton or may be required by the General Statutes or by the
Commissioner of Emergency Services and Public Protection.
C. The Director/Coordinator of the Department of Emergency Management
shall receive such compensation for performance of his duties as may be
determined by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 46-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-2
1:15
Chapter 47
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES COMMISSION
§ 47-1. Commission established. [Amended 9-15-2014]
There is hereby created and established a Commission to be known as the
"Emergency Medical Services Commission of the Town of Easton." This
Commission is established pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 368D of
the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 47-2. Membership.
The Commission shall be composed of five members to be appointed by the
Board of Selectmen.
§ 47-3. Term of office; vacancies; qualifications.
A. The term of office of said Commission shall be as follows:
(1) One member shall be appointed to serve until January 1, 1982.
(2) One member shall be appointed to serve until January 1, 1983.
(3) One member shall be appointed to serve until January 1, 1984.
(4) One member shall be appointed to serve until January 1, 1985.
(5) One member shall be appointed to serve until January 1, 1986.
B. All vacancies shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen for the unexpired
term being filled.
C. Commission members shall be electors of the Town of Easton. Upon the
expiration of such original term, each appointment to the Commission
shall be for a term of five years.
§ 47-4. Organization and procedure.
The Commission shall elect a Chair from among its members and a
Secretary, who need not be a member of the Commission. Said Chair and
Secretary shall serve terms ending on January 31 of the year next following
their respective elections. Said Commission shall keep proper minutes and
records of its meetings and activities and shall make an annual report
to the Town of Easton in a manner required of other agencies, boards
and commissions of the Town of Easton. No more than four members of
such Commission shall be of the same political party. The members of
said Commission shall receive no compensation but may be reimbursed for
actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
§ 47-5. Powers and duties.
A. The Commission shall have the power, duty and responsibility to train,
instruct, and provide a location for sufficient personnel in order to
properly maintain an emergency medical services delivery system for the
Town of Easton and further have the authority to design and develop an
emergency medical services system.
B. The Commission shall be charged with the exclusive control,
management, and administration of all public emergency medical
§ 46-2 EASTON CODE § 47-5
1:16
services within the Town of Easton and shall have all other powers and
duties conferred or imposed by Chapter 368D of the General Statutes
and shall conform to the ordinances of the Town of Easton. [Amended
9-15-2014]
Chapter 52
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 52-1. Purpose.
There shall continue to be a Code of Ethics established in order to acquaint
the public with a desired level of ethics in local government; to set suitable
ethical standards for all public officials and employees; to set forth general
principles of conduct to guide such officials and employees; and to prohibit
acts or actions of such officials and employees which are incompatible with
the discharge of proper public duties.
§ 52-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONFIDENTIAL — Personal matters and financial matters which, if
disclosed, would be of detrimental interest to the Town and a violation of
the trust placed in that person.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Any financial interest, direct or indirect,
which is more than nominal and which is not common to the interest of
other citizens of the Town.
INDIRECT INTEREST — Includes but is not limited to the interest of
any subcontractor in any contract with the Town and the interest of any
person or his immediate family in any corporation, firm or partnership
which has a direct or indirect interest in any transaction with the Town.
TOWN OFFICER — Includes any official, employee, agent, consultant, or
member, elected or appointed, of any board, department, commission,
committee, legislative body or other agency of the Town of Easton, paid
or unpaid, with the exception of employees and agents of the Board of
Education who shall be governed by regulations of said Board and the
General Statutes.
TRANSACTION — Includes the offer, sale or furnishing of any real or
personal property, material, supplies or services by any person, directly
or indirectly, as vendor, prime contractor, subcontractor or otherwise, for
the use and benefit of the Town for a valuable consideration, excepting
the services of any person as a Town officer.
B. Words of the masculine gender shall include the feminine.
§ 47-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-3
1:17
§ 52-3. Conflicts of interest.
No Town officer shall engage in any transactions or shall have a financial
interest or other personal interest which is incompatible with the proper
discharge of his official duties in the public interest or would tend to impair
his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official
duties. Without limiting the nature and type of potential conflicts of interest,
the following examples of specific conflicts are hereby set forth for the
guidance of all Town officers:
A. Incompatible employment. No Town officer shall engage in or accept
private employment or render services for private interest when such
employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his
official duties or would tend to impair independence of judgment or
action in the performance of his official duties.
B. Use of Town facilities.
(1) No Town officer shall request or permit the use of Town-owned
vehicles, equipment, facilities, materials, or property for personal
convenience or profit except when such is available to the public
generally or is provided as Town policy for the use of such Town
officer in the interest of the Town.
(2) No Town officer shall grant any special consideration, treatment,
favor or advantage to any person beyond that which is generally
available to residents and taxpayers of the Town.
C. Gifts and favors. No Town officer or his immediate family shall accept
any valuable gift, thing, favor, loan or promise which might tend to
influence the performance or nonperformance of his official duties.
D. Disclosure of confidential information. No Town officer shall, without
proper authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the
property, government or affairs of the Town, nor shall he use such
information to advance the financial or private interest of himself or
others.
E. Appearance before Town agencies. No Town officer shall appear on
behalf of private interests before any board, agency, committee or
commission of the Town, nor shall he represent private interests in any
action or proceeding against the interest of the Town in any litigation
to which the Town is a party. Nothing herein shall prohibit a Town
officer from appearing before any such board, agency, committee or
commission on his own behalf.
§ 52-4. Disclosure of financial interest.
Any Town officer having a financial interest in any transaction with the
Town, or in any action to be taken by the Town, shall first divulge and
disclose such interest in writing to the committee, board or agency involved,
and if no such committee, board or agency is involved, to the Board of
Selectmen, and shall further refrain from using his office to exert his
influence or vote on such transaction or action.
§ 52-3 EASTON CODE § 52-5
1:18
§ 52-5. Board of Ethics.
There shall continue to be a Board of Ethics in and for the Town which shall
be charged with the administration of this Code of Ethics and which shall
consist of five members. Not more than three of said members shall be of
the same political party, and none of whom shall hold any of the appointed
or elected Town offices, or be a Town employee, or be a member of the Town
committee of any political party.
A. Members of the Board of Ethics shall be appointed for two-year terms.
No elector may serve for more than six successive years.
B. The Board shall promulgate and adopt reasonable rules and regulations
for the administration of its proceedings. The rules and regulations so
promulgated and all amendments thereto shall be made available at the
office of the Town Clerk to any elector of the Town.
C. The Board shall receive all complaints, in writing, of violation of this
code, shall investigate the same and, after giving the Town officer
concerned an opportunity to be heard, shall, within 35 calendar days,
make such findings and recommendations as it may deem appropriate
in each case to the Board of Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen shall,
thereupon, take such action as it may deem appropriate.
D. Upon written request of any Town officer, said Board shall render an
advisory opinion in writing to such Town officer with respect to this code.
Chapter 60
FINANCE, BOARD OF
§ 60-1. Membership; powers and duties.
There shall continue to be a Board of Finance consisting of six members
who are electors and taxpayers of the Town of Easton and which shall have
all the powers and duties provided by Chapter 106 of the General Statutes.
§ 60-2. Term of office.
The members of said Board shall be elected for a term of six consecutive
years in the same manner as the Town officers are elected, with the terms
of said members arranged so that not more than two members are elected
in any one year and not more than four members are members of the same
political party.
§ 60-3. Officers; meetings.
The Board shall elect one of its members to be Chair and one to be Clerk
thereof. The Board shall hold such regular meetings and special meetings
as may be advisable at any time upon giving at least 24 hours' notice to
each member before the time of such meeting. The Clerk shall cause to be
prepared and filed with the Town Clerk a copy of the minutes and records
of each regular and special meeting within seven days from the date of
such meeting. At all meetings of the Board, four members shall constitute
§ 52-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-3
1:19
a quorum and the concurrence of three votes shall be necessary for the
transaction of business.
§ 60-4. Vacancies.
Vacancies from death, resignation or otherwise shall be filled by a majority
vote of the remaining members at a special meeting called for such purpose.
Any member so elected shall serve until the next Town election and until his
successor is elected and qualified. At the next Town election following the
occurrence of such vacancy, the electors shall elect a successor to fill the
vacancy for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 60-5. Submission of budgets.
All officers, boards, commissions and departments of the Town entrusted
with the expenditure of Town funds shall submit to the Board of Selectmen,
at least four meetings before the annual budget meeting, the items and
details of their respective budgets for the next fiscal year. The officers,
boards, commissions and departments shall thereafter submit the items and
details of their respective budgets, in such form and detail as the Board
of Finance may from time to time prescribe, to the Board of Finance at
least two months before the annual budget meeting. No officer, board,
commission, or department shall expend any sum for any purpose unless
such expenditure shall first be approved by the Board of Finance and
appropriate transfers in such budget shall have been made by the Board.
§ 60-6. Alternate members. [Amended 8-13-1981]
There shall be three alternate members of the Board of Finance who shall
be appointed by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to the provision of
§ 7-340a of the Connecticut General Statutes.
A. The terms of said appointments shall be as follows:
(1) One member shall be appointed to serve until January 1, 1983.
(2) One member shall be appointed to serve until January 1, 1985.
(3) One member shall be appointed to serve until January 1, 1987.
B. Upon the expiration of each of the original terms referred to above, each
appointment as an alternate member of the Board of Finance shall be for
a six-year term. All vacancies shall be filled by the Board of Selectman.
Chapter 64
FIRE COMMISSIONERS, BOARD OF
§ 64-1. Membership; terms of office.
There shall continue to be a Board of Fire Commissioners (hereinafter
referred to as the "Board") consisting of five members. One Commissioner
shall be appointed annually to serve for a term of five years. Appointments
shall be made so that only one Fire Commissioner's term shall expire each
year, so that at no time shall more than three Fire Commissioners be
§ 60-3 EASTON CODE § 64-1
1:20
members of the same political party, and so that at least one member shall
be a member of the Easton Volunteer Fire Company.
§ 64-2. Meetings; annual report.
Meetings of the Board may be called by the Chair or by a majority of
the members thereof, and a majority of the members of said Board shall
constitute a quorum. In the month of September, said Board shall make an
annual report to the Selectmen which shall be published by the Selectmen
in the annual report of the Town.
§ 64-3. Agreements with volunteer fire companies.
The Board is authorized to enter into agreements from time to time with any
volunteer fire company within the Town for the protection thereof from fire,
subject to such conditions as to financial assistance and the observance of
the regulations of the Board as it shall deem suitable and adequate in the
public interest and as approved by the Board of Finance.
§ 64-4. Powers and duties.
The Board shall have the management and control of all matters pertaining
to fire protection within the Town of Easton pursuant to § 7-301 of the
General Statutes, except such matters as are vested by law in the Easton
Fire District No. 1, Incorporated, or in the Easton Volunteer Fire Company
No. 1, Incorporated. Pursuant to such powers and duties, it shall:
A. Select and recommend to the Board of Selectmen the acquisition of sites
for the location of facilities to assure adequate fire protection within the
Town.
B. Review the adequacy of existing fire protection facilities and make
recommendations to the Board of Selectmen for such changes as the
Board may deem advisable.
C. Supervise the purchase of fire-fighting equipment and supplies after
reviewing with the Volunteer Fire Company its requirements and make
recommendations to the Board of Selectmen and Board of Finance
relative thereto.
D. Make recommendations for improvements in the communications
service particularly as it pertains to the effectiveness of the fire
protection of the Town. [Amended 9-15-2014]
E. Prepare each proposed annual operating budget for the fire protection
of the Town and particularly the provisions thereof with respect to
the necessary paid personnel and cooperate with the Volunteer Fire
Company in determining its budgeted needs with respect to fire-fighting
equipment, supplies and services as may be deemed necessary for the
coming fiscal year.
F. Supervise the care of equipment, deportment and dress of all firefighters
paid by the Town and encourage proper training of new recruits.
G. Coordinate the activities of the Board with the Board of Police
Commissioners and civil defense personnel in such manner as to best
serve the public interest and safety. [Amended 9-15-2014]
§ 64-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-4
1:21
H. Explore with proper representatives of adjoining towns the matter of
regional cooperation in fire protection matters.
I. Employ such employees as the Board may deem necessary for adequate
fire protection within the Town and prescribe the duties of such
employees. [Amended 9-15-2014]
§ 64-5. Expenditures.
All expenditures of the Board shall be approved by a majority of the
members present at a duly held meeting and shall be subject to the approval
of the First Selectman.
§ 64-6. Fire Marshal. [Amended 9-15-2014]
A. The Board shall appoint a local Fire Marshal and such Deputy Fire
Marshals as may be necessary. In making such appointment, preference
shall be given to a member of the regular or volunteer fire department
of the Town. Such persons being appointed must be certified by the
State Fire Marshal in accordance with the provisions of § 29-298 of the
General Statutes.
B. The Clerk shall record acceptance of the position of local Fire Marshal
and shall report the same in writing to the State Fire Marshal within 10
days thereafter, giving the name and address of the local Fire Marshal
and stating the limits of the territory in which the local Fire Marshal
is to serve. Should such Fire Marshal fail to faithfully perform the
duties of his office, the Board, after proper inquiry, may dismiss him and
appoint another qualified person in his place. Such dismissal shall be in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 29-299 and 29-300 of the General
Statutes.
Chapter 71
FUNDS
§ 64-4 EASTON CODE § 64-6
1:22
ARTICLE I
Municipal Reserve Fund
[Adopted 3-25-1980 as Title IIID of the 1980 Code of Ordinances]
§ 71-1. Fund created.
In accordance with Chapter 108 of the General Statutes, a special fund
is hereby created to be designated as the "Reserve Fund for Capital and
Nonrecurring Expenditures."
§ 71-2. Payment into fund.
Upon the recommendations of the Board of Finance and approval by the
Town Meeting, funds may be paid into said Reserve Fund in accordance
with § 7-361 of the General Statutes.
§ 71-3. Use of fund.
In accordance with § 7-364 of the General Statutes, the use of said Reserve
Fund shall be restricted to the financing of all or part of the planning,
construction, reconstruction or acquisition of any specific capital
improvement or the acquisition of any specific item of equipment.
§ 71-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-3
1:23

ARTICLE II
Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
[Adopted 2-4-1985]
§ 71-4. Establishment of fund.
There is hereby established the Easton Agricultural Land Preservation
Fund.
§ 71-5. Definitions.
The following words shall have the following meanings for purposes of this
article:
AGRICULTURAL LAND — Any land in the Town suitable by reference to
soil types, existing and past use of such land for agricultural purposes and
other relevant factors for the cultivation of plants for production of human
food and fiber or production of other useful and valuable plant products and
for the production of animals, livestock and poultry useful to man and the
environment, and land capable of providing economically profitable farm
units, and may include adjacent pastures, wooded land, natural drainage
areas and other adjacent open areas.[Amended 9-15-2014]
CONSERVATION COMMISSION — The Conservation Commission of the
Town of Easton.
DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS — The rights of the fee simple owner of
agricultural land to develop, construct on, sell, lease or otherwise improve
the agricultural land for uses that result in rendering such land no longer
agricultural land, but shall not be construed to include:
The uses defined in § 1-1(q) of the General Statutes; [Amended
9-15-2014]
A.
The rights of the fee owner of agricultural land to develop, construct
on, sell the property in its entirety, lease or otherwise improve the
agricultural land to preserve, maintain, operate or continue such land
as agricultural land, including but not limited to construction thereon
of residences for persons directly incidental to farm operation and
buildings for animals, roadside stands and farm markets for sale to
the consumer of food products and ornamental plants, facilities for
the storing of equipment and products or processing thereof or such
other improvements, activities and uses thereon as may be directly or
incidentally related to the operation of the agricultural enterprise, as
long as the acreage and productivity of arable land for crops is not
materially decreased and due consideration is given to the impact of
any decrease in acreage or productivity of such arable land upon the
total farm operation, except that new construction or modification of an
existing farm building necessary to the operation of a farm on prime
farmland, as defined by the United States Department of Agriculture,
of which the state has purchased development rights shall be limited to
not more than 5% of the total of such prime farmland;
B.
§ 71-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-5
1:25
FUND — The fund established pursuant to this article.
TOWN — The Town of Easton.
§ 71-6. Sources of fund.
There shall be deposited in and become part of the fund all moneys received
by the Town from whatever sources and by whatever means as:
A. Gifts for agricultural land preservation purposes;
B. Grants or loans for agricultural land preservation purposes; and
C. Appropriations by the Town.
§ 71-7. Use of fund. [Amended 9-15-2014]
Upon recommendation by the Conservation Commission to the Board of
Finance, such amounts in the fund as may be recommended by the
Conservation Commission and approved by the Board of Finance may be
used for the acquisition in the name of the Town of development rights of
agricultural land and for any expenditure incurred in the preservation of
agricultural land, provided that:
A. The development rights have been voluntarily offered for sale to the
municipality by the owner; and
B. The land has been designated for preservation purposes by the
municipality in an open space plan, municipal plan of conservation and
development or farmland preservation plan.
§ 71-8. Custody and investment of fund.
The fund shall be in the custody of the Town Treasurer or other officer in
charge of funds for the Town. All or any part of the fund may from time
to time be invested in any securities in which public funds may lawfully be
invested. All income derived from such investments shall be paid into the
fund and become a part thereof. The moneys so invested shall at all times be
subject to withdrawal from such investment for use as provided in § 71-7.
§ 71-9. Annual report.
Annually the Town Treasurer or other person having custody of the fund
shall submit to the Town Meeting a complete and detailed report of the
condition of the fund, which report shall be made a part of the annual Town
report.
The rights of the fee owner to provide for the extraction of gravel or
like natural elements for purposes directly or incidentally related to the
operation of the agricultural enterprise; or
C.
The existing water and mineral rights, exclusive of gravel, of the fee
owner.
D.
§ 71-5 EASTON CODE § 71-9
1:26
Chapter 86
INCENTIVE PLANS
§ 71-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-9
1:27

ARTICLE I
Volunteer Firefighters and Emergency Medical Service Personnel
[Adopted 4-28-2003; amended 3-19-2012]
§ 86-1. Purpose.
The Town of Easton adopts this article establishing incentive plans for
volunteer firefighters and volunteer emergency medical service personnel
for the purpose of encouraging volunteerism in the Easton Volunteer Fire
Department and the Easton Volunteer Emergency Medical Service and
to provide an honorarium for those volunteers who give of their time to
provide public safety services.
§ 86-2. Honorarium. [Amended 9-15-2014]
Any volunteer firefighter or EMS volunteer is entitled to an honorarium
up to the amount of $1,000 per fiscal year, provided that such volunteer
satisfies the requirements set forth in the incentive plan of the respective
organization. "Incentive plan" shall mean the plan developed and approved
by the Board of Fire Commissioners (hereinafter referred to as the
"Commission") for volunteer firefighters and the plan developed and
approved by the EMS Commission for volunteer EMS personnel, as both
such plans are also approved by the Board of Finance. Each plan shall
detail the requirements to be met in order for a volunteer to be eligible to
receive all or a portion of the honorarium. Eligibility will be based upon
certification, participation and training. A volunteer in both organizations
may receive an honorarium from each organization to a maximum of $2,000
if the volunteer qualifies under each organization's incentive plan.
Qualification shall, however, be independent for each organization, in that
attendance at a single incident shall not count both as a volunteer for the
Fire Department and as a volunteer for the EMS. The honorarium will be
prorated for a volunteer who serves for less than a full calendar year.
§ 86-3. Additional honorarium.
In addition to the amount stipulated in the above section, each of the
Commissions is authorized to offer an additional $500 to volunteers who
earn the maximum honorarium as defined in § 86-2 and who work a
substantial portion of their hours during difficult to cover time periods. The
incentive plan developed by each of the Commissions will stipulate those
time periods that are considered difficult to cover and the number of hours
or calls which must be worked in order to earn the additional honorarium.
The stipulations of § 86-2 applying to volunteers who serve both the EMS
and fire services shall also apply to this additional honorarium.
§ 86-4. Participation; appropriation. [Amended 9-15-2014]
Participation shall be measured on a calendar year basis. A request for
an appropriation in the amount sufficient to fund the program for each
calendar year for each organization shall be made to the Board of Finance
§ 86-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-4
1:29
so that payment for the preceding calendar year may be made by August 1
of the succeeding fiscal year.
§ 86-5. Incentive plans.
The initial incentive plan for each organization is on file with the Town
Clerk. The incentive plan of each organization may be amended by the
organization's Commission with the approval of the Board of Finance,
provided that no amendment shall affect any provision of this article, and
in the event of any conflict between any amended plan and this article, this
article shall control.
§ 86-6. Disputes.
Any dispute concerning the application of a plan to a volunteer shall be
submitted to and determined by the organization's Commission with the
right of appeal to the Board of Selectmen, whose decision shall be final.
§ 86-7. Review by committee.
No later than September 15 of every third year commencing 2007, or
more frequently at the discretion of the Board of Selectmen, the Board
of Selectmen shall appoint a committee of not fewer than five resident
taxpayers of the Town which will undertake and complete, within 60 days
following such appointment, or such longer time as the Board of Selectmen
shall authorize, a study and investigation with respect to honoraria for
volunteer firefighters and volunteer EMS personnel, and the committee
shall prepare a report to the Board of Selectmen which report shall include
the following:
A. With respect to the previous three years, the fiscal effect of the program;
and
B. Recommendations with respect to the form and extent of the program
for the following three years, including estimates of the annual economic
impact.
§ 86-8. Action on committee report.
After receiving the report from the committee, the Board of Selectmen shall
provide such comments on the recommendations as it deems appropriate.
The committee shall consider the comments of the Board of Selectmen and
shall, to the extent deemed necessary and appropriate by the committee,
present revised recommendations to the Board of Selectmen. At its
discretion, the Board of Selectmen may forward the committee report to
the Board of Finance. After receiving the report from the committee, the
Board of Finance shall provide such comments on the recommendations as
it deems appropriate. The committee shall consider the comments of the
Board of Finance and shall, to the extent deemed necessary and appropriate
by the committee, present revised recommendations to the Board of
Finance. When the Board of Finance is satisfied with the recommendations
of the committee, the Board of Finance shall recommend the ordinance for
§ 86-4 EASTON CODE § 86-8
1:30
adoption by the Town at a Town Meeting to be scheduled by the Board of
Selectmen. The Town Meeting shall, by a majority vote, approve or reject,
but not amend, the recommended ordinance. If approved, the ordinance
shall remain in effect until such time as a new recommended ordinance is
approved by the Town Meeting. If rejected, a new committee, which may but
need not contain members of the preceding committee, shall be convened.
Until such time as a new ordinance shall be adopted by the Town Meeting,
the then current ordinance will remain in effect.
§ 86-9. Amendments.
This article may, but need not, be amended and restated in its entirety in
the future. It shall be sufficient to submit as an amendment to this article
the provisions of the recommended ordinance.
§ 86-10. Exemption from taxation.
The honoraria provided pursuant to this article shall be free from federal
and state taxation to the extent permitted by law.
§ 86-11. Form of honorarium.
The recipient of an honorarium under this article may choose to receive up
to $1,000 of it in the form of a tax abatement. Any remaining amount of the
honorarium will be issued in the form of a cash stipend.
§ 86-12. When effective
In accordance with § 7-157 of the Connecticut General Statutes, this article,
upon its adoption, shall become effective 30 days after publication and shall
provide for a payment commencing in fiscal year 2012-2013 for services
during calendar year 2011 and for subsequent years in accordance with this
article.
§ 86-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-12
1:31
Chapter 90
INSURANCE COMMISSION
§ 90-1. Membership; term of office.
There shall continue to be an Insurance Commission of the Town of Easton,
comprised of five members consisting of the First Selectman, or his
designee, a member of the Easton Board of Education and three electors
of the Town of Easton knowledgeable in the general field of insurance, said
electors to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for terms of three years.
At no time shall more than four members of said Commission be members
of the same political party.
§ 90-2. Duties.
The duties of said Commission shall consist of studying the insurance needs
of the Town, making recommendations to the Board of Selectmen as to
the amounts and specifications of insurance coverage for the Town and
reporting said recommendations to the Board of Selectmen at least three
months prior to the beginning of each fiscal year.
§ 90-3. Meetings; records.
Said Commission shall conduct such meetings as are necessary at the call of
the Chair. It shall keep an accurate record of the minutes of said meetings
and prepare and maintain a compilation of all policies held by the Town, the
names of the agents of record, the insurance coverages secured thereby and
the amounts of the premiums due thereon, which compilation and minutes
shall be a part of the record of said Commission and shall be available for
public inspection at reasonable times.
§ 90-4. Purchase of insurance policies.
The purchase of any insurance policy recommended by said Commission
shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 160, Purchasing and
Competitive Bidding, of this Code, irrespective of the amount of the
premium for such policy.
Chapter 105
LAND ACQUISITION AND PRESERVATION
§ 105-1. Land Acquisition and Development Authority.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Land Acquisition and
Development Authority consisting of five members and two alternates to
serve terms of three years with terms ending on January 2; provided,
however, that at the time of the first appointment, two members and
one alternate shall be appointed for a period of two years only or until
§ 86-12 EASTON CODE § 105-1
1:32
January 2, 2008, whichever is earlier. No more than three members and
one alternate shall be members of the same political party.
B. The Authority shall evaluate land for possible acquisition in fee by the
Town or for the possible acquisition by the Town of development rights
to such land. The Authority shall make recommendations to the Board
of Selectmen as appropriate. Land will be evaluated for acquisition
based upon its potential use for open space, recreation or housing.
Before making any recommendation, the Commission shall consult with
other Town boards and officials, including the Board of Selectmen, Town
Planner, the Conservation Commission, the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Park and Recreation Commission. For purposes
of this chapter, "land" shall mean real property with or without
improvements thereon located within the Town of Easton. "Development
rights" shall mean the rights or combination of rights of owners of
land to construct on, sell, lease or otherwise develop or improve such
land and shall include any easement, interest or rights in land and any
covenants and agreements with owners of land or interests therein to
acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of or otherwise
conserve such land.
§ 105-2. Guidelines for acquisition of land or development rights.
A. The types of land to be considered for acquisition by the Town must be:
(1) Land that has unique features and/or significant scenic, topographic,
conservation or wilderness value based on the characteristics of the
land.
(2) Land that has significant historical or archaeological value based on
the character of the land or improvements thereon.
(3) Land that has recreational value as outlined in the Town Plan of
Conservation and Development.
(4) Land that has potential value for housing development.
(5) Land that has potential value because its acquisition will provide
other strategic opportunities for the Town consistent with the
purpose of this chapter and the Town Plan of Conservation and
Development.
B. The types of development rights to be considered for purchase by the
Town must be consistent with the general purpose of this chapter and
may include one or more of the following:
(1) Development rights which will tend to maintain and enhance the
conservation of natural or scenic resources.
(2) Development rights which will tend to protect natural topography,
streams or water supply.
(3) Development rights which will tend to protect historical or
archaeological sites.
(4) Development rights which will tend to promote conservation of
agricultural soils, particularly prime farmland soil.
(5) Development rights which will tend to contribute towards the
preservation of agriculture in the Town.
§ 105-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-2
1:33
(6) Development rights which will tend to promote certain publicly
desirable uses of the land, at the present time expected to include
agricultural, forest and natural uses.
(7) Development rights which provide other strategic advantage to the
Town consistent with the purpose of this chapter and the Town Plan
of Conservation and Development.
§ 105-3. Procedure.
A. The Authority shall forward recommendations to the Board of Selectmen
for consideration. Upon gaining the support of the Board, the Authority
will then present a request for appropriation to the Board of Finance.
B. Upon approval of the Board of Selectmen and the Board of Finance,
the decision to acquire the land shall be put to a vote before the Town
Meeting.
C. At the Town Meeting, the Authority shall provide information about
the parcel, the proposed purpose for its purchase and the method and
sources of funding.
§ 105-4. Land Acquisition Fund.
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 7-131r and Public Act No.
05-228, the Town hereby establishes a Land Acquisition Fund to be used
for the purpose of acquiring and maintaining land and development rights
within the Town of Easton. Such fund shall not lapse at the close of the
municipal fiscal year. Such fund shall be held in a separate, interest-bearing
account with all interest and income derived from the assets of the fund
paid into the fund and added to the assets of the fund. The Land Acquisition
Fund may:
A. Accept donations from the public and private entities and from
individuals.
B. Accept contributions required by the Town Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Conservation Commission as a condition for the
approval of applications before such Commissions. Such required
contributions may be in place of or in addition to any contribution to the
Fee in Lieu of Open Space Fund. This chapter is intended to supplement,
and not to replace, the Fee in Lieu of Open Space Fund.
C. Receive funds through an appropriation in the annual budget as allowed
by Connecticut General Statutes § 7-131r.
D. Be used alone or in combination with other public or private funds to
acquire and maintain land and development rights.
E. Be used for the purpose of investigating, testing, appraising, and
analyzing the suitability and value of a potential parcel of land for
acquisition.
F. Be used for the purpose of providing for the general maintenance, but
not improvement, of such acquired parcels.
Chapter 112
LIBRARY BOARD
§ 105-2 EASTON CODE § 112-1
1:34
§ 112-1. Membership; powers and duties.
There shall continue to be a Library Board (hereinafter referred to as the
"Board") consisting of six members who are electors and taxpayers of the
Town of Easton and which shall have all the powers and duties provided by
Chapter 190 of the General Statutes.
§ 112-2. Term of office. [Amended 9-15-2014]
The members of said Board shall be elected for a term of six consecutive
years in the same manner as the Town officers are elected, with the terms
of said members arranged so that not more than two members are elected
in any one year and not more than three members of the Board shall be
members of the same political party.
§ 112-3. Officers; meetings.
The Board shall elect one of its members to be Chair and one to be Clerk
thereof. The Board shall hold such regular meetings and special meetings
as may be advisable at any time upon giving at least 24 hours' notice to
each member before the time of such meeting. The Clerk shall cause to be
prepared and filed with the Town Clerk a copy of the minutes and records
of each regular and special meeting within seven days from the date of
such meeting. At all meetings of the Board, four members shall constitute
a quorum and the concurrence of three votes shall be necessary for the
transaction of business.
§ 112-4. Vacancies.
Vacancies from death, resignation or otherwise shall be filled by a majority
vote of the remaining members at a special meeting called for such purpose.
Any member so elected shall serve until the next Town election and until his
successor is elected and qualified. At the next Town election following the
occurrence of such vacancy, the electors shall elect a successor to fill the
vacancy for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 112-5. Management of property.
The Library Board shall have the management and control of all property of
the Town devoted to library purposes, except such property as may be under
the jurisdiction of the Board of Education, and shall maintain and operate
the same. The Board may establish reasonable rules regulating the use of its
facilities and may establish and enforce reasonable fines and penalties for
the violation thereof and, in addition to its free library services, may provide
for the rental of books, periodicals, motion pictures, exhibits or other library
facilities. All money which may be collected in the enforcement of such
fines and penalties shall be turned over to the Treasurer of the Town. The
Board may appoint a librarian and such assistant librarians, clerks and
other employees as may be necessary to maintain and operate the library
facilities and may determine their duties, terms of service and, subject
to the approval of the Board of Finance, their compensation. The Board
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-5
1:35
may, within the limits of the appropriations, from time to time, purchase
such books and periodicals, publications, materials and supplies as may be
useful or necessary for the operation of the library facilities of the Town.
The Board may dispose of the same as may be desirable and necessary for
the operation of the library. The proceeds, if any, of such disposal shall be
turned over to the Treasurer of the Town.
§ 112-6. Gifts and funds.
Subject to the provisions contained herein and in the General Statutes, the
Board may accept any gift of property of any character upon any terms and
conditions which the donor may prescribe and which may be acceptable
to the Board, provided that no gift which imposes upon the Town any
obligation to incur any expense in order to keep, use or maintain the gift
may be accepted by the Board unless it is approved by the Town Meeting.
The Board may establish with any such gift one or more library funds and
shall have the exclusive control and management thereof, may hold title
thereto and may manage and invest and reinvest the same in accordance
with the laws of the state governing the investment of trust funds. Subject
to the terms and conditions upon which any of such property or funds shall
be held, the Board shall transfer the gross income thereof quarterly, or more
frequently, to the Town Treasurer to be expended by the Town for general
library purposes or for such special purposes as may be required to comply
with the terms and conditions of any gift. To the extent permitted by the
terms and conditions upon which any of such property or funds may have
been received, the Board may transfer to the Town Treasurer the whole or
any part of the principal of any such library fund to be expended by the
Town for general library purposes or for such special purposes as may be
required to comply with the terms and conditions of any gift. In connection
with the administration and management of any of such property or funds,
the Board may employ such agents, experts and other personnel as it may
deem advisable.
Chapter 128
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 112-5 EASTON CODE § 112-6
1:36
ARTICLE I
Appointed Officers and Board and Commission Members
[Adopted 3-25-1980 as Title IC of the 1980 Code of Ordinances]
§ 128-1. Appointment; term of office. [Amended 4-15-1982]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, all appointed officers and
members of each board or commission shall be resident electors of the
Town of Easton and shall be appointed by vote of a majority of the
Board of Selectmen. Beginning in January of 1982, all terms of office
shall commence on January 2 in the year of appointment. Any officer,
board member or commission member so appointed shall serve for the
full term of his office as provided for in this Code of Ordinances or until
his respective successor has been appointed and has qualified. In the
event that any such officer, board member or commission member dies,
resigns or is otherwise incapable of serving during the term of his office,
a successor shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen to serve for
the unexpired portion of the term for which such officer, board member
or commission member has been appointed.
B. All officers, board members or commission members whose present
terms expire after January of 1982 shall serve until the first of January
following such month of expiration. This subsection in no way modifies
the existing system of staggered appointments presently provided for in
this Code of Ordinances.
§ 128-2. Officers.
Except as otherwise provided herein, each board and commission shall elect
annually in the month of January from its members a Chair, a Vice Chair and
a Clerk.
§ 128-3. Compensation.
All officers and members of each board or commission shall be sworn to
the faithful performance of their duties. Except as otherwise provided,
no member of a board or commission shall receive compensation for his
services as such, but the necessary expenses of the board or commission,
when approved, shall be paid by the Town.
§ 128-4. Removal.
Any appointed officer or member of an appointed board or commission may,
except as otherwise provided in this Code, be removed by the vote of a
majority of the Board of Selectmen, provided that notice shall first be given
in writing of the specific grounds for his removal and an opportunity to
be heard in his own defense, alone or with counsel, at a hearing before
the Board of Selectmen, held not more than 10 and not less than five days
after delivery of such notice. The hearing shall be private unless a public
hearing is requested by such officer or member. If said officer is entitled
to compensation, he may be suspended without compensation pending any
§ 128-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-4
1:37
such hearing, and provided, further, that if following such a hearing he is
restored to office, he shall be compensated from the date of his suspension.
§ 128-5. First Selectman.
The First Selectman shall be an ex officio member of all appointed boards
or commissions.
§ 128-4 EASTON CODE § 128-5
1:38
ARTICLE II
Assessor
[Adopted 4-15-1982 (Title IIIG of the 1980 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 128-6. Office of Assessor.2 [Amended 9-15-2014]
Pursuant to the authority and provisions of § 7-100k of the Connecticut
General Statutes, there shall be one Assessor for the Town of Easton who
shall hereinafter be appointed and serve as provided for herein.
§ 128-7. Qualifications; compensation. [Amended 9-15-2014]
The Assessor shall be a certified Connecticut municipal assessor. Said
Assessor shall receive compensation at a rate determined by the Board of
Selectmen within the limits of the appropriation therefor.
§ 128-8. Appointment by Board of Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen shall make the initial and all subsequent
appointments of an Assessor. Any appointment, except as provided for in
§ 128-13 below, shall be made by the Board of Selectmen from a list of
qualified candidates submitted to the Board of Selectmen by the examining
committee pursuant to the provisions of § 128-9 below.
§ 128-9. Examining committee.
When an examining committee is required to carry out the provisions of
this article, the Board of Selectmen shall convene the same. The examining
committee shall be comprised of three individuals, one of whom shall be
a representative of the Connecticut Office of Policy and Management and
two of whom shall be certified Connecticut municipal assessors, one of
whom shall be selected by the majority members of the Board of Selectmen
and one of whom shall be selected by the minority member of the Board
of Selectmen. The representative of the Connecticut Office of Policy and
Management and the Board of Selectmen shall attempt where reasonably
possible to select certified Connecticut municipal assessors employed by
towns having a similar size and grand list to that then prevailing in the
Town of Easton. The examining committee shall personally interview each
applicant for the Assessor's office and shall conduct a technical oral
examination of each such candidate. The examining committee shall submit
a list to the Board of Selectmen containing the names of not more than
a simple majority of applicants, to a maximum of three applicants, found
by said examining committee to be most qualified for the Assessor's office.
Said list shall be submitted in order of the committee's preference. The
two certified Connecticut municipal assessors serving on the examining
committee shall be paid an honorarium as established by the Board of
Selectmen of the Town of Easton for their services.
2. Editor's Note: Original § 1 of this ordinance, which immediately preceded this section and
dealt with the incumbent Assessors, was repealed 9-15-2014.
§ 128-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-10
1:39
§ 128-10. Clerical help and assistants.
The Board of Selectmen, with the advice of the Assessor, can and hereby
is authorized to employ and/or appoint such clerical help, secretaries, and
Assistant Assessors as said Board of Selectmen determines are necessary to
assist the Assessor with the performance of the functions of his office. The
Board of Selectmen shall establish the rate of compensation for said clerical
help, secretaries, and Assistant Assessors to the limits of the appropriation
therefor.
§ 128-11. Powers and duties.
The Assessor shall have all the powers and shall perform all the duties as
established by the Connecticut General Statutes. In addition, the Assessor
shall have those specific duties set forth in the attached Schedule A.3 On
request of the Board of Selectmen, the Assessor shall report in writing
concerning any matter pertaining to the duties of his office.
§ 128-12. Term of office; removal.
Any Assessor appointed hereunder shall serve for a term of six years or until
his death, resignation, or removal from office for just cause or his inability
or unwillingness to perform the duties of his office, including those set forth
in the attached Schedule A. Removal shall be by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 128-13. Reappointment.
Upon the expiration of any term of any Assessor then in office, appointed
in the manner specified herein, the Board of Selectmen shall be authorized
to reappoint said Assessor for additional terms without the necessity of
convening the examining committee.
§ 128-14. Action by Selectmen.
As used in this article, the word "Selectmen" means the Board of Selectmen
of the Town of Easton. No action shall be taken by the Selectmen, pursuant
to the provisions hereof, except by a majority vote thereof.
3. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 128-10 EASTON CODE § 128-14
1:40
Chapter 132
ORDINANCES, PUBLICATION OF
§ 132-1. Summary publication of Town ordinances.
A. Ordinances adopted by the Town Meeting may be published, in summary,
in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes § 7-157, as amended.
B. The summary document is prepared for the benefit of the public, solely
for purposes of information, summarization and explanation. The
document does not represent the intent of the legislative body of the
Town of Easton for any purpose.
C. The full text of any ordinance is available for public inspection in the
Town Clerk's office.
Chapter 136
PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
§ 136-1. Membership; term of office.
There shall continue to be a Park and Recreation Commission, consisting of
seven members, not more than five of whom shall be from the same political
party. Each such member shall be appointed to a term of three years.
§ 136-2. Powers and duties.
A. The Commission shall have full and exclusive power to make rules and
bylaws for the transaction of its business and to appoint or employ
such supervisors or employees as it may deem necessary and shall
prescribe and define their respective duties and shall fix and regulate
compensation to be paid to the persons to be employed by the
Commission, subject to the approval of the Board of Finance as to the
amount of any such compensation.
B. Said Commission shall have the care, management and control of:
(1) All public parks and grounds used for park purposes and all
structures therein and all recreational facilities therein, whether
now owned or hereafter acquired by said Town of Easton, and all
Town-owned greens, monuments and abandoned cemeteries.
(2) Such other public grounds and public recreational facilities as may
from time to time be delegated to said Commission by the Town of
Easton.
C. Said Commission shall encourage and promote coordinated action
among volunteer groups and agencies in the Town interested in
recreational activities.
D. Said Commission shall have the power to make and alter from time to
time all needful rules and regulations for the maintenance and order,
safety and decency within the parks and other areas and facilities under
its care, management and control and to prescribe penalties for
disobedience thereof.
§ 128-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-2
1:41
E. Said Commission shall consider the acceptance of gifts, donations,
legacies or devises of property, both real and personal, for park and
recreation purposes and recommend the acceptance or rejection thereof
to the Town.
F. Said Park and Recreation Commission shall make an annual report to the
Town of its activities.
§ 136-3. Expenditures.
All expenditures of said Commission shall be approved by a majority of
the members present at a duly held meeting, and all checks or orders for
the payment thereof shall be signed by either the Chair, the Vice Chair or
Secretary of the Commission and by the First Selectman.
Chapter 141
PERSONNEL
§ 136-2 EASTON CODE § 136-3
1:42
ARTICLE I
Retirement
[Adopted 3-25-1980 as Title XB of the 1980 Code of Ordinances]
§ 141-1. Participation in Old Age and Survivors Insurance System.
The First Selectman is hereby authorized to execute on behalf and in
the name of the Town of Easton any and all agreements with the State
Retirement Commission relating to participation by the Town of Easton in
the Old Age and Survivors Insurance System under Title II of the Social
Security Act, as amended, in accordance with and subject to the provisions
of §§ 7-452 to 7-459 of the General Statutes, and subject to the regulations
promulgated by the State Retirement Commission pursuant to said statutes.
§ 141-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-1
1:43

ARTICLE II
Pension and Employee Benefit Commission
[Adopted 4-15-1982 (Title XA of the 1980 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 141-2. Membership; term of office.
A. There shall be a Pension and Employee Benefit Commission which shall
consist of the First Selectman or his nominee and seven appointed
electors of the Town of Easton, who shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen. The term of said appointments shall be as follows:
(1) Two members shall be appointed to serve until January 1, 1983.
(2) Two members shall be appointed to serve until January 1, 1984.
(3) Two members shall be appointed to serve until January 1, 1985.
(4) One member shall be appointed to serve until January 1, 1986.
B. Upon the expiration of each of the original terms referred to above,
each appointment shall be for a term of four years. No more than
five members of said Commission shall be of the same political party.
[Amended 9-15-2014]
§ 141-3. Qualifications.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint individuals knowledgeable in the field
of pension benefits, employee fringe benefits, personnel management or
labor relations.
§ 141-4. Powers and duties.
The Pension and Employee Benefit Commission shall:
A. Administer the Town Pension Plan.
B. Make recommendation concerning the investment of pension funds.
C. Supervise distribution of pension benefits to retiring employees.
D. Review the acutarial assumptions of the Town Actuary.
E. Act as the administrative review board with regards to the following
items:
(1) Past service credits for Town employees.
(2) Establishment of original dates of employment.
F. Inform employees concerning their specific pension benefits at
retirement.
G. Make specific recommendations concerning the group health insurance,
accident insurance, sickness-disability insurance, major medical
insurance and other fringe benefits to be provided Town employees.
H. Establish an employee benefit manual.
I. Assist and advise the Town of Easton concerning the negotiation of
employee contracts.
§ 141-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-4
1:45
Chapter 147
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
§ 147-1. Membership; term of office.
There shall continue to be a Planning and Zoning Commission consisting of
five members who are electors of the Town of Easton holding no salaried
municipal office. The members of said Commission shall be appointed for
terms of five years.
§ 147-2. Rules, meetings and records.
The Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, hold
regular meetings and keep public records of its activities. The Commission
shall hold a public information meeting at least once during each year.
§ 147-3. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have all the powers and duties given to zoning
commissions and to planning commissions by the General Statutes. The
Commission shall also have the power and duty to prepare, adopt and
amend a master plan for the development of the Town or to amend a master
plan previously adopted and shall have control over the subdivision of land.
The Commission shall also have the power and duty to make studies and
recommendations on matters affecting health, recreation, traffic and other
needs of the Town.
§ 147-4. Adoption or amendment of master plan.
Before adopting or amending a master plan, or any portion thereof, the
Commission shall hold at least one public hearing, notice of the time, place
and purpose of which hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Town in accordance with the General Statutes.
The adoption of a master plan or of any part or amendment thereof shall be
by resolution of the Commission carried by the affirmative vote of not fewer
than three members. The plan shall be a public record, a copy of which shall
be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 147-5. Alternate members.
A. There shall continue to be three alternate members of the Planning
and Zoning Commission who shall not be members of the Zoning Board
of Appeals. Each alternate shall be appointed for a period of three
consecutive years. Not more than two alternate members shall be
members of the same political party.
B. Alternate members may attend all meetings and executive sessions of
the Commission, and if a regular member of the Commission is absent or
is disqualified, the Chair of the Commission shall designate an alternate
to so act, choosing alternates in rotation so that they shall act as nearly
equal a number of times as possible. If any alternate is not available in
§ 141-4 EASTON CODE § 147-5
1:46
accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes
of the meeting.
C. The Commission, including any alternate member, when seated as herein
provided, shall have all the powers and duties set forth in the General
Statutes for such Commission and its members.
Chapter 152
POLICE COMMISSIONERS, BOARD OF
§ 152-1. Membership.
There shall continue to be a Board of Police Commissioners (the "Board").
The Board shall consist of five resident electors of the Town of Easton
appointed by the Board of Selectmen. At no time shall more than four Police
Commissioners be members of the same political party.
§ 152-2. Officers; meetings; annual report; vacancies.
A. The Board shall elect one of its members to serve as Chair and one of
its members to serve as Clerk and shall hold regular meetings and keep
records of the same. Meetings of the Board shall be called by the Chair
or by a majority of the Board, and a majority of the members of the Board
shall constitute a quorum.
B. In the month of September of each year, the Board shall make an annual
report to the Selectmen which shall be included with and published by
the Selectmen in the annual report of the Town.
C. All vacancies occurring in the membership of the Board shall be filled
by the Board of Selectmen, and the Board of Selectmen may remove any
Commissioner for cause in accordance with ordinances of the Town of
Easton.
§ 152-3. Powers and duties.
The Board shall have all powers of boards of police commissioners pursuant
to § 7-276 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as it may be amended from
time to time, and shall maintain, control and manage the Police Department
of the Town. Pursuant to such powers, it shall:
A. From time to time, fix the number of members of the Police Department
and designate one who shall be Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall
be the chief administrative officer of the Board and shall be responsible
to the Board for the efficiency of the Department and for the execution
of all laws, rules and regulations prescribed by state statute, the
ordinances of the Town or the Board.
B. From time to time, appoint such police officers as may be required, and
such police officers, when so appointed, shall have all such authority
with respect to the service of criminal process and enforcement of
criminal laws as is vested by the state statutes in police officers. The
police officers shall receive a salary, and no officer shall receive fees
for service in any criminal matter except his salary as fixed by the
§ 147-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-3
1:47
Town. All fees for services rendered by any officer in any criminal
matter in the Town shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Town and
deposited in the general fund. The Board may prescribe the duties of
police officers, whether regular or supernumerary. The Board shall make
such rules and regulations governing the Police Department as it may,
from time to time, deem necessary and consistent with the provisions
of this chapter. Any such person appointed as a police officer by the
Board, under the provisions of this chapter, shall remain in office during
good behavior and until removed for cause by the Board. The Board may
remove, suspend or discipline, in accordance with the state statutes and
any applicable collective bargaining agreement or contract and in such
manner as the Board may prescribe, any police officer, provided that
the charge against such officer shall have been filed in writing with the
Board and the officer so charged shall have had ample opportunity to
appear before the Board to be heard and answer to the charge.
C. Have control and management of all apparatus, equipment and buildings
owned and used by the Town for the purposes of the Police Department
and, subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen and in accordance
with the ordinances of the Town of Easton and funding pursuant to the
General Statutes, purchase all equipment for the Police Department and
prepare an annual budget and submit the same to the Board of Finance.
D. Be the sole and exclusive traffic authority under the provisions of
§ 14-297 of the General Statutes, as it may be amended from time to
time, for and within the limits of the Town.
§ 152-4. Police Chief.
The Chief of the Police Department shall serve in office during good
behavior and until removed for cause by the Board, and prior to dismissal
he shall be entitled to the notice, hearing and appeal required by § 7-278 of
the General Statutes as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 152-5. Term of office.
Members of the Board of Police Commissioners shall be appointed for threeyear
terms.
Chapter 155
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 152-3 EASTON CODE § 152-5
1:48
ARTICLE I
Administrative Division
[Adopted 4-26-1999]
§ 155-1. Purpose.
The Administrative Division shall serve to provide assistance and support to
the Chief of Police of the Easton Police Department relating to the discharge
of his duties and obligations with regard to the Department.
§ 155-2. Personnel. [Amended 9-15-2014]
The personnel of the Administrative Division shall consist of a captain and
such other personnel as may be authorized by the Easton Board of Police
Commissioners or by the Town, provided that such personnel shall not be
authorized in violation of any collective bargaining agreement between the
Town and the bargaining representative of the uniformed police officers.
§ 155-3. Obligations and duties of officers. [Amended 9-15-2014]
The officers of the Administrative Division shall have such obligations and
duties as may be established by the Easton Board of Police Commissioners
or the Chief of Police from time to time.
§ 155-4. Pension benefits.
Each officer in the Administrative Division shall be entitled to participate in
the MERF Fund B of the State Retirement Fund. Participation in the fund is
approved by the legislative body of the Town of Easton in accordance with
the resolution adopted by the Town at the same meeting as this article is
adopted and attached to this article as Exhibit I.
§ 155-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-4
1:49
Chapter 160
PURCHASING AND COMPETITIVE BIDDING
§ 160-1. Purchasing authority.
The Board of Selectmen shall be the general purchasing authority of the
Town. All supplies, materials, equipment, other commodities and work or
services required by any department, office, agency, board or commission
of the Town, including the Board of Education, shall be purchased by
the purchasing authority on requisition, in such form as the Selectmen
may prescribe, signed by the head of the department, office or agency
or chair of the board or commission. No contract or requisition for any
purchase shall be valid until it has been also signed by the First Selectman
and the Treasurer or by an officer or officers of the Town designated
for such purpose by the purchasing authority to act in place of either or
both such officers and unless there are sufficient unencumbered funds to
make payment. A copy of each requisition and supporting contract or other
supporting information shall be submitted to the First Selectman and the
Treasurer. The First Selectman shall administer purchasing and bidding
for the purchasing authority unless the Board of Selectmen prescribes
otherwise. The Superintendent of the Schools shall administer purchasing
and bidding for the Board of Education for the purchasing authority unless
the Board of Selectmen prescribes otherwise.
§ 160-2. Purchasing guidelines.
A. Purchases of $2,500 or less shall be made pursuant to policies and
procedures established by the purchasing authority.
B. Before any purchase is made involving an expected expenditure of more
than $2,500 but less than $7,500, the requisitioner shall procure
proposals from at least three sources which are reasonably expected
to be competitive, and such proposals may be provided by any vendor
who shall conform to the regulations which may be imposed by the
purchasing authority when the proposals are requested. The
requirements of this subsection may be waived with the written approval
of the First Selectman, or with respect to purchases for the Board
of Education with the written approval of the Superintendent of the
Schools, in any case in which compliance with this subsection shall be
deemed to be impractical or not in the best interests of the Town. Each
waiver of this subsection shall contain a statement of the reasons for
such waiver and shall be kept on file in the office of the purchasing
authority with the requisition where it shall be open to public inspection.
C. If any purchase involves an expected expenditure of $7,500 or more,
the purchasing authority shall invite sealed bids or proposals giving at
least 10 days' notice by at least one publication in a newspaper having
a substantial circulation in the Town and such other notice, if any, as
the purchasing authority deems appropriate. The purchasing authority
shall make the purchase from the lowest responsible bidder meeting the
specifications, or if there are two or more such responsible bidders who
§ 155-4 EASTON CODE § 160-2
1:50
submit bids which are equal and lowest, to one of the lowest responsible
bidders, or shall reject all bids or proposals. If the purchasing authority
rejects a bidder as not responsible, the purchasing authority shall state
its reasons for such determination which shall be kept on file in the office
of the purchasing authority where it shall be open for public inspection.
Any advertisement for bids shall contain a statement reserving the right
to reject all bids. The requirements of this subsection may be waived to
the extent permitted by Connecticut Statutes with the written approval
of the Board of Selectmen in any case in which compliance with this
subsection shall be deemed to be impractical or not in the best interests
of the Town. Each waiver of this subsection shall contain a statement of
the reasons for such waiver and shall be kept on file in the office of the
purchasing authority where it shall be open to public inspection.
§ 160-3. Disclosure of interest.
No purchase shall be made nor shall any services be obtained from any
Town officer or from any partnership, corporation or other legal entity of
which a Town officer is a partner, officer, director or holder of an interest
of more than 5% unless such relationship and the fact that such purchase
is contemplated shall be made known in writing to the Board of Selectmen,
which writing shall be posted on a public bulletin board in the Town Hall for
at least five days before the purchase is made or the services obtained. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to any contract awarded to a lowest
responsible bidder after public advertisement as provided in § 160-2C.
§ 160-4. Endorsement by Treasurer.
No requisition or contract for any purchase shall be valid unless it bears
the endorsement of the Town Treasurer. The Town Treasurer shall endorse
a requisition or contract only after he or she has examined the same and
found that it conforms to the requirements of this chapter and that there is
or will be a sufficient unencumbered balance of an applicable appropriation
to pay the same. The Town Treasurer shall record the amount of the
requisition or of any approved contract as an encumbrance against the
appropriation from which it is to be paid, and if by making any requisition
for purchase or by execution of any contract the budget allowance of
the office, department, commission or board requesting the same shall be
exceeded, the Treasurer or the purchasing authority shall bring the request
to the attention of the office, department, commission, or board, which shall
request action by the Board of Finance and secure its approval before the
purchase or execution of the contract is made.
§ 160-5. Claims against Town.
No voucher, claim or charge against the Town shall be paid until it has
been approved by the purchasing authority and the Town Treasurer for
correctness and legality. Appropriate checks shall be drawn by the Town
Treasurer for approved claims or charges and the same shall be signed
by the Treasurer and one Selectman unless the Board of Selectmen shall
§ 160-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-5
1:51
prescribe otherwise. If more than one Selectman signs, signature by one of
the Selectmen may be by facsimile, but signature by the other Selectman
shall not be by facsimile. Payroll checks may bear up to two facsimile
signatures but shall always have at least one nonfacsimile signature.
§ 160-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply whenever a Town check is to be issued and thus
covers purchases even if made under grants, from special funds, or any
other source.
§ 160-7. Waiver for continuing purchases.
In circumstances where compliance with this chapter for continuing
purchases would be impractical or not in the best interests of the Town,
the Board of Selectmen may waive, by written approval, compliance with
this chapter for up to a maximum period of one year. Such waivers may
be renewed for additional one-year periods. Each waiver shall contain a
statement of the reasons for such waiver and shall be kept on file in
the office of the purchasing authority where it shall be open to public
inspection.
§ 160-8. Waiver for emergencies.
In an emergency, the First Selectman or his or her designee may waive
compliance with this chapter, provided that the waiver and the nature of
the emergency shall be brought to the Board of Selectmen for ratification
as soon as reasonably practical.
§ 160-9. Definition.
For purposes of § 160-3, "Town officer" shall be defined as in Chapter 52,
Ethics, Code of, and shall also include the spouse, children, parents, and
siblings of the Town officer.
§ 160-10. Exceptions.
A. The following purchases shall not be subject to the requirements of this
chapter:
(1) Services by Town employees, whether full-time, part-time, or
temporary;
(2) Purchases where there is reasonably only a single source to
purchase from, such as service contracts for a specific piece of
equipment properly purchased under this chapter;
(3) Purchases where, as a practical matter, purchasing should be from a
single source, as, for example, utilities or publication in newspapers;
and
(4) Requests for proposals for a purchase which is of a unique nature,
such as for a computer system or program or insurance.
B. A record of any purchase claimed to fall within the exceptions of this
section shall be kept on file in the office of the purchasing authority
§ 160-5 EASTON CODE § 160-10
1:52
where it shall be open for public inspection. No specifications for any
purchase by bid shall be written in such manner that only a single
supplier can meet the specifications.
C. The Board of Selectmen may, from time to time, in policies and
procedures adopted pursuant to this chapter, specify purchases or
classes of purchases which shall not be subject to the provisions of
this chapter. If there is any question that any purchase may be exempt
pursuant to this section, it should be submitted to the Board of
Selectmen for confirmation that it is exempt.
§ 160-11. Recurring services.
For services of a recurring nature but without a definite scope of work, such
as plumbing or electrical repairs, bids may be solicited on an annual basis
for unit rates for labor and the basis for pricing of materials. Orders for
services covered by the bid may then be placed with the low bidder based
on those rates without further bidding.
Chapter 173
REGIONAL COUNCILS
§ 160-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-11
1:53

ARTICLE I
Regional Council of Governments
[Adopted 3-25-1980 as Title XIB of the 1980 Code of Ordinances]
§ 173-1. Election to join.
The Town of Easton does hereby join with such of the towns and cities
within its planning region as defined by the Secretary of the Office of Policy
and Management of the State of Connecticut, or his designee under the
provisions of § 16a-4a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as may enact
a similar ordinance to create a Regional Council of Governments as said
Council is defined by §§ 4-124i to 4-124p, inclusive, of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
§ 173-2. Representative.
The representative to said Regional Council of Governments shall be the
First Selectman.
§ 173-3. Powers and duties.
The Regional Council of Governments shall have such powers, purposes,
responsibilities and duties as stated in §§ 4-124i to 4-124p, inclusive, of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 173-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-3
1:55

ARTICLE II
Regional Council of Elected Officials
[Adopted 4-25-2011]
§ 173-4. Findings.
The Town of Easton recognizes that formation of a Regional Council of
Elected Officials will improve the continued operation of the Greater
Bridgeport Regional Planning Agency (the "Agency") as the designated
regional planning organization of the Greater Bridgeport Planning Region
(the "Region") by providing a policy board to guide the Agency regarding
the study of issues of mutual concern to two or more members. The Region
is comprised of the municipalities of Bridgeport, Easton, Fairfield, Monroe,
Stratford and Trumbull.
§ 173-5. Formation.
In accordance with the provisions of §§ 4-124c through 4-124h, inclusive, of
the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, the Town of Easton hereby
agrees to form and join a regional organization known as the "Greater
Bridgeport Regional Council of Elected Officials" as the designated policy
board to guide the Agency.
§ 173-6. When effective.
This article shall become effective upon the enactment and approval of a
similar ordinance by all other members of the Region that will comprise the
Greater Bridgeport Regional Council of Elected Officials.
§ 173-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-6
1:57
Chapter 179
ROAD COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 421.
§ 179-1. Membership.
There shall continue to be a Road Commission comprised of three members,
who shall be civil engineers or experienced in the field of road construction.
Not more than two members shall be of the same political party.
§ 179-2. Term of office; quorum.
Each member of the Commission shall serve for a term of three years. Two
members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
§ 179-3. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the Commission to assist the Board of Selectmen by
advising said Board upon the following matters:
A. The extent of the maintenance and repair required for existing roads.
B. The location and layout of new roads and bridges.
C. The construction of new roads in approved subdivisions in strict
accordance with the Easton Road Regulations.
D. The strict compliance with requirements of the Easton Road Regulations
relative to the disturbance of the surface of any road.
E. The winter care of roads and bridges to ensure safe travel conditions.
F. The employment of such personnel and the hiring of such equipment as
may be necessary to perform the required work on roads and bridges.
G. The purchase of such equipment as may be necessary for the
maintenance, new construction and winter care of roads.
H. The revision and amending of the Easton Road Regulations for the Town
of Easton.
Chapter 200
TOWN MEETING
§ 200-1. General powers.
The Town of Easton shall continue to govern its affairs under and be subject
to the applicable provisions of the General Statutes and applicable special
acts of the Legislature. To the extent permitted by the General Statutes it
shall, acting through the Board of Selectmen and Town Meeting, adopt such
§ 173-6 EASTON CODE § 200-1
1:58
ordinances, amendments and resolutions as are necessary or appropriate to
the general health and welfare of its inhabitants.
§ 200-2. Legislative body.
Subject to the provisions of Chapter 90, Title 7, of the General Statutes, the
legislative body of the Town shall be the Town Meeting.
§ 200-3. Special Town Meeting.
A Special Town Meeting may be convened for any proper purpose by the
Selectmen of the Town or by a petition of 50 inhabitants qualified to vote
at such meeting submitted in accordance with Chapter 90 of the General
Statutes.
§ 200-4. Moderator.
Each Town Meeting shall elect a Moderator who shall preside over said
meeting in accordance with §§ 7-7 and 7-8 of the General Statutes.
Chapter 215
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 215-1. Membership; term of office.
There shall continue to be a Zoning Board of Appeals consisting of five
members who are electors of the Town of Easton and are not members of
the Planning and Zoning Commission. Said Board shall be elected for a term
of five consecutive years, and the terms of office shall be arranged so that
the terms of not more than three members shall expire in any one year
and so that not more than four members are members of the same political
party.
§ 215-2. Officers; meetings.
The Board by vote of its regular members shall elect a Chair from among its
members. Meetings of such Board shall be held at the call of the Chair and
at such other times as the Board determines and shall be open to the public.
§ 215-3. Alternate members.
A. There shall also continue to be a panel of alternates consisting of three
members who shall not be members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Each alternate shall be appointed for a term of three
consecutive years. Appointments shall be made so that not more than
two members of the panel shall be members of the same political party.
B. If a regular member of the Board is absent or is disqualified, the Chair
of the Board shall designate an alternate from the panel, choosing
alternates in rotation so that they shall act as nearly equal a number
§ 200-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-3
1:59
of times as possible. If any alternate is not available in accordance with
such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
§ 215-4. Powers and duties.
The Board, including any alternate member, when seated, shall have all the
powers and duties as set forth in the General Statutes for such Board and
its members.
Chapter 226
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 226-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BURGLAR ALARM — Any mechanism, equipment or device designed to
transmit an audible alarm to the exterior of a dwelling or other building.
PRIVATE ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanism, equipment or device
designed to transmit to others, including but not limited to private alarm
services, notice of intrusion or other emergency.
TELEPHONIC ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanism, equipment or device
which is designed to operate automatically through the use of public
telephone facilities to transmit a signal, message or warning to another
location.
§ 226-2. Permit required.
No person shall operate or maintain a telephonic alarm system or a private
alarm system which automatically or through a third party transmits a
signal, message or warning to the Town of Easton Police Department or Fire
Department telephone line or other emergency line without first obtaining
a permit as required by this chapter.
§ 226-3. Application for permit. [Amended 9-15-2014]
Application for permits to install, maintain or operate a telephonic alarm
system or private alarm system which is intended to automatically or
through a third party transmit a signal, message or warning to the Town
Police Department or Fire Department telephone line or other emergency
line shall be filed with the Chief of Police on forms supplied by the Town of
Easton, together with an application fee of $25. Said application shall set
forth the name, address, and telephone number of both the installer of the
system and the person on whose premises the system will be installed, as
well as a description of the system and the location where it is proposed to
be installed.
§ 226-4. Approval of application.
§ 215-3 EASTON CODE § 226-4
1:60
A. The Chief of Police may approve such application if he finds, among other
things, that:
(1) The use of said alarm system to transmit a signal, message or
warning to a designated Town Police Department or Fire Department
telephone line or other emergency line will not interfere with the
orderly conduct of Town business.
(2) The person and/or company installing the system maintains an
adequate service organization to repair, maintain and otherwise
service telephonic alarm systems or private alarm systems sold or
leased by him and/or it.
B. Said Chief of Police shall have the authority and is hereby empowered to
impose reasonable conditions on the exercise of said permit.
§ 226-5. Right of inspection.
Said Chief of Police or designee shall have the right to inspect any
telephonic alarm system or private alarm system on the premises where it
is intended to function prior to issuance of any permit for its operation, and
he may cause an inspection of such system to be made at any time after
issuance of a permit to determine whether it is being used in conformity
with the terms of the permit and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 226-6. Restricted numbers.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, operate
or maintain a telephonic alarm system or private alarm system which
automatically transmits a signal, message or warning to any Town Police
Department or Fire Department telephone line or other emergency line
except to such telephone number or numbers as designated by the permit
issued under the provisions of this chapter. (Telephone dialers will be
prohibited in any new systems. Preexisting dialers must not send more than
two signals to the receiving center for notice of an alarm.)
§ 226-7. Noise control. [Amended 9-15-2014]
Alarms installed after the adoption of this chapter must contain an
automatic timing device to shut down after 40 minutes. Existing systems
must provide a key holder or an outside shutoff. Police may be key holders
in such cases.
§ 226-8. Revocation of permit.
Said Chief of Police may revoke any permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter. Notice to the permit holder of intent to revoke
said permit shall be by registered or certified mail. The permit holder shall
be entitled to a hearing before said Chief of Police within 15 days of the
date of issuance of the notice of intent to revoke. If, after said hearing, said
Chief of Police determines that the telephonic alarm system or private alarm
system installed pursuant to said permit has been installed, maintained, or
operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or of any term or
§ 226-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-8
1:61
condition of said permit, or for failure to pay the annual service fee specified
in § 226-9, he may order said revocation.
§ 226-9. Annual fee. [Amended 9-15-2014]
Each permit holder shall pay to the Town of Easton on or before July
1 of each year a use fee as may be established by the Board of Police
Commissioners from time to time.
§ 226-10. Fee charged for false alarms.
Any person, firm or corporation having a burglar alarm, telephonic alarm
system, private alarm system or any other type of intrusion alarm shall
be charged a fee of $10 after the second false alarm responded to by
the Easton Police Department within the period of a year, $20 after the
third occurrence and $40 each after each subsequent occurrence. If the
possessor of the alarm system appears in person before the Police Chief and
shows to the satisfaction of the Police Chief that the false alarm was not the
result of negligence, inadequately informed employees or service personnel
or improper maintenance, such fee(s) may be waived.
§ 226-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined $50 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 230
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 226-8 EASTON CODE § 226-11
1:62
ARTICLE I
Possession by Minors
[Adopted 4-26-2004]
§ 230-1. Definitions.
"Alcoholic liquors" or "alcoholic beverages" include alcohol, beer, spirits
and wine and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol,
spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed by a human being for
beverage purpose as more fully defined in § 30-1 of the Connecticut General
Statutes which is incorporated herein by reference.
§ 230-2. Possession. [Amended 9-15-2014]
No person under the age of 21 shall be in possession of alcoholic liquors
or alcoholic beverages nor shall he be in the possession or control of
containers of alcoholic liquors or alcoholic beverages, whether opened or
closed, within the Town of Easton except when accompanied by or in the
presence of his or her parent, guardian, or spouse who has attained the
age of 21 years as provided for in § 30-89(c) of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
§ 230-3. Hosting events. [Amended 9-15-2014]
No person shall host an event or permit an event or gathering to take place
on or in property under that person's control or where the host is present
which allows the consumption, dispensing, or other use of alcoholic liquors
or alcoholic beverages to or by a person or persons under the age of 21,
except as provided in § 30-89(c) of the Connecticut General Statutes. This
prohibition shall apply to events or gatherings on both public and private
property.
§ 230-4. Sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor. [Amended 9-15-2014]
Except as provided in § 30-86(b)(3) of the Connecticut General Statutes, no
person shall sell, deliver, offer or expose for sale or delivery, or own or keep
with the intent to sell or deliver alcoholic liquors or alcoholic beverages to
any person under the age of 21 within the Town of Easton.
§ 230-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of
$100.
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:63
Chapter 241
BAZAARS AND RAFFLES
§ 241-1. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The Town of Easton hereby ratifies its adoption of §§ 7-170 to 7-186
inclusive of the General Statutes, which statutes set forth the regulation
by which bazaars and raffles may be operated by qualified sponsoring
organizations and the requirement for permits therefor.
Chapter 252
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Board of Appeals — See Ch. 18.
§ 252-1. Enforcement of State Building Code.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision
of the State Building Code as adopted by the Town and as amended from
time to time or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of any approved plan or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of the State Building Code, shall
be served with a stop order by the Building Official, and thereafter any
person, firm or corporation who or which shall continue to work in or about
a building, except such work as he or it is directed to perform to remove
a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than
$100 for the first day of any such violation and $25 for each day that such
violation continues in addition to all other penalties imposed by the State
Building Code.
Chapter 257
BUILDINGS AND LOTS, NUMBERING OF
§ 230-5 EASTON CODE § 252-1
1:64
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 257-1. Purpose.
A. Assignment of numbers. This chapter establishes a formal program of
assignment of street numbers (the "program") as authorized by
§ 7-148(c)(6)(C)(i) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The purpose of
the program is to:
(1) Devise a systematic method of assigning numbers to real property in
the Town of Easton; and
(2) Devise, administer, implement and enforce a program of visual
identification of assigned street numbers in order to facilitate and
ensure the response of emergency and other public services to such
real properties.
B. Other regulations. This chapter shall not supersede any other ordinance
or regulations, including, without limitation, planning and zoning
regulations, and this chapter shall not create by implication any use not
otherwise permitted.
§ 257-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply for the purpose of this chapter only:
BUILDING — A structure on a lot intended for human occupancy.
LOT — All contiguous land in one ownership, as evidenced by a deed or
deeds recorded in the land records of the Town of Easton. For the purposes
of this chapter, "lot" shall also mean parcel.
UNIT — A self-contained area of occupancy within a building. A unit may
be used for any permitted purpose and may consist of either an owned or
leased area.
§ 257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-2
1:65

ARTICLE II
Numbering Policy
§ 257-3. Authority.
The Assessor shall devise, administer, implement and enforce the program
and shall have the authority to assign street numbers for all lots, buildings
and units within the Town. The Assessor may consult with the Planning and
Zoning Department and the Fire Marshal and the Building Official and such
other Town officials as may be appropriate in carrying out such assignment.
§ 257-4. Numbering records.
A. Records. The Assessor shall maintain and be the office of record of all
street numbers assigned pursuant to the program.
B. Issuance of numbers. Any person applying for a building permit for new
construction on a lot or parcel of land must first obtain from the Assessor
a street number for each lot or parcel of land for which a permit has
been applied, which assigned street number (or numbers as the case
may be) shall appear on all applications and documentation relating to
such construction.
C. Existing numbers. Street numbers existing in the records of the Assessor
or in other Town records upon the date of enactment of this chapter shall
continue to be the street number of record for each such lot, building or
unit unless otherwise revised by the Assessor for good cause.
§ 257-5. Policy.
The Assessor, within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter, shall
issue a written policy for the assignment of street numbers. The policy shall
take into account consecutive numbering for single building and single lot
development and special numbering needs necessitated by multi-unit or
unique development patterns. The Assessor shall periodically review the
policy for revision necessitated by community needs or changing methods
of development.
§ 257-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-5
1:67

ARTICLE III
Identification and Enforcement
§ 257-6. Identification and display required.
The owner of each lot upon which a building or unit is located shall
permanently affix and display the street number which has been assigned
by the Assessor, in the manner specified below.
§ 257-7. Specifications.
A. Design. The assigned street number shall be displayed by numerals no
less than three inches in height. Written, printed or scripted words shall
not be used as the required display.
B. Color. The color of the numerals shall be in sharp contrast to their
background, so as to be plainly visible and legible from the center line of
the street at all times.
C. Location of number display. The assigned street number shall be
displayed on or near the front entrance of the building or each unit. The
front of the building or unit shall be that side facing the street for which
a number has been assigned to that building or unit. Where a building
or unit is set back more than 60 feet from the edge of the street or
the assigned street number or numbers are not clearly visible from the
center line of the street, the number shall be displayed on a freestanding
sign or other device or mailbox. Such display shall be located and
shall comply with all specifications enumerated in this section, where
applicable, and shall be near the main entrance of the property on one
of the following:
(1) The front entrance of the building or each unit;
(2) A freestanding sign or other device set back no more than 25 feet
from the edge of the street; or
(3) A mailbox located at the edge of the street. The number display shall
appear on both sides of the mailbox unless the mailbox is one of a
group serving multiple buildings or units, in which case the number
display shall appear on the front of each mailbox.
D. Obstruction. The assigned street number shall be displayed so that its
view from the street is not wholly or significantly obstructed by the
mailbox, flag, trees, shrubbery, porches, building architecture or other
physical impediments.
E. Multiple lots off the same drive. Where there are multiple lots off the
same drive, each branch in the drive shall be clearly marked to show
the direction to take for each assigned number, and in such cases, each
building or unit shall also have the assigned number displayed on it or at
the edge of the property in accordance with this section.
§ 257-8. Display of unassigned numbers.
The display of any street number other than that assigned by the Assessor
is expressly prohibited.
§ 257-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-9
1:69
§ 257-9. Maintenance.
It shall be the responsibility of the lot, building or unit owner (or the lessee,
where applicable) to maintain at all times the number display as required
by and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 257-10. Building inspection; certifications.
A. New construction. All lots for which new construction has been approved
(as evidenced by issuance of a building permit) shall display their
assigned street numbers (in accordance with the provisions of § 257-7 of
this article) prior to the performance of any construction inspection.
B. Completed construction. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until
the assigned street number is permanently displayed in accordance with
the provisions of § 257-7 of this article.
§ 257-11. Noncompliance; enforcement.
A. Noncompliance deemed a violation. The owner (or owners jointly and
severally) of each lot, building or unit failing to display an assigned
street number as prescribed under the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to be in violation of this chapter.
B. Determination and warning. Upon the determination of any such
violation, the Board of Selectmen or its designee shall issue a warning of
violation, which warning shall provide a thirty-day period from the date
of issuance in which to correct such violation.
C. Summons. Upon failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter
within the thirty-day warning period, the Board of Selectmen or its
designee shall issue a citation for violation of this chapter.
D. Continuing violation. Each day beyond the thirty-day warning shall be
deemed a separate violation subject to the issuance of a new summons.
§ 257-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine of $50 per violation. The amount of such fine shall be payable to the
Town of Easton.
§ 257-13. Exemption.
The owners of all existing lots, buildings or units in the Town of Easton shall
be exempt from any violation of the provisions of this chapter until 30 days
after the Assessor issues a written policy and publishes notice of it.
§ 257-14. Appeals and variances.
Any appeal or request for a variance shall be taken to the Board of
Selectmen, the majority decision of which shall be final.
§ 257-9 EASTON CODE § 257-14
1:70
Chapter 273
DRIVEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 421.
§ 273-1. Permit required. [Amended 9-15-2014]
No owner of land shall construct or reconstruct a driveway in or
permanently surface any area between the paved portion of any road and
the abutting property line without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
Town Engineer. The Town Engineer shall be empowered to grant a waiver
of such permit upon recommendation by the Road Commission.
§ 273-2. Application for permit.
Applications shall set forth the name and address of the owner of the land,
location and layout of the driveway, together with contours at two-foot
intervals, and a drainage plan.
§ 273-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation failing to comply with the provisions of
this chapter or applicable road regulations shall, for each such offense, be
subject to a fine of not more than $100.
§ 273-4. Work done by Town.
In addition to the penalty provided for in § 273-3 of this chapter, if the
owner shall, after written notice, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter for a period of 60 days, the Town may cause such
work to be done as it deems necessary in order to comply with this chapter
and collect the actual costs thereof from the owner of the land upon which
the work was done.
Chapter 286
FARMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agricultural Commission — See Ch. 10. Agricultural Land Preservation Fund — See
Ch. 71, Art. II.
§ 286-1. Purpose and intent.
§ 257-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-1
1:71
A. Agriculture is a significant part of the Town of Easton's heritage and
is an integral part of the Town's future. The Town officially recognizes
the importance of farming to its rural quality of life, heritage, public
health, scenic vistas, tax base, wetlands and wildlife, open space and
local economy. This right to farm chapter:
(1) Encourages the pursuit of agriculture.
(2) Promotes agriculture-based economic opportunities.
(3) Protects farmland within Easton by allowing agricultural uses and
related activities to function with minimal conflict with abutting
property holders and Town agencies, consistent with the Town
Master Plan of Conservation and Development.
(4) Acts as a policy statement providing an opportunity to educate Town
residents from both the farming and nonfarming communities about
a farmer's right to farm under Connecticut General Statutes §§ 1-1(q)
and 19a-341.
B. It is the declared policy of the Town of Easton to conserve, protect and
encourage the maintenance and improvement of agricultural land for
the production of food and other agricultural products, for protection of
the quality of the public water supply watershed, and for conservation
of the natural and ecological value of Easton's land. It is hereby further
determined that any impact caused to others through generally accepted
agricultural practices shall be considered offset and ameliorated by
the benefits of farming to the neighborhood, community and society in
general.
§ 286-2. Definitions.
The terms "agriculture" and "farming" shall have those meanings set forth
in § 1-1(q) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 286-3. Right to farm.
A. No present or future agricultural operation which is conducted or
maintained in a manner consistent with generally accepted agricultural
practices4 and engaged in the act of farming as defined in this chapter
shall become or be considered a nuisance solely because such activity
resulted or results in any changed condition of the use of the land.
Agricultural operations may occur any time provided such activities do
not violate applicable health, safety, fire, zoning, wetlands, life safety,
environmental or building codes and regulations. The term "agricultural
operations" shall include:
(1) The incidental noise from livestock, poultry or farm equipment used
in generally accepted farming practices.
(2) Odors from livestock, manure, fertilizer or feed.
(3) Dust and fumes associated with generally accepted farming
practices.
(4) Use of chemicals, provided such chemicals and the method of
application conform to practices approved by the Commissioner of
Energy and Environmental Protection or where applicable the
Commissioner of Public Health.
§ 286-1 EASTON CODE § 286-3
1:72
(5) Irrigation and water management associated with generally
accepted farming practices.
B. Inspection and approval of the agricultural or farming operation, place,
establishment or facility by the Commissioner of the Department of
Agriculture or his/her designee shall be prima facie evidence that such
operations follow generally accepted agricultural practices. These
practices must comply with the regulations and requirements of the
Easton Conservation Commission, Planning and Zoning Commission, and
Building or Health Department pursuant to the Connecticut General
Statutes.
C. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 19a-341, agricultural or
farming operation is not deemed a nuisance.
§ 286-4. Assistance in resolution of disputes.
Residents of Easton may seek assistance from the Agricultural Commission
with any complaints or concerns they have with respect to any agricultural
operation, place, establishment or facility located in Easton as well as
from any other Easton official, board or commission. The Agricultural
Commission, acting in an advisory capacity, may provide assistance with
any complaint or concern brought to it or any other official, board or
commission. Nothing herein prohibits residents from making complaints to
the Connecticut Department of Agriculture.
§ 286-5. Impact upon Town agencies.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall alter or restrict the powers of the
Easton Conservation Commission, Planning and Zoning Commission, and
Building or Health Department bestowed upon them by the Connecticut
General Statutes. In addition, these boards and departments are
encouraged to adopt regulations consistent with this chapter and to make
the permanent preservation of farmland within the Town an important
consideration in their respective planning policy decisions.
§ 286-6. Willful or reckless conduct not protected.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply where a nuisance results from
negligence or willful or reckless misconduct in the operation of any such
agricultural or farming operation, place, establishment or facility, or any of
its appurtenances.
§ 286-7. Authority.
In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148(b), the Town has
the right to create this right to farm chapter.
Chapter 290
4. Note: Agricultural or farming operation is not deemed a nuisance. See Connecticut
General Statutes §§ 19a-341, 22a-430, 22a-471, 22a-471a and 53-247 in respect to
generally accepted agricultural practices.
§ 286-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-7
1:73
FEES
§ 286-7 EASTON CODE § 286-7
1:74
ARTICLE I
Municipal Land Use Applications
[Adopted 3-30-1999; amended 4-25-2011]
§ 290-1. Fee schedule. [Amended 9-15-2014]
Pursuant to § 8-1c of the Connecticut General Statutes, the following fees
are established for the processing of applications by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals:
Zoning permit $1.50 per $1,000
Zoning permit - minimum $25
Sign permit $25
Temporary zoning permit $25
Conditional zoning certificate of compliance $25
Final zoning certificate of compliance $25
Amended Plan of Conservation and Development N/C
Amended Zoning Regulations text $500
Special permit - minimum $200
Special permit - less than $1,000,000 $1.50 per $1,000
Special permit - $1,000,000 plus $1 per $1,000
Special permit - gravel removal/municipal $250
Special permit - gravel removal/state $10
Special permit - affordable apartment $200
Accessory apartment $20
Affordable apartment $20
Subdivision $500
Plus per lot $200
Application to Zoning Board of Appeals $200
§ 290-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-1
1:75

ARTICLE II
Use of Town Facilities
[Adopted 12-8-2008]
§ 290-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONDUCTING ACTIVITIES — Includes any commercial activity conducted
at any location, private or public, within the geographic limits of the Town
of Easton.
TOWN FACILITIES — Includes, but is not limited to, roads and/or streets;
parks; recreational facilities; properties, buildings, and structures; police,
fire and EMS personnel; police, fire, Public Works Department and EMS
equipment; Town of Easton personnel; Town of Easton equipment; and such
other things as may be identified as Town facilities by the First Selectman
of the Town of Easton.[Amended 9-15-2014]
§ 290-3. Application process.
Any individual or entity using Town facilities for conducting activities as
defined in § 290-2 above shall first make application to the First Selectman
of the Town of Easton on such form as may then be in use by said First
Selectman.
§ 290-4. Administrative fees.
A. Any individual or entity using Town facilities for conducting activities
shall pay the following administrative fees:
(1) Application fee: $500.
(2) Use fee: minimum of $1,000 per day or such higher fee as
determined by the First Selectman.
B. Fees imposed by this article are not intended to supplant or limit any fee
or charge required by any other ordinance or the rules of any other Town
agency.
§ 290-5. Exempt parties. [Amended 9-15-2014]
The following parties shall be exempt from the provisions of this article:
A. Individuals or entities providing services primarily for the benefit of the
Town of Easton or its residents as determined by the Board of Selectmen.
B. Individuals or entities conducting activities solely for charitable
purposes which activities have been approved by the First Selectman of
the Town of Easton.
C. Individuals or entities conducting activities primarily related to
agriculture, farming or the sale of agricultural products as determined
by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 290-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-6
1:77
§ 290-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-15-2014]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of
$250 per each day of such violation.
§ 290-6 EASTON CODE § 290-6
1:78
Chapter 298
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 298-1. National Flood Insurance Program. [Amended 9-15-2014]
The Town of Easton, pursuant to the provisions hereof and in accordance
with § 22a-36 et seq. of the General Statutes (Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Act), hereby authorizes application by the First Selectman
for Federal Flood Insurance and agencies to identify and evaluate flood
areas having special flood hazards and enact as necessary and maintain
in force, for those areas having flood hazards, adequate land use and
control measures with effective enforcement provisions consistent with the
criteria set forth in Section 1910 of the National Flood Insurance Program
Regulations, including but not limited to measures that will:
A. Take into account floodplain management programs, if any, already in
effect in neighboring areas.
B. Apply at a minimum to all areas identified by the Administrator of
the Federal Emergency Management Agency as floodplain areas having
special flood hazards.
C. Provide that within the floodplain area having special flood hazards,
the laws and ordinances concerning land use and control and other
measures designed to reduce flood losses shall take precedence over any
conflicting laws, ordinances or codes.
§ 298-2. Duties of Conservation Commission.
The Conservation Commission of the Town of Easton is hereby vested with
the responsibility, authority and means to:
A. Delineate or assist the Administrator at his request in delineating the
limits of the areas having special flood hazards on available local maps
of sufficient scale to identify the location of building sites.
B. Provide such information as the Administrator may request concerning
present uses and occupancy of the floodplain.
C. Cooperate with federal, state and local agencies and private firms which
undertake to study, survey, map and identify floodplain and cooperate
with neighboring communities with respect to management of adjoining
floodplain in order to prevent aggravation of existing hazards.
D. Submit on the anniversary date of the community's initial eligibility an
annual report to the Administrator on the progress made during the past
year within the community in the development and implementation of
floodplain management measures.
§ 298-3. Lowest floor elevations.
The Building Official for the Town of Easton is appointed to maintain for
public inspection and to furnish upon request a record of elevations (in
relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
new or substantially improved structures located in the special flood hazard
§ 290-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-3
1:79
areas. If the lowest floor is below grade on one or more sides, the elevation
of the floor immediately above must also be recorded.
Chapter 325
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 29.
§ 325-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a means by which the Town of
Easton may more effectively enforce its Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations, as herein ded, with the implementation of s for violations and
continued nonconformance therewith.
§ 325-2. Authority.
This chapter has been prepared and adopted pursuant to Connecticut
General Statutes § 22a-42g(a), as adopted by the Easton Town Meeting on
February 1, 2000, effective 30 days from publication, and may be amended
from time to time by the Easton Town Meeting or its successor.
§ 325-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings:
COMMISSION — The Easton Conservation Commission or its successor,
acting as the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency of the Town of
Easton pursuant to the provisions of §§ 22a-36 to 22a-45 inclusive of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
FUND — The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Protection and
Maintenance Fund established by this chapter to secure any s collected
hereunder.
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS — The Inland
Wetland and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of Easton, as such may
be amended from time to time.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, company, organization or legal entity of any kind,
including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions
thereof.
WETLANDS ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The employees and/or designees
of the Town of Easton responsible for enforcing the policies and regulations
of the Commission.
§ 298-3 EASTON CODE § 325-4
1:80
§ 325-4. Citation for violation of regulations.
A. Upon the recommendation of the Commission, any Easton police officer,
wetlands enforcement officer and/or any other person authorized by the
Easton First Selectman may issue a citation to any person who violates
the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations.
B. The shall not exceed $1,000 per each offense as may be established
by the Commission. In assessing the damage and in recommending the
amount of to be levied, the Conservation Commission or its designee
shall consider all relevant facts and circumstances, including but not
limited to the following:
(1) The environmental impact of the unauthorized action, construction,
facility or condition.
(2) The irreversibility and/or irretrievability of damage caused by the
unauthorized action, construction, facility or condition.
(3) The character and degree of injury to or interference with public
health, safety and welfare that the unauthorized action,
construction, facility or condition has caused.
(4) The continuance of violation after notification by the Commission or
service of any order or notice within the powers of the Commission.
(5) The history of multiple violations by the person cited.
C. Each violation of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
shall be a separate and distinct offense, and in case of continuing
violation, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed to be a
separate and distinct offense for which a fine may be levied.
D. Preexisting violations. Violations of or nonconformance with the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourse Regulations in existence at the effective date
of this chapter shall be deemed violations under this chapter and may be
issued fines accordingly.
§ 325-5. Fund established.
A. A special fund known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Protection and Maintenance Fund" is hereby established pursuant to the
provisions of § 22a-42g(c) of the Connecticut General Statutes, which
fund shall be maintained and administered by the Commission.
B. Any fine collected by the Town of Easton pursuant to this chapter shall
be deposited in said fund and shall be used by the Commission for the
maintenance and protection of wetlands and/or watercourses or such
other legitimate purposes as may be established by the Commission.
§ 325-6. Hearing procedure for citations.
A. In accordance with § 7-152c of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the
same may be amended from time to time, there is hereby established the
following citation hearing procedure:
(1) The First Selectman of the Town of Easton shall appoint one or more
citation hearing officers, other than police officers or other persons
authorized to issue citations hereunder, to conduct the hearings
authorized by this chapter.
(2) The Town of Easton shall send notice to the person cited within 12
months from the expiration of the final period for the uncontested
§ 325-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-6
1:81
payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any citation issued for
any unauthorized action.
(3) Such notice shall inform the person cited:
(a) Of the allegations against him;
(b) The amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fee due;
(c) Of his right to contest his liability before a citation hearing
officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice within 10
days of the date thereof;
(d) That if he does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and
judgment shall be entered against him; and
(e) That such judgment may issue without further notice.
B. If any person who is sent notice pursuant to Subsection A(2) of this
section wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he/she may,
without requesting a hearing, pay the full amounts of the fines, penalties,
costs or fees admitted to in person or by mail to the Easton Conservation
Commission. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil
or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person
making the payment.
C. Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing
within 10 days of the date of the first notice provided for in Subsection
A(2) of this section shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the
Conservation Commission shall certify such person's failure to respond
to the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and
assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by this chapter and
shall follow the procedures set forth in Subsection E of this section.
D. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of
the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held
not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the
mailing of notice, provided that the hearing officer shall grant upon
good cause shown any reasonable request by any interested party for
postponement or continuance. An original of certified copy of the initial
notice of violation issued by the issuing official or police officer shall
be filed and retained by the Town of Easton and shall be deemed to
be a business record within the scope of Connecticut General Statutes
§ 52-180 and evidence of the facts contained therein. The presence of the
issuing official or police officer shall be required at the hearing if such
person so requests. A person wishing to contest his liability shall appear
at the hearing and may present evidence in his behalf. A designated
municipal official, other than the hearing officer, may present evidence
on behalf of the Town of Easton. If such person fails to appear, the
hearing officer may enter an assessment by default against him upon a
finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable statutes and/
or ordinances. The hearing officer may accept from such person copies
of police reports, investigation and citation reports, and other official
documents by mail and may determine thereby that the appearance
of such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct the
hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as he
deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of
evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given
§ 325-6 EASTON CODE § 325-6
1:82
under oath or affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce his
decision at the end of the hearing. If he determines that the person is not
liable, he shall dismiss the matter and enter his determination in writing
accordingly. If he determines that the person is liable for the violation, he
shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against
such person as provided by the applicable ordinances of the municipality.
[Amended 9-15-2014]
E. If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing
officer shall send, by first-class mail, a notice of the assessment to the
person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12
months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment
with the Clerk of the Superior Court for the geographical area in which
the Town of Easton is located together with an entry fee of $8. The
certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of
assessment. Within such twelve-month period, assessments against the
same person may be accrued and filed as one record of assessment. The
Clerk shall enter judgment, in the amount of such record of assessment
and court costs of $8, against such person in favor of the Town of
Easton. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the General Statutes
or ordinance, the hearing officer's assessment, when so entered as a
judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of
execution on such judgment may issue without further notice to such
person.
Chapter 361
NUISANCES
§ 361-1. Maintenance of nuisance prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation owning, leasing, occupying or having charge
of any premises shall maintain or keep any nuisance thereon as defined in
§ 361-2.
§ 361-2. Definition.
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "nuisance" means any condition or
use of premises or of building exteriors or vacant lots which causes or tends
to cause substantial diminution in the value or enjoyment of other property
in the neighborhood in which such condition or use of premises is located
or which constitutes a hazard to health or safety of the general public. This
includes, but is not limited to, any of the following:
A. The keeping or the depositing on or allowing the accumulation of or the
scattering over the premises of lumber, junk, trash or debris; abandoned,
discarded or unused objects or equipment such as furniture, bedding,
stores, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers; persistent pools of
stagnant water from storm runoff or subsurface seepage or discharges
of water from the premises; and weeds or other unsightly vegetation
contributing to higher pollen counts in the atmosphere.
§ 325-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 361-2
1:83
B. Vacant or abandoned structures not secured against entry by boarding,
shuttering, locks or watchmen on premises or on regular patrol.
C. The keeping, depositing or storing, outside of an enclosed building, of
more than two inoperative or unregistered motor vehicles, or the used
parts of a motor vehicle, except operative farm vehicles.
§ 361-3. Enforcement. [Amended 9-15-2014]
Enforcement of this chapter may be accomplished by the Town in any
manner authorized by law. The Police Department of the Town shall have
primary responsibility for such enforcement. In the exercise of this
responsibility, the Police Department shall cause to have notice served on
the violator(s) and the owner(s) of the property, specifying the nature of
the violation and the action required of the violator(s) or the owner(s) to
correct the complaint. If the violation is not corrected within 10 calendar
days, the Town may seek an order from a court of competent jurisdiction
to permit the Town, by its agent, designated for such purpose by the Board
of Selectmen, to enter such premises and perform such work as may be
required to correct the violation. In the event of such action, violators shall
be charged the full costs for manpower and equipment employed in doing
the work, as well as court costs and other legal costs incurred in obtaining
the court order. Any such charges and costs that remain unpaid 90 calendar
days after they are billed by the Town shall be filed as liens against the
property in question and accrue interest and penalties in the same manner
as delinquent taxes.
§ 361-4. Penalties for offenses.
Notwithstanding any costs and penalties imposed pursuant to § 361-3 of this
chapter, those who fail to comply with notice served upon them within the
time permitted shall be fined $25 for each violation. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues.
§ 361-5. Action to abate violation.
In addition to such actions as the Town may take, any person who, by reason
of another's violation of any provision of this chapter, suffers special damage
to himself different from that suffered by other property owners throughout
the Town generally may bring an action to enjoin or otherwise abate an
existing violation.
Chapter 373
PARKING
§ 361-2 EASTON CODE § 373-1
1:84
§ 373-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the text
clearly indicates a different meaning:
OPERATOR — The person operating or in control of a vehicle on a public
highway.
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a
highway or upon land of the Town of Easton otherwise than temporarily
for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging
passengers or loading or unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic
regulations or traffic signs and signals.
VEHICLE — Any device used for conveyance or other transportation of
persons or property, whether on wheels or runners or other, when on a
public highway, except those which are operated upon rails or tracks.
§ 373-2. Power to regulate parking.
A. The Board of Police Commissioners is delegated the power and authority
to:
(1) Determine areas where parking shall be prohibited or limited;
(2) Cause signs to be posted in all areas where such parking is to be
prohibited or limited, indicating such prohibitions or limitations; and
(3) Establish appropriate fines for violation thereof not to exceed those
set forth in § 373-3 as it may be amended from time to time.
B. While not obligated to do so, the Board of Police Commissioners may
hold public hearings on proposed regulations before such
determinations can be made. Notice of such public hearings shall be
given at least 10 days in advance by publication in a newspaper having a
general circulation in the Town and by posting a notice in a public place.
§ 373-3. Fines.
A. The members of the Police Department shall be authorized to affix to each
vehicle parked in violation of said regulations a ticket directing the owner
to report to the Police Department. Each owner shall, within 14 days of the
time when such notice was attached to such vehicle, pay or cause to be paid
to the Police Department, as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such
violation, the following sums: [Amended 9-15-2014]
Violation Penalty
Parking time limit $10
Parking in no-parking area $10
Parking in crosswalk $20
Parking within 10 feet of fire hydrant $50
Parking within 25 feet of intersection $20
Parking in front of driveway $20
§ 373-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-3
1:85
Violation Penalty
Parking in Town park $20
Parking in restricted area $30
Parking in handicapped zone (unless a
handicapped vehicle)
$150 for first violation;
$250 for subsequent
violation
Other violations $20
B. In the event that such owner fails to make such payment as aforesaid within
14 days, the penalty due shall be doubled, and 14 days thereafter such
owner shall be additionally liable for the penalty hereinafter provided for
violations of the provisions of this chapter as set forth in § 373-6.
§ 373-4. Removal of vehicle.
The Board of Police Commissioners or, in an emergency situation, the
Chief of Police is hereby authorized to direct the removal from the public
highways or land of the Town of any vehicles parked in violation of said
regulations. Upon such removal the owner of such vehicle shall, in addition
to any fines or penalties imposed, be required to pay the cost of said
removal.
§ 373-5. Restrictions during emergencies. [Amended 9-15-2014]
The Board of Police Commissioners may, in case of emergency, restrict or
forbid parking on any street or portion of a street of the Town during the
time of such emergency. When practical during such emergency period,
signs shall be posted designating such restrictions, and the police shall
enforce such emergency restrictions in the same manner as the ordinances
of the Town.
§ 373-6. Penalties for offenses.
Unless otherwise provided, every person who shall violate this chapter shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding $50.
Chapter 379
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 379-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person, firm or corporation, whether principal or agent,
who or which goes from place to place within the Town of Easton selling,
vending, or bartering any food, goods, wares, or merchandise on foot, from
house to house, at organized events, or from any vehicle.
§ 373-3 EASTON CODE § 379-1
1:86
SOLICITOR — Any person, firm or corporation, whether principal or agent,
who or which solicits orders for the sale of food, goods, wares, or
merchandise for future delivery or for services to be performed in the
future. This definition also includes any person, firm or corporation,
whether principal or agent, who or which without invitation goes upon
private property to request contribution of funds or anything of value
or to sell goods or services for political, charitable, religious, or other
noncommercial purposes.
§ 379-2. Permit required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to carry on the
business of peddling or soliciting in the Town of Easton without having
first applied for and received from the Chief of Police a permit to do so.
B. The permit shall expire 90 days from the date issued, unless an earlier
expiration date is noted on the permit.
C. The permit shall be nontransferable.
§ 379-3. Application for permit.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring such a permit shall apply for one
in writing to the Chief of Police, or his or her agent, on forms provided by
the Town.
A. Such application shall:
(1) State the name and home and business address of the applicant;
(2) State the name and address of the person, firm or corporation by
whom or by which employed;
(3) Provide a general physical description of the person, including
weight, height, and color of hair and eyes;
(4) Provide a brief description of the food, goods, wares, merchandise or
services to be offered by the applicant;
(5) Recite the specific dates, not to exceed 90 days, in which the
applicant intends to sell, vend, barter or solicit orders in the Town;
(6) Provide the applicant's state or federal tax identification number;
and
(7) List all convictions, if any, of the applicant upon any criminal charge.
B. The applicant shall submit:
(1) When applicable, a copy of a valid Heath Department certificate
enforceable for the same period of time as the requested permit;
(2) When applicable, a copy of a certificate from the State Sealer of
Weights and Measures indicating that all weights and measures used
by the applicant in his or her business have been approved and
stamped;
(3) The application fee in the amount described in this chapter;
(4) If the applicant or his or her employer is from out of state, a
certificate of good standing from the Secretary of the State providing
that the firm or corporation is qualified to conduct business in the
State of Connecticut; and
(5) Identifying information for the motor vehicle, including a copy of the
registration thereof, if any, to be used by the applicant.
§ 379-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-3
1:87
C. Each applicant shall be fingerprinted and photographed, and any such
fingerprints may, in the discretion of the Chief of Police, be sent to
the Federal Bureau of Investigation and to the Connecticut State Police
Investigation Department for further investigation.
D. The signature on the application shall be witnessed by the Chief of
Police, or his or her agent.
E. The Chief of Police, or his or her agent, shall issue the permit within 15
days from the date a completed application is received by the Town.
(1) If the Chief of Police finds the application to be in order, he or she
shall endorse his or her approval on the application and shall deliver
the required permit to the applicant.
(2) The permit shall show the name, address and photograph of the
permittee, the date of issuance, the date of expiration, and an
identifying description of any vehicle to be used in carrying on the
business for which the permit is issued.
F. The Chief of Police, or his or her agent, may deny the application for any
of the following reasons:
(1) The location or time of the peddling and soliciting would endanger
the public safety and welfare;
(2) Investigation of the application reveals that false information has
been provided;
(3) There is no proof as to the authority of the applicant to serve as an
agent of the principal;
(4) The applicant has been denied a permit pursuant to this chapter
within the past year, unless the applicant can establish to the
satisfaction of the Chief of Police that the reasons for the denial no
longer exist; or
(5) The applicant has been convicted within the immediately preceding
five years for a crime involving fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation.
§ 379-4. Hours of operation.
No person shall carry on the business of a peddler or solicitor within the
Town of Easton between sunset and 9:00 a.m.
§ 379-5. Fees.
A. The fee for each application submitted shall be $50 or such other amount
as may be established by the Board of Police Commissioners from time
to time.
B. The fee for each permit issued shall be:
(1) For a permit to expire not more than 30 days from the date issued:
$100.
(2) For a permit to expire not more than 60 days from the date issued:
$150.
(3) For all other permits: $200.
§ 379-6. Display of permit.
Such permit shall be carried at all times by the permittee when peddling
or soliciting in the Town and shall be exhibited by a permittee whenever he
§ 379-3 EASTON CODE § 379-6
1:88
or she shall be requested so to do by any police officer or any purchaser or
prospective purchaser.
§ 379-7. Receipts for purchases.
All peddlers and solicitors shall give a written receipt for all orders taken
within the Town, which receipt shall be signed and dated by the peddler or
solicitor and shall set forth a brief description of the food, goods, wares,
merchandise or services sold, the total purchase price thereof, and the
amount of any payment received by the peddler or solicitor from the
purchaser.
§ 379-8. Revocation of permit.
A. Any such permit may be revoked by the Chief of Police after reasonable
investigation for any of the following causes:
(1) Violations by the permittee of any of the ordinances of the Town or
any state or federal law;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for a permit;
(3) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement by the permittee in the
course of conducting peddling or solicitation activities;
(4) Conviction of the permittee for any crime involving moral turpitude;
(5) Soliciting orders within 1,000 feet of any school grounds on days
school is in session during the period commencing 1/2 hour before
school is in session and ending 1/2 hour after the session terminates;
(6) Peddling any articles of food, goods, wares, or merchandise from
a permanent, temporary, or stationary stand, tent, vehicle or cart
within the right-of-way of any Town or state road or highway; or
(7) Acting in a manner prohibited by § 379-4, 379-6 or 379-7.
B. Notice of revocation shall be given in writing, specifically setting forth
the effective date of the revocation and the grounds for revocation. Such
notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his or her
address as given in his or her application for a permit or as subsequently
updated by the permittee.
C. The permittee may appeal the decision to revoke to the Board of
Selectmen by providing a written notice of appeal to the office of the
First Selectman within 10 days of the date of mailing of the notice of
revocation. The Board of Selectmen shall hear the complaint within 20
days from receipt of the appeal and shall issue a decision within five
days thereafter. Notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall
be mailed to the permittee at the address given in his or her application
or such updated address as may have been provided. The decision of the
Board of Selectmen shall be final and binding on all parties.
§ 379-9. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A. Sales by farmers or gardeners of the produce of their farms and gardens.
B. Peddlers or solicitors making visits upon invitation of the homeowner.
§ 379-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-9
1:89
C. Peddlers or solicitors making regular visits to serve business
establishments.
D. Pupils in the Easton or Joel Barlow public school system peddling or
soliciting in connection with a fund-raising project approved by the local
or regional board of education or school principal or a parent-teacher
organization of the local or regional public school system.
E. Participants in fund-raising events sponsored by local charitable,
athletic, civic or religious nonprofit organizations.
F. Any solicitation made upon the premises owned or occupied by an
organization upon whose behalf the solicitation is made.
G. Any communication by an organization soliciting contributions solely
from persons who are members of the organization at the time of such
solicitation.
§ 379-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined $100 for each offense. Every
day upon which such violation shall occur or upon which such violation shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
A. In addition, the permit of the peddler or solicitor shall be revoked in
accordance with § 379-8 of this chapter.
B. The Town, or any individual, may pursue any available civil remedies.
Chapter 388
PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANIES
§ 379-9 EASTON CODE § 379-10
1:90
ARTICLE I
Notice of Sale or Lease of Land
[Adopted 3-25-1980 as Title XIH of the 1980 Code of Ordinances]
§ 388-1. Duty of First Selectman. [Amended 9-15-2014]
The First Selectman of the Town of Easton is authorized and directed
to notify, in writing, within five days after receipt of written notice from
any public service company pursuant to the provisions of § 16-50c of the
General Statutes, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Board of
Education, the Park and Recreation Commission and the Conservation
Commission of the receipt of such notice from such public service company,
including a general description of the land intended to be sold, leased or
otherwise disposed of by such public service company.
§ 388-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-1
1:91
Chapter 405
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 388-1 EASTON CODE § 388-1
1:92
ARTICLE I
Community Septic Systems
[Adopted 6-14-2006]
§ 405-1. Community systems prohibited.
Community septic or sewage systems (defined as systems which serve more
than a single dwelling unit) shall not be permitted anywhere within the
Town of Easton.
§ 405-2. Use of individual system required. [Amended 9-15-2014]
All requirements for sewage disposal for residences within the Town of
Easton shall be by the use of individual septic systems subject to the
oversight of the Town Health Department.
§ 405-3. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to community septic or sewage systems for
municipal nonresidential structures.
§ 405-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-3
1:93
Chapter 414
SOLID WASTE
§ 405-3 EASTON CODE § 405-3
1:94
ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 8-22-1991]
§ 414-1. Authority and purpose.
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-241 et seq., as amended,
any person(s) generating solid waste must begin separating certain items
for recycling from other solid wastes for disposal. On September 20, 1989,
by a vote at a Town Meeting, the Town of Easton has become party to
an intercommunity agreement establishing the Southwest Connecticut
Regional Recycling Operating Committee (SWEROC) through which
regional solid waste recycling services will be provided. This article
establishes the recycling program that shall govern the separation,
recovery, collection, removal, storage and disposition of recyclable
materials within the Town of Easton.
§ 414-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works of the Town of Easton.
GENERATOR — All individuals, households, firms, partnerships,
corporations, associations, organizations, syndicates, companies, agencies,
trusts, businesses, industries, churches, government offices and facilities,
political or administrative subdivisions of the State of Connecticut, schools,
multiple-unit dwelling complexes and social clubs which generate
recyclable materials within the Town of Easton.
IPC — The Regional Intermediate Processing Center.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, municipality, political subdivision or any other
legal entity of any kind.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those unwanted/discarded waste materials
which are mandated by the State of Connecticut to be recycled, as well as
other items which are deemed recyclable by the Town of Easton.
RECYCLING COLLECTOR — Any person(s) authorized by the Town of
Easton to collect and transport recyclable materials.
RECYCLING COORDINATOR — An individual appointed to facilitate the
recycling program.
RECYCLING DROP-OFF CENTER — The area designated by the Board of
Selectmen to receive recyclable materials. Currently the Trumbull Transfer
Station located on Spring Hill Road, Trumbull.
RECYCLING PROGRAM — The program for recycling to govern the
separation, recovery, collection, removal, storage and disposition of
recyclable materials within the Town of Easton.
§ 414-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-2
1:95
REFUSE COLLECTOR — Any person(s) authorized by the Town of Easton to
collect and transport refuse.
SOLID WASTE — Unwanted/discarded materials, including, without
limitation, solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous materials.
SWEROC — The Southwest Connecticut Regional Recycling Operating
Committee.
§ 414-3. Recycling program administration and enforcement.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized and empowered to:
A. Develop and enforce such regulations as are necessary to accomplish
the objectives of the recycling program and to ensure compliance by
generators and recycling collectors with Connecticut General Statutes
§ 22a-241 et seq., as amended, and any other municipal, state or federal
ordinances, laws or regulations affecting the recycling program.
B. Develop, implement, and administer the provisions of this article, which
shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1) The coordination of the recycling program with state and federal
solid waste management and recycling programs and SWEROC.
(2) The development of public education programs relating to solid
waste management and recycling.
(3) The encouragement, organization and coordination of voluntary
citizen and business organization solid waste management and
recycling campaigns.
(4) The investigation of the availability of public and private sources of
funding for such programs.
(5) The reviewing of available information on solid waste management
and recycling.
C. Designate a qualified person to act as a recycling coordinator to
administer and coordinate the recycling program in accordance with this
article.
D. Consider present and future marketing conditions, availability of
appropriate containers, transportation vehicles and other equipment,
personnel, and such other factors as in its opinion may bear on the
effective and efficient application of this article in discharging its duties.
§ 414-4. Obligations of generators.
A. Each generator shall separate recyclable materials from the solid waste
generated by it and store such recyclable materials for collection and
recycling pursuant to this article. Each generator shall place recyclable
materials for collection by the recycling collector at the time and in the
manner designated by the Selectmen.
B. No permit, license or other such authorization for any public event on
public or private property shall be issued by the Town of Easton unless
it contains a requirement that recyclable materials be separated from
the solid waste generated at such event and stored and disposed of in
accordance with this article.
C. No generator shall allow recyclable materials within its control to
become a nuisance or hazard in any way to public health, safety or
§ 414-2 EASTON CODE § 414-4
1:96
welfare. A generator that fails to observe this requirement shall defend
and hold the Town of Easton harmless and indemnified from and against
any and all claims, injuries, damages, and/or liabilities arising out of any
such nuisance or hazard.
D. Generators are prohibited from disposing of recyclable materials as
refuse into the solid waste transfer station. However, generators may
dispose of recyclable materials at designated recycling drop-off centers.
§ 414-5. Collection of recyclable materials.
A. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person, directly or indirectly, to
collect, remove, or dispose of recyclable materials. Recyclable materials
designated and delivered for collection by a generator shall become the
property of the Town of Easton upon the setting out of the recycling
container by the generator.
B. The Board of Selectmen shall establish such regulations for generators
pertaining to the placement and storage of recyclable materials pending
collection as it shall determine are reasonably necessary to assure the
orderly administration of the recycling program.
C. All vehicles used by collectors of solid waste and recyclable materials
shall be licensed by the Town of Easton.
D. All collectors shall:
(1) Comply with all rules, regulations and ordinances established by the
Selectmen to ensure compliance with the recycling program.
(2) Notify the Director of each violation by a generator of any provision
of this article or of any regulations established in connection
herewith.
(3) Register with the Town of Easton pursuant to Article II of this
chapter.
E. Any recycling collector doing business in the Town of Easton which
violates any section hereof or any regulation adopted by the Selectmen
in connection herewith may, upon due notice with an opportunity to be
heard, have its privilege to operate within the Town of Easton, including,
without limitation, any license or permit issued to such recycling
collector, terminated and revoked and fine imposed, not to exceed $100
for each violation, as determined by the Selectmen.
F. The requirements of this section shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of,
any other requirements presently or hereafter imposed upon collectors
by the Town of Easton.
§ 414-6. Penalties for improper treatment of recyclable materials.
In the event that generators fail to separate significant amounts of
recyclable materials from solid waste as required under § 414-4A of this
article, the following penalties may be enforced:
A. Upon the first violation of § 414-4A of this article, the following may take
place:
(1) The recycling collector shall provide the generator with a written
warning notice or tag which shall state that failure to separate
recyclable materials from solid waste is a violation of Connecticut
General Statutes § 22a-241, as amended, and this article.
§ 414-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-6
1:97
(2) The recycling collector will not be required to collect the
unseparated solid waste.
B. Upon the second violation of § 414-4A of this article, the following may
take place:
(1) The recycling collector shall provide the generator with a written
warning that any further violation may result in noncollection of
recyclables and/or a monetary fine.
(2) The recycling collector shall not collect the unseparated solid waste.
C. Upon the first and second failures to separate recyclable materials from
solid waste the refuse collector may take the following actions:
(1) The refuse collector shall attach a written notice or tag to the
offending material which states the violation of Connecticut General
Statutes § 22a-241 et seq. The format of the tag shall be prepared
by the Solid Waste Commission. The tag shall be supplied by the
Town of Easton. Upon a third violation in a calendar year, the refuse
collector shall not pick up the unacceptable waste and the Director
shall be notified. [Amended 9-15-2014]
D. All refuse collectors shall refuse to pick up any solid waste that includes
significant amounts of recyclable materials or be subject to fines or
refusal at the designated disposal area, currently the Trumbull Transfer
Station.
E. Upon notification of more than two violations of § 414-4A within one
calendar year, the person(s) who violates any provision of this article
may be fined up to $100 for each violation, as determined by the
Selectmen.
F. Each and every violation of § 414-4A of this article shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation and shall result in a fine not to exceed
$100 for each violation, as determined by the Selectmen. In addition to
any fine, the offender, at the option of the Selectmen, may be required
to make restitution to the Town of Easton for the value of any recyclable
materials illegally removed. Nothing in this article shall deny the right
of any person to give or sell recyclable materials, including deposit
beverage containers, to any other person.
§ 414-7. Volunteers.
The Director may, in his discretion, issue permits to any person(s) to collect
recyclable materials, provided such person(s) files a report with the
Director detailing the types and amounts of recyclable materials collected.
In exercising his discretion under this section, the Director shall consider
the effect of volunteer activities on the objectives and operations of the
recycling program and the responsibilities of the Town of Easton under
SWEROC, including whether such volunteer activity would significantly
diminish the quantity of recyclable materials which the Town of Easton must
deliver to the IPC under SWEROC.
§ 414-6 EASTON CODE § 414-7
1:98
ARTICLE II
Storage, Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 4-26-2010 (Title VA of the 1980 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 414-8. Declaration of policy.
The accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of refuse must be
controlled by the Town for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare of its residents. It is consequently found and declared that:
A. The Town is authorized by law to regulate the disposal of refuse
generated within its boundaries and to license refuse collectors;
B. The Town has designated the Trumbull Transfer Station as the area
where refuse generated within the Town's boundaries shall be disposed
and has given notice thereof to refuse haulers doing business in the
Town;
C. The Town has executed the municipal contract requiring it to cause all
processible solid waste generated within its boundaries to be delivered
to the Bridgeport System; and
D. The public health, safety and welfare of the Town will be best served by
requiring the delivery of processible solid waste to the transfer station
for processing by the Bridgeport System into products which have an
economic value.
§ 414-9. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following meanings:
AUTHORITY — The Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority established
pursuant to Chapter 361B of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of
1958, as amended.5
BRIDGEPORT SYSTEM — The system for the processing of solid waste and
the recovery of products therefrom constructed by the Authority pursuant
to the municipal contract.
COMMERCIAL REFUSE — Waste from the preparation, cooking and
consumption of food, condemned food products and all refuse from the
handling, storage, preparation and sale of produce originating primarily in
commercial kitchens, stores, restaurants, food markets and factories.
COMMISSION — The Easton Solid Waste Commission established pursuant
to this article.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works of the Town of Easton.
DISPOSAL CHARGE — That amount of money to be charged for each ton of
processible solid waste delivered to the Bridgeport System as established
by the procedures authorized in the municipal contract.
HAZARDOUS WASTES — Solid and liquid wastes in the following
classifications: "hazardous wastes" shall mean pathological, biological,
5. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 446E, Solid Waste Management Services Act.
§ 414-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-9
1:99
cesspool or other human wastes, human and animal remains, and
radioactive, toxic, and other hazardous wastes which according to federal,
state or local rules or regulations from time to time in effect require
special handling in their collection, treatment or disposal, including those
regulated under 42 U.S.C. §§ 6921 to 6925 and regulations thereunder
adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant
to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 90 Stat. 2806, 42
U.S.C. § 6901, such as cleaning fluids, crankcase oils, cutting oils, paints,
acids, caustics, poisons, drugs, fine powdery earth used to filter cleaning
fluid and refuse of similar nature.
HOUSEHOLD GARBAGE — Includes waste from the preparation, cooking
and consumption of products used primarily in private homes.
INDUSTRIAL REFUSE — Includes putrescible and nonputrescible matter
from the manufacture, fabrication or processing of any product.
MUNICIPAL CONTRACT — The municipal solid waste management services
contract between the Town and the Authority dated as of August 30, 1985.
PROCESSIBLE SOLID WASTE — The refuse acceptable to the Bridgeport
System pursuant to the municipal contract.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputresible solid wastes, including
household garbage, rubbish, ashes, bulky wastes and solid commercial and
industrial refuse. It shall not include hazardous wastes.
REFUSE COLLECTOR — Includes any person, firm or corporation engaged
in the business of collecting and transporting commercial, household or
industrial refuse for hire within the Town of Easton.
TICKET — A ticket issued by the Town authorizing the disposal of
processible solid waste at the transfer station.[Amended 9-15-2014]
TOWN — The Town of Easton.
TRANSFER STATION — That facility constructed and operated by the
Authority as part of the Bridgeport System and located at Spring Hill Road,
Trumbull, Connecticut.
§ 414-10. Licensing of refuse collectors; registration of vehicles.
A. Licensing and registration authority designated. The Director shall be
the licensing and registration authority for refuse collectors and
vehicles.
(1) The Director shall grant a license within 30 days following the filing
of a proper application and payment of the prescribed fee unless he
finds one or more of the following conditions to prevail:
(a) The applicant has been irresponsible in the conduct of refuse
collection or hauling operations based upon previous
suspensions and/or revocations of licenses.
(b) The applicant lacks suitable equipment with which to collect
refuse in a safe and nuisance-free manner and in compliance
with this article.
§ 414-9 EASTON CODE § 414-10
1:100
(c) The applicant does not provide insurance having coverage as
specified in this article.
(2) Should the Director decide not to issue a license, he shall advise
the applicant and the Commission in writing of his decision and his
reason(s) within 30 days after the application is complete.
B. License required. Each refuse collector shall on or before July 1 each
year apply for a license from the Director on such form as he shall
prescribe to engage in the business of refuse collection in the Town. The
refuse collector shall list in his application all municipalities in which he
is licensed or hauls and shall inform the Director of any changes to the
list as they occur.
C. Registration of vehicles. No refuse collector shall collect, haul or
otherwise transport refuse in the Town except in duly registered
vehicles. Registrations shall not be transferable from vehicle to vehicle.
The Director may allow temporary transfer of registration in hardship
situations such as a temporary breakdown of an individually licensed
vehicle. [Amended 9-15-2014]
D. Insurance. Each refuse collector shall at all times maintain public
liability insurance having limits of not less than $500,000 for personal
injury and $25,000 for property damage and shall maintain workers'
compensation for all of its employees. The refuse collector shall provide
the Director with proof of such insurance at the time that the refuse
collector shall apply for his license and each renewal thereof.
E. Registration term; fee; renewal. All registrations shall be issued for a
term not to exceed one year and shall be renewable on or before July 1
each year. [Amended 9-15-2014]
F. Reinspection upon sale or transfer of vehicle during registration year. If
a duly registered vehicle shall be sold or transferred to another refuse
collector licensed in the Town during the registration year, the vehicle
shall be reinspected within seven days of such transfer date but no
additional fee shall be required.
G. Display of registration. The registration issued shall be conspicuously
displayed on the left front of the body of each vehicle so licensed, or as
may be directed.
H. Identification of vehicles and containers. Each licensee shall
prominently display at all times on each registered vehicle or container
in letters at least four inches in height its name, registration number and
telephone number.
I. Licenses nontransferable. Licenses are not transferable. When any
licensee shall sell or transfer all or part of its route to any refuse
collector not licensed in the Town, it shall notify the Director in writing
of its intent to sell at least seven days before the sale or transfer stating
the name of the buyer or transferee and the date of transfer.
§ 414-11. Refuse collector's responsibilities and obligations.
A. Place of delivery. Each refuse collector shall deliver all processible solid
waste collected within the Town to the transfer station. The Town shall
be credited with all said waste delivered to the transfer station. All other
refuse shall be delivered to such place as the Director may from time
§ 414-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-11
1:101
to time designate, and any applicable charge shall be paid by the refuse
collector.
B. Prohibition on delivery. No licensee shall deliver any processible solid
waste to any place other than the transfer station unless the transfer
station is incapable of accepting processible solid waste at the time of
delivery, in which event waste shall be delivered to another location
designated by the Director.
C. Construction and maintenance of vehicles and containers. All vehicles
registered to collect and transport refuse shall be of a watertight
construction and shall be maintained free of noxious odors and
accumulated refuse. Any such vehicle with a capacity in excess of five
cubic yards shall be of a closed construction. A container utilized
primarily for non-liquid refuse need not be of watertight construction but
shall be completely enclosed. If any such vehicle shall have a capacity of
less than five cubic yards, it may have an open top, provided that it is
covered when it is in motion, to prevent the escape of refuse.
D. Insurance and registration of vehicles and licensing of drivers. No
vehicle shall be used to collect or transport refuse within the Town
unless the vehicle is covered by liability insurance as provided in this
article, is duly registered with the Connecticut Motor Vehicle
Department, and is driven by a person licensed to drive with the
Connecticut Motor Vehicle Department.
E. Customers' containers. Refuse collectors shall leave their customers'
containers in a neat, upright position, with lids replaced, and off the
road.
F. Spilled refuse. Refuse collectors shall clean up refuse that may have
spilled when carrying or transferring refuse.
G. List of rates. Each collector shall furnish to its customers, upon request,
a list of rates for the various services it provides. Each collector shall
also file such rates with the Commission, and should a collector intend to
change its rates, it shall file the proposed new rates with the Commission
at least 15 days before their effective date. No collector shall increase
its rates until it complies with this subsection.
§ 414-12. Revocation or suspension of license or registration.
A. Generally. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be
grounds for revocation or suspension by the Director of a license or
registration in addition to the imposition of any fine or penalty permitted
by law.
B. If the Director shall determine that a license or registration should be
revoked or suspended, he shall so notify the holder thereof by certified
mail, return receipt requested, at least seven days in advance of the
action to be taken, and the Commission. The notice shall state the
reason(s) for the action.
C. Request for appeal. If a refuse collector shall object to the Director's
action to revoke or suspend its license or registration, it may within
seven days after receipt of the notice file a written appeal with the
Commission. Timely filing of the appeal shall operate as an automatic
stay of the Director's action.
§ 414-11 EASTON CODE § 414-12
1:102
D. The Commission shall hear and decide the appeal within 30 days; it
shall state the reasons for the decision in writing. The decision of the
Commission shall be final and binding upon the collector. The decision
shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the
Town.
E. Names and addresses of customers to be furnished upon revocation or
suspension. Whenever a collector's license or registration is revoked or
suspended, it shall do one of the following within five days after such
action:
(1) Offer to provide the services of another collector to its customers;
(2) Notify its customers of the revocation or suspension of its license, as
the case may be; or
(3) Furnish the Director with the names and addresses of its customers
to ensure continuity of service.
F. Refusal of permission to use transfer station. The Director shall also
have the authority to refuse permission to a collector to use the transfer
station when, in the Director's opinion, the collector has violated this
article.
§ 414-13. Procedure for use of transfer station tickets.
A. No refuse collector or other person shall transport or otherwise dispose
of refuse at the transfer station without having first purchased a ticket
entitling the collector or such other person to dispose of the processible
solid waste at the transfer station.
B. The Town of Easton shall be the sole agency authorized to sell tickets for
the disposing of processible solid waste collected in the Town.
C. The Commission shall from time to time set the price of the tickets and
denominations thereof.
D. Tickets may be purchased at the Town Hall during all Town Hall hours.
§ 414-14. Storage of refuse.
A. Provision for containers. The owner of each premises where refuse
is created or generated shall provide, at a suitable place upon such
premises, sufficient receptacles for receiving and holding such refuse
during the intervals between collections. Refuse containers shall be
maintained in good condition.
B. Containers for commercial refuse. The standard container for
commercial refuse shall be a watertight, vermin-proof galvanized or
plastic receptacle, with a tight lid, of not over 30 gallons' capacity,
except that commercial establishments may provide for a large covered
container designed to be emptied into a refuse truck.
C. Containers for household garbage; number of collections. The standard
unit of collection for household garbage shall be twenty- and thirtygallon
containers and at least one collection shall be made each week.
Other refuse, such as trash and papers, may be stored for collection in
plastic or comparable containers.
D. Discarding of refuse. No person shall throw upon, discard, place or
leave any refuse on any street or other public place or upon any private
property, whether owned by such person or not, within the Town except
§ 414-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-14
1:103
in proper containers or otherwise properly prepared for collection or
under express approval granted by the Director. No person shall throw
or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of water.
E. Accumulation of refuse. Any uncontainerized accumulation of refuse on
any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
Failure to remove any accumulation of refuse within 10 days after
written notice from the Director by certified mail to remove it shall be
deemed a violation of this article.
F. Scattering of refuse. No person shall cast, place, sweep, deposit or allow
to remain any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or blown
by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place, or upon
another person's property.
G. Hazardous wastes. No person, firm or corporation shall place hazardous
wastes or similarly dangerous substances in any refuse container or
transport any such substance to the transfer station.
§ 414-15. Solid Waste Commission.
A. There is hereby created a Solid Waste Commission.
B. The duties of the Commission shall be to:
(1) Prepare and submit to the Board of Selectmen before February
1 each year an annual budget for the carrying out of the Town's
responsibilities under the municipal contract and this article.
(2) Set from time to time the fees for the tickets, licenses and
registrations to be issued pursuant to this article.
(3) Receive reports from the Director concerning the collection of refuse
in the Town and the administration of this article.
(4) Inform itself as to the operation and administration of the Authority
and the Bridgeport System.
(5) Advise and recommend to the Board of Selectmen and such other
boards, commissions and agencies of the Town as may be
appropriate such changes in this article or the procedures carried
out pursuant to it as the Commission may deem necessary or
appropriate.
(6) Hear and decide appeals from decisions of the Director pursuant to
this article.
C. The Commission shall consist of five members and two alternates.
Existing members will continue with their current terms. The two
alternates will each have five-year terms.
D. A quorum shall consist of not fewer than three members.
§ 414-16. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $50 or not more than $100
for each offense. Every day upon which the violation shall occur or upon
which the violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. The
foregoing fines are in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed
by law.
§ 414-14 EASTON CODE § 414-16
1:104
Chapter 421
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Road Commission — See Ch. 179.
Numbering of buildings and lots — See Ch.
257.
Driveways — See Ch. 273.
Parking — See Ch. 373.
§ 414-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-16
1:105

ARTICLE I
Construction and Maintenance
[Adopted 3-25-1980 as Title VIB of the 1980 Code of Ordinances]
§ 421-1. Supervision by Board of Selectmen.
The layout, widening, construction, reconstruction and repair of all roads,
bridges, sidewalks, curbs, storm drainage systems, and all other
construction necessary or appropriate to the foregoing shall be within the
control and supervision of the Board of Selectmen under Chapter 238 of the
General Statutes.
§ 421-2. Road Regulations.
No activity with respect to the construction or reconstruction referred to
in § 421-1 shall take place except in conformity with the currently effective
Easton Road Regulations promulgated by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 421-3. Acceptance of deed by Town.
No request for the acceptance by the Town of a deed to a road shall be
submitted to a Town Meeting unless said deed is a warranty deed conveying
clear title to the road together with necessary drainage easements and a
covenant guaranteeing, for a five-year period, the construction of roads in
accordance with the Easton Road Regulations, then currently effective. Said
deed shall be in a form satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen and to Town
Counsel.
§ 421-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-3
1:107

ARTICLE II
Excavations
[Adopted 3-25-1980 as Title VIC of the 1980 Code of Ordinances]
§ 421-4. Permit required. [Amended 9-15-2014]
No person, firm or corporation shall disturb the surface of any road within
the Town unless a permit has been obtained from the Town Engineer. A fee
of $25 shall be charged for each permit.
§ 421-5. Application for permit.
Applications for permits shall set forth the location of the intended
excavation, the size thereof, the purpose thereof, and the name and address
of the person, firm or corporation doing the actual excavating work, the
name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whom the work
is being done, and an agreement that the applicant will comply with all
ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done.
§ 421-6. Bond and insurance. [Amended 9-15-2014]
No such permit shall be granted until the applicant/owner shall file with the
Town Engineer:
A. A cash or surety company bond in the amount of $15 for each square
yard of road surface to be disturbed, as determined by the Town, to
ensure the restoration of the roadway to its original condition; and
B. Evidence of insurance coverage or financial responsibility sufficient to
indemnify and hold the Town harmless from any loss, liability or damage
which may arise out of the existence or manner of guarding or
constructing any such excavation.
§ 421-7. Restoration of damaged roads. [Amended 9-15-2014]
In the event that any person, firm or corporation accidentally disturbs
the surface of any road or excavates or otherwise performs work on a
road without a permit, such damage shall be restored at once, and the
repairs, paving or patching shall be done in accordance with the Easton
Road Regulations. If said repairs are not made within 10 days, after notice,
in writing, by the Town Engineer, the Town shall cause the necessary
restoration to be done and collect the total cost thereof, together with
reasonable legal fees, in a civil action against the party causing the damage
or the party for whose benefit the work was done.
§ 421-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation failing to comply with this article shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $100, in addition to the costs provided for
in § 421-7 hereof.
§ 421-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-8
1:109

ARTICLE III
Street Monuments
[Adopted 3-25-1980 as Title VIE of the 1980 Code of Ordinances]
§ 421-9. Replacement of destroyed monuments.
The cost of replacing a street monument destroyed or displaced either in
the course of constructing a building upon or landscaping property abutting
the monument shall be borne by the owner of the property abutting the
monument. If the property owner fails to replace a destroyed or displaced
monument within three months after notice, in writing, the Town may
replace the monument at the expense of the property owner.
§ 421-10. Penalties for offenses.
A property owner who violates the provisions of this article by failing to
replace a destroyed or displaced monument within three months after it is
destroyed or displaced shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100.
§ 421-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-10
1:111

ARTICLE IV
Snow Emergencies
[Adopted 3-25-1980 as Title IVC of the 1980 Code of Ordinances]
§ 421-11. Vehicles interfering with snow removal.
No person, firm or corporation shall allow any vehicle used or owned by him
or it or registered in his or its name to remain on a public street during
or after a snowstorm in such a manner as to interfere with the work of
removing or plowing snow or removing ice or in such a manner as to create
a traffic hazard.
§ 421-12. Removal of vehicles.
Any vehicle remaining on a street in violation of § 421-11 may be removed,
towed or conveyed by or at the direction of any member of the Police
Department by means of towing the same or otherwise to any Town
property or outdoor parking area or to a commercial place.
§ 421-13. Impoundment and recovery of vehicles. [Amended
9-15-2014]
The Board of Police Commissioners is authorized to designate one or more
suitable places for the impounding of motor vehicles. Impounded motor
vehicles may be repossessed only upon payment of a towing charge and
a storage charge. Said charges shall be set by the Board of Police
Commissioners from time to time. Preference will be given by the Board
of Police Commissioners to garages and towing facilities located within the
Town of Easton.
§ 421-14. Deposit of snow on streets prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation, including those owning, leasing, occupying
or having charge of any premises, shall cause or allow the removal or
deposit of snow from said premises onto the traveled portion of any public
street.
§ 421-15. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates the provisions of §§ 421-11 and 421-14 shall be
fined not more than $25. The fine shall be an addition to any towing and
storage charges paid under the provisions of § 421-13.
§ 421-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-15
1:113

ARTICLE V
Scenic Roads
[Adopted 9-20-1989]
§ 421-16. Findings and purpose.
A. The scenic and rural roads of the Town of Easton are an irreplaceable
resource.
B. The scenic values of some rural roads in Easton have been destroyed
or are in danger of destruction because of past or potential alterations
to their rights-of-way. Such alterations have had, and could continue
to have, a significant adverse impact on the quality of the Town's
environment in general and, in particular, on aesthetic and historic
values that are of great but immeasurable benefit to residents and
visitors alike.
C. As explicitly expressed by Public Act 81-401,6 the preservation and
protection of the scenic or historic values of rural roads is essential to
the welfare of the people of Connecticut. It is the purpose of this article
to balance that need in Easton with the traditional need to provide, in
transportation matters, for common convenience and public safety.
D. Therefore be it ordained by the Town of Easton that, pursuant to the
authority granted by Public Act 81-401, the Town of Easton provide for
the designation of Town roads ("highways") or portions thereof as scenic
roads, and further in order to maintain the scenic nature of highways
so designated or portions thereof, the Town of Easton is authorized
to regulate, in accordance with this article, the future alteration or
improvement of roads so designated, including but not limited to
widening of the right-of-way or of the travelled portion of the highway,
paving, changes in grade, straightening, removal of stone walls and
removal of mature trees.
§ 421-17. Authority of Planning and Zoning Commission.
The authority to designate a highway or any portion of any highway as a
scenic road is hereby delegated to the Planning and Zoning Commission of
the Town of Easton.
§ 421-18. Designation criteria.
A. No highway or portion of a highway shall be designated as a scenic road
if the abutting property contains intensive commercial development or
if the highway itself has intensive vehicular traffic. Prior to designating
a highway or portion thereof as a scenic road, the Planning and Zoning
Commission must first specifically find that at least one of the following
criteria is met:
(1) The highway is unpaved;
(2) The highway is bordered by mature trees or stone walls;
(3) The travelled portion of the highway is no more than 20 feet in width;
(4) The highway offers scenic views;
6. Editor's Note: See § 7-149a of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 421-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-18
1:115
(5) The highway blends naturally into the surrounding terrain; or
(6) The highway parallels or crosses over brooks, streams, lakes, or
ponds.
B. No highway or portion thereof may be designated as a scenic road by
the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to this article unless
the owners of the majority of the lot frontage abutting the highway or
portion thereof agree to the designation of the highway as a scenic road
by filing a written statement of approval with the Town Clerk of the Town
of Easton.
§ 421-19. Procedure.
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission on its own initiative may consider
a highway or portion thereof for scenic road designation. Property
owners may petition the Planning and Zoning Commission for a
designation of a highway or portion thereof as a scenic road. The petition
shall state what road or portion of road is requested to be designated
as a scenic road and describe those characteristics of the road which
qualify it for scenic road status, as well as other characteristics which
enhance the scenic character of the road. The petition shall be signed by
the owners of a majority of lot frontage abutting the road or portion of
road in question (such ownership shall be verified by the Town Assessor),
stating that they approve of designating the road or portion of road
a scenic road and indicating, to the best of their knowledge, their lot
frontage along the road or portion of the road in question. Each signer
of the petition shall indicate his or her address. The petition should also
include the names and addresses of owners of lot frontage abutting the
road or portion of road in question who did not sign the petition. The
petition must contain the name, address and signature of the circulator
of the petition, who must be a resident of Easton. Said petition shall
also have a signed statement by the circulator that the circulator either
knows each individual who signed the petition or that the signer
satisfactorily identified himself or herself to the circulator. An original
and one copy of the petition shall be filed with the Town Clerk, who
shall retain the copy and forward the original to the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
B. In order to designate a highway or portion thereof a scenic road, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall first hold a public hearing
regarding the designation of such road as a scenic road. Notice of the
public hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town of Easton at least twice in intervals of not less
than two days, the first not more than 15 days nor less than 10 days and
the last not less than two days prior to the date of such hearing, and by
sending a copy thereof by registered or certified mail to the owners of
lots fronting the highway or the portion of the highway to be designated
as a scenic road. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act upon
the designation within the period of time permitted under § 8-26d of
the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. Notice of the decision of
the Commission shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial
circulation in the Town of Easton and addressed by certified mail to the
§ 421-18 EASTON CODE § 421-19
1:116
owners of lots fronting on that highway or portion thereof designated
as a scenic road, by its Secretary or Clerk, under his signature in any
written, printed, typewritten or stamped forms, within 15 days after such
decision has been rendered. Such notice shall be a simple statement
that the highway or a portion thereof was or was not designated as a
scenic road by the Planning and Zoning Commission, together with the
date of such action. The grounds for the designation or nondesignation
shall be stated in the records of the Commission and shall include in as
much detail as possible the special features which make the highway so
designated scenic, or the reasons for denying designation.
§ 421-20. Rescission and appeal.
A. The designation of a highway or a portion thereof as a scenic road
may be rescinded by the Planning and Zoning Commission using the
above procedures and provided that the owners of the majority of the lot
frontage abutting the highway or a portion of the highway concur with
such rescission as set forth in this article.
B. Any person aggrieved by a designation or refusal to designate a highway
or portion of a highway as a scenic road pursuant to this article or by any
alteration or improvement of such highway may appeal such designation
in the manner and utilizing the same standards of review provided for
appeals from the decisions of the Planning and Zoning Commission
under Connecticut General Statutes § 8-28.
§ 421-21. Application for alterations.
A. Preservation objective. Routine maintenance and the regulation of
future alterations and improvements of designated highways shall be
carried out so as to preserve to the highest degree possible the scenic
characteristics of the highway which are indicated in the records of the
Planning and Zoning Commission as the basis for the designation.
B. Hearing and decision responsibility. The alteration or improvement of a
designated scenic road shall be determined by the Board of Selectmen.
Any proposal for alteration or improvement, whether by public or private
applicant, shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission,
which shall hold a public hearing and submit findings of fact and a
recommendation to the Board of Selectmen. After a vote by the Planning
and Zoning Commission to maintain a designated highway without
change, the Board of Selectmen may overturn that vote only by a
unanimous vote of its own. The determination by the Board of Selectmen
shall be based on the findings of fact of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and shall give important weight to the Commission's
recommendation.
C. Routine road maintenance. Such maintenance shall include removal of
dead and seriously diseased or damaged trees and branches of trees;
trimming of the tree branches that encroach on the travelled portion
of the highway below the height needed to allow school buses and
emergency vehicles to pass; trimming or removal of brush and removal
of boulders or other obstacles that encroach on the travelled portion
of the road; necessary trimming for utility lines; trimming of brush to
§ 421-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-21
1:117
enhance and protect scenic views, stone walls, mature trees and other
characteristics of the scenic road set forth in the decision designating
it a scenic road; correction of drainage problems without damage to
existing stone walls and mature trees; and graveling, retreatment and
repair of existing roadway surfaces.
D. Natural disasters. In the case of a natural disaster in which a road
becomes impassable or unsafe for public travel and access must be
provided, emergency repairs may be made as needed.
E. Standards for alterations. When contemplating alterations to a scenic
road for common convenience and necessity, including, without
limitation, safety reasons for fire and police considerations, the following
procedures shall be followed:
(1) Review of a suitable map and, where deemed necessary by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, of a technical report documenting
the cited hazards and offering alternative solutions.
(2) Public hearing to allow full public participation.
(3) A decision-making process that not only reviews the specific safety
features but also takes into account the overall impact of the possible
change in a scenic road as well as the public response.
(4) The final decision shall reflect the least damages to the character of
the scenic road. If stone walls or portions thereof must be removed,
they shall be rebuilt along the untraveled portion of the scenic road.
(5) If alterations to a scenic road are required, then they shall be
planned with due regard to the following parameters:
(a) Speed limits. Scenic values are correlated with lower speeds.
The lower speed shall be posted and suitably enforced.
(b) Curves. Scenic values are correlated with the existence of
curves, which allow a constant unfolding of new and changing
views. Curves shall not be eliminated until they are found to be a
definite hazard within the concept of the specific road.
(c) Grades. Hills and valleys are correlated with scenic values. They
shall not be destroyed by cuts and fills unless absolutely essential
for road safety.
(d) Widths. A narrow road is correlated with high scenic beauty.
Designated highways should not be widened unless the amount
of traffic, as determined by a professionally based factual study,
demands it. For some rural roads, the amount of traffic that
can be handled can be greatly increased by wide bypasses and
turnouts, constructed at intervals where they do least damage to
scenic and other values.
(e) Side slopes. Existing steepness of side slopes is preferable to
reduction of gradient by extensive removal of soil and rock. This
is especially true where the slope is fully stabilized and where it
is rich with existing ground cover, shrubs and trees.
(f) Vistas. Vistas of distant landscapes shall be preserved by suitable
vegetation management techniques.
(g) Utility lines. Wherever possible, utility lines should be put
underground. Where they are overhead the utility corporations
should cooperate by implementing suitable vegetation
§ 421-21 EASTON CODE § 421-21
1:118
management techniques which preserve the wildflowers and the
shrubs.
(h) Vegetation. Vegetation on the side of the road shall be managed
in such a way as to preserve wildflowers, shrubs of ornamental
wildlife values, larger trees overarching smaller, isolated trees,
as well as closed forest canopies, all of which have extremely
high scenic values. [Amended 9-15-2014]
(i) Billboards, sand, gravel and salt piles, refuse disposal, and other
unsightly structures or situations shall be forbidden. Where
possible, scenic and preservation easements should be acquired
from adjacent owners to ensure the continuance of natural relief,
desirable features, and scenic and historic values in the public
interest.
(6) Any action under Subsections A, B, C and D shall be taken in a
manner which will avoid or reduce adverse effects on the
characteristics of the designated highway specified in the decision
designating it a scenic road. Any reconstruction of a designated
highway shall be done in similar manner with a view to restoring
the road to the extent possible to its scenic character at the time of
designation.
F. Paving criteria. Paving of the unpaved travelled portion of a scenic road
shall be permitted only if the owners of a majority of lot frontage along
the unpaved portion of the road indicate their approval of the paving by
signing a written statement agreeing to the paving and filing it with the
Town Clerk.
G. Rights of landowners.
(1) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit a person owning
or occupying land abutting the highway or portion thereof
designated as a scenic road by the Planning and Zoning Commission
from:
(a) Maintaining and repairing the land which abuts the road so
designated if the maintenance occurs on land not within the
right-of-way, paved or unpaved, of the scenic road; or
(b) Having access to his property by driveway or subdivision road
encroachment within the rights-of-way, provided that such
encroachment is constructed so as to safeguard the highway's
scenic features as recorded by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(2) Nothing herein shall prohibit a landowner from permanently
removing a portion of a stone wall in order to construct or improve
a driveway or, in the case of a subdivision, to connect a subdivision
road with a designated scenic road.
§ 421-22. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
acting through its designated enforcement official(s).
B. Violation of this article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $100 per
day for each day the violation continues and such other legal remedies
as may be available to the Commission.
§ 421-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-22
1:119

ARTICLE VI
Acceptance of Conveyance of Streets
[Adopted 5-12-1997]
§ 421-23. Delegation of power to Selectmen.
The power under § 13a-48 of the Connecticut General Statutes to accept
proposed public highways and streets is delegated to the Board of
Selectmen according to the procedures set forth in this article as they may
be amended from time to time.
§ 421-24. Procedure.
The following procedure shall be used when the owner of a street proposes
to convey it to the Town:
A. The owner shall request the Town Engineer in writing to inspect the
street and all other improvements installed or made in connection with
it for the purpose of the Town Engineer's recommending to the Planning
and Zoning Commission that the street and improvements have been
constructed and completed according to the Town's road ordinances and
Subdivision Regulations and the decision of said Commission approving
the subdivision where the street is located. The owner's request shall
include the owner's certification that the street and improvements have
been constructed and completed as described herein. The owner shall
provide the Planning and Zoning Commission with a copy of the owner's
request and certification.
B. If the Town Engineer shall so recommend, he shall also advise the
Commission:
(1) That all required as-built drawings have been received by him and
approved by him as complying with the Subdivision Regulations;
(2) Of the amount of the proposed maintenance bond to be filed by the
owner under Section VIId(3) of the Subdivision Regulations; and
(3) Of such recommendations as the Town Engineer may deem
appropriate regarding acceptance of the street and/or its
maintenance.
C. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet to consider the Town
Engineer's recommendation within 30 days after its receipt.
D. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall decide within 30 days after
the conclusion of its meeting whether to recommend to the Board of
Selectmen as to the items listed in Subsection B and notify the owner of
its decision. If the Planning and Zoning Commission shall so recommend,
it shall accordingly advise the Board of Selectmen, including the amount
of the proposed maintenance bond and such other recommendations as
the Commission may deem appropriate regarding the acceptance of the
street and/or its maintenance.
E. Within 30 days after the Planning and Zoning Commission's decision
to recommend to the Board of Selectmen, the owner shall request the
Board of Selectmen to accept the street as a public street. The owner's
request shall include a list of the names and addresses of the owners of
§ 421-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-24
1:121
all lots abutting the street. The owner's request shall also include the
following documents:
(1) Form of proposed maintenance bond.
(2) Proposed warranty deed for street.
(3) Certificate of title to the Town to be signed by a Connecticut
attorney, certifying that title to the street is free and clear of all
encumbrances except those imposed by law.
(4) Evidence that all real property taxes on the street have been paid to
the date of conveyance.
(5) Proposed Connecticut conveyance tax returns.
(6) Form of notice to be given abutting lot owners.
F. After the Board of Selectmen has completed its review of the
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town
Counsel has completed his or her review of the documents enumerated
in Subsection E, the Board of Selectmen shall place the owner's request
on an agenda of a Selectmen's meeting to be held not sooner than 10
days before such meeting or more than 30 days after it.
G. The Board of Selectmen shall cause notice of its meeting at which the
owner's request shall be heard to be published in a newspaper having
a circulation in the Town. In addition, the owner shall give notice by
registered or certified mail of the date, time and place of the meeting
to all owners of lots abutting the street and shall certify to the Board
of Selectmen that such notice has been given. The Board of Selectmen
shall not act upon the owner's request until the owner can so certify.
H. The Board of Selectmen shall notify the owner of its decision regarding
the owner's request within 30 days after the completion of the meeting
at which it was heard. If the owner's request is granted, the owner
shall cause the owner's attorney to complete the recording of the deed
for the street and the certification of title with respect thereto, all
at the owner's expense. The owner shall also deliver to the Planning
and Zoning Commission the completed subdivision maintenance bond
for action by the Commission, including release of the subdivision
improvements bond pursuant to the Commission's Subdivision
Regulations.
§ 421-25. Conveyance of easements.
The acceptance and recording of conveyances to the Town of easements
other than for open spaces and rights-of-way (exclusive of public streets),
as required by the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to its
regulations or as part of its approval of a subdivision, shall be administered
by the Planning and Zoning Commission according to its regulations, rules
and procedures.
§ 421-26. Inconsistencies with other ordinances.
In the event of an inconsistency between this article and any other
ordinance, the provisions of this article shall govern.
§ 421-24 EASTON CODE § 421-27
1:122
§ 421-27. Purposes.
The purposes of this article are to simplify the procedure for accepting
streets and to designate which Town board shall have the power to do so.
§ 421-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-27
1:123
Chapter 430
TAXATION
§ 421-27 EASTON CODE § 421-27
1:124
ARTICLE I
Exemption for Bradley-Hubbell House
[Adopted 2-1-2000]
§ 430-1. Exemption authorized.
Pursuant to the authority of § 12-81(58) of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the Town of Easton authorizes exemption from any real or
personal property taxes of the property commonly known as the "Bradley-
Hubbell House," as such property is more particularly shown on a survey
titled "Map of Property of BHC Company Leased to the Historical Society
of Easton, Inc., #535 Black Rock Turnpike, Easton, Conn. December 28,
1999," for such period as such property is leased to and used exclusively
for the educational and administrative purposes of the Historical Society of
Easton and so long as the Historical Society of Easton remains exempt from
taxation for federal income tax purposes. In the event that the property shall
no longer be leased to the Historical Society of Easton or used exclusively
for the educational and administrative purposes of the Historical Society
of Easton, or if the Historical Society of Easton shall no longer be exempt
from taxation for federal income tax purposes, then this exemption shall
expire automatically without further action by the Town. Notice of any such
expiration shall be given by recording on the land records of the Town of
Easton.
§ 430-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 430-1
1:125

ARTICLE II
Effective Date for Property Tax Exemption
[Adopted 12-16-2002]
§ 430-2. Effective date established; application for exemption.
The Town, pursuant to § 12-81b of the Connecticut General Statutes,
provides that the property tax exemption authorized by any of Subdivisions
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16 of § 12-81 of the Connecticut General
Statutes shall be effective as of the date of acquisition of the property to
which the exemption applies, including reimbursement to the tax-exempt
organization for any tax paid by it to the Town for a period subsequent to
the date of acquisition, but not including reimbursement for any tax paid by
the prior owner for a period subsequent to the date of acquisition for which
the tax-exempt organization reimbursed such owner on the transfer of title
to such property. Any such tax-exempt organization shall apply for such
exemption in writing to the Tax Collector and shall supply all reasonable
information that the Tax Collector requires. Exemption pursuant to this
article shall not provide a basis for any use, and all uses shall be subject to
all applicable Town requirements, including, without limitation, those of the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
§ 430-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 430-2
1:127

ARTICLE III
Farm Tax Exemption
[Adopted 4-26-2004]
§ 430-3. Additional exemption for farm machinery.
Pursuant to P.A. 03-234 which amends § 12-91 of the Connecticut General
Statutes effective July 1, 2003, the Town provides an additional exemption
from property tax for farm machinery as allowed by § 12-91(b) of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 430-4. Additional exemption for farm buildings.
Pursuant to P.A. 03-234 which amends § 12-91 of the Connecticut General
Statutes effective July 1, 2003, the Town provides an additional exemption
from property tax for farm buildings as allowed by § 12-91(c) of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 430-5. Rights and obligations.
All rights and obligations with respect to the exemptions shall be as set
forth in § 12-91 of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended by P.A.
03-234.
§ 430-6. When effective.
This exemption shall be effective commencing with the October 1, 2004,
assessment.
§ 430-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 430-6
1:129

ARTICLE IV
Exemptions for Solar Energy Systems
[Adopted 12-8-2008]
§ 430-7. Solar energy systems. [Amended 9-15-2014]
A. Any building, the construction of which is commenced on or after
October 1, 1977, which is equipped with a solar energy heating or
cooling system, or any building to which a solar energy heating or
cooling system is added on or after October 1, 1977, shall receive a
property tax assessment exemption to the extent of the amount by
which the assessed valuation of such real property equipped with such
solar heating or cooling system exceeds the assessed valuation of such
real property equipped with the conventional portion of the heating or
cooling system, exclusive of any portion of such system related to solar
energy. The exemption shall only apply to the first 15 assessment years
following construction of such building or addition of any such system to
a building.
B. As used in this section, "solar energy heating or cooling system" means
equipment which provides for the collection, transfer, storage and use of
incident solar energy for water heating, space heating or cooling which
absent such solar energy system would require a conventional energy
resource, such as petroleum products, natural gas or electricity, employs
mechanical means such as fans or pumps to transfer energy, and meets
standards established by regulation by the Secretary of the Office of
Policy and Management. Such standards are incorporated herein by
reference.
C. Any person who desires to claim the exemption provided in this section
shall file with the Assessor in the Town of Easton, within 30 days
following the annual assessment date, written application claiming such
exemption on a form as prescribed by the Secretary of the Office of
Policy and Management. Failure to file such application in said manner
and form within the time limit prescribed shall constitute a waiver of the
right to such exemption for the assessment year.
§ 430-8. Solar energy generating systems.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
HYBRID SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy heating or cooling
system which consists of both active and passive elements and which
meets the standards established for both.[Amended 9-15-2014]
PASSIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A system which utilizes the
structural elements of a building for the collection of incident solar
energy and its storage and distribution for use in water heating or
space heating or cooling, which building absent such system would
require a conventional energy resource, such as petroleum products,
natural gas or electricity, and which system meets standards established
by regulation by the Secretary of the Office of Policy and
Management.[Amended 9-15-2014]
§ 430-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 430-8
1:131
SOLAR ENERGY ELECTRICITY GENERATING SYSTEM — Equipment
which is designed, operated and installed as a system at any private
residential location which meets standards established by regulation by
the Secretary of the Office of Policy and Management.
B. Any solar energy electricity generating system installed for the
generation of electricity for private residential use, provided that such
installation occurs on or after October 1, 1977, shall receive a property
tax assessment exemption. This exemption shall only be applicable in the
first 15 assessment years following the installation of such system.
C. Any building, the construction of which is commenced on or after April
20, 1977, which is equipped with a passive or hybrid solar energy
system, or any building to which such a system is added on or after
April 20, 1977, shall receive a property tax assessment exemption to
the extent of any amount by which the assessed valuation of such real
property equipped with such a system exceeds the valuation at which
such real property would be assessed if built using conventional
construction techniques in lieu of construction related to such a system,
as determined by the assessing officer of the Town of Easton. [Amended
9-15-2014]
D. Any person who desires to claim the exemption provided in this section
shall file with the Assessor in the Town of Easton, within 30 days
following the annual assessment date, written application claiming such
exemption on a form as prescribed by the Secretary of the Office of
Policy and Management. Failure to file such application in such manner
and form within the time limit prescribed shall constitute a waiver of the
right to such exemption for the assessment year. [Amended 9-15-2014]
§ 430-8 EASTON CODE § 430-8
1:132
ARTICLE V
Tax Relief for the Elderly
[Adopted 3-19-2012]
§ 430-9. Authority and purpose.
The Town of Easton amends and restates the ordinance relating to tax relief
for elderly homeowners, adopted pursuant to § 12-129n of the Connecticut
General Statutes for eligible residents of the Town of Easton, on the terms
and conditions provided herein. This article is enacted for the purpose of
assisting elderly homeowners with a portion of the costs of property (real
estate) taxation.
§ 430-10. Committee report.
No later than August 15 of every third year commencing 2011, or more
frequently at the discretion of the Board of Selectmen, the Board of
Selectmen shall appoint a committee of not fewer than five resident
taxpayers of the Town of Easton which shall undertake and complete, within
180 days following such appointment, or such longer time as the Board
of Selectmen shall authorize, a study and investigation with respect to
property tax relief for the elderly and, on the basis thereof, prepare a report
to the Board of Finance which report shall include the following:
A. With respect to the previous three years, the fiscal effect of such
property tax relief on property tax revenues for such years for the Town
of Easton; and
B. Recommendations with respect to the form and extent of such property
tax relief for the following three years, including estimates of the effect
annually of recommended tax relief on property tax revenues.
§ 430-11. Submission of plan to Town Meeting.
After receiving the report from the Committee on Tax Relief for the Elderly,
the Board of Finance shall provide such comments on the recommendations
as it deems appropriate. The Committee on Tax Relief for the Elderly shall
consider the comments of the Board of Finance and shall, to the extent
deemed necessary and appropriate by such Committee, present revised
recommendations to the Board of Finance. When the Board of Finance is
satisfied with the recommendations of the Committee, the Board of Finance
shall recommend the plan for adoption by the Town at a Town Meeting
to be scheduled by the Board of Selectmen. The Town Meeting shall, by
majority vote, approve or reject the recommended plan but shall not amend
the plan. If approved, the plan shall remain in effect until such time as a
new recommended plan is approved by the Town Meeting. If rejected, a new
Committee on Tax Relief for the Elderly, that may, but need not, contain
members of the preceding Committee on Tax Relief for the Elderly, shall be
convened. Until such time as a new plan for tax relief for the elderly shall be
adopted by the Town Meeting, the then current plan shall remain in effect.
§ 430-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 430-12
1:133
§ 430-12. Amendments.
This article may, but need not, be amended and restated in its entirety in
the future. It shall be sufficient to submit as an amendment to this article
the provisions of the recommended or approved plan.
§ 430-13. Benefit to estate of deceased taxpayer and eligible
surviving spouse.
Under no circumstances shall tax relief provided under this article result in
a benefit to the estate of a deceased taxpayer and to the eligible surviving
spouse that would be separately, or together, greater than the deceased
taxpayer would have received if such deceased taxpayer had lived.
§ 430-14. Transfer of property.
If any person entitled to the tax relief pursuant to this article transfers the
property on which relief is granted, such tax relief shall be prorated as of
the date of transfer of title and the transferee of such property shall pay
the Town a prorated share of the tax relief as provided by § 12-81a of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 430-15. Relief to be prorated.
Tax relief under this article shall be allowed only once per year for each
eligible principal residence. In any case where title to such real property
is recorded in the name of an eligible applicant (including such applicant's
spouse) and any other person or persons, the tax relief shall be prorated
so as to allow tax relief equivalent to the fractional share of ownership in
the property of such eligible applicant (including such applicant's spouse).
In any case where such real property is a multiple-family dwelling and
is occupied by the eligible applicant (including such applicant's spouse)
and any other person, the tax relief shall be prorated so as to allow tax
relief equivalent to the fractional portion occupied by such eligible applicant
(including such applicant's spouse). The Assessor shall determine the
proration amount in a multiple-family situation.
§ 430-16. Maximum tax relief.
The total of all tax relief granted under this article shall not exceed an
amount equal to 4% of the total real estate property tax assessed for
the Town in the preceding tax year, and if such relief would exceed such
amount, it shall be prorated to keep the total amount of Town tax relief
within such 4%.
§ 430-17. Use of lien on property.
The Town of Easton shall not place a lien on any property for which tax
abatement is granted under this article in any amount by reason of the
granting of such abatement. However, the terms of this section will not
in any way affect the right of the Town of Easton to have a lien on such
§ 430-12 EASTON CODE § 430-17
1:134
property pursuant to any tax deferral granted under this article or pursuant
to any section of the Connecticut General Statutes other than § 12-129n.
§ 430-18. Applicability.
This article shall apply to real property taxes as are due and payable
commencing the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2012, and succeeding fiscal
years.
§ 430-19. Qualifications for relief.
Any person who owns real property in the Town of Easton or is liable, by
reason of life use, for payment of taxes thereon pursuant to § 12-48 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, and who occupies the property as a principal
residence, shall be entitled on the annual taxes for such property as are due
and payable for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2012, to a credit against
the real property taxes on such residence based on the plan set forth in this
article.
A. This program shall be offered to those persons qualifying even though
their current taxes may be in arrears, provided that all of the following
conditions are met:
(1) Such person was 65 years of age or over on December 31 prior to
the fiscal year for which tax relief is sought, or his or her spouse was
65 years of age or over on such December 31 and resides with such
person, or such spouse was, on such December 31, 60 years of age
or over and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer who was qualified for
tax relief under this article at the time of his or her death.
(2) Such person, or such person's spouse, as described in Subsection
A(1), shall have resided in the Town of Easton and paid taxes for a
period of five years immediately prior to the fiscal year for which tax
relief is sought.
(3) The property for which the tax relief is sought must be the principal
residence of such person, and such person's spouse (if any), for
more than 183 days of the fiscal year immediately prior to the fiscal
year for which tax relief is sought; however, should the applicant be
confined to a skilled nursing home for 365 days or less but intend to
return to the property, such person is entitled to tax relief.
(4) Such person or such person's spouse as defined in Subsection A(1)
shall file with the Assessor an application, in a form acceptable
to the Assessor, not later than May 15 of the year following the
October 1 grand list. The form shall require such information as
the Assessor may reasonably require and shall be prepared by the
Assessor subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
(5) Means test; liquid assets. In order to qualify, each household must
certify that it has no more than $500,000 in liquid assets (i.e., cash,
including bank accounts, and marketable securities but exclusive
of IRS recognized retirement plans). The Assessor shall include the
affidavit shown in Appendix A of this article in each application form
for tax relief.7
§ 430-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 430-19
1:135
(6) Before the tax benefit created by this article or any portion thereof
shall be given, such person must first apply for tax relief under any
state statutes under which he or she is eligible.
B. If in the Assessor's opinion the taxpayer does not qualify for tax relief,
she/he may refuse relief. In the event of a question with respect to
income or a claimed exemption of income, or deduction from income,
not specifically referred to in this section, the Assessor or designee
shall make a determination based upon the purposes of this article. The
Assessor may also refuse tax relief if there is a question as to whether or
not any application is bona fide. Any person refused relief for any reason
may appeal to the Board of Selectmen, which may grant tax relief if in
its opinion the Assessor has erred, or where this article is not clear, or in
case of extreme hardship or extraordinary circumstances.
C. There shall be a three-person advisory committee, appointed by the
First Selectman, to assist in resolution of any problems which arise in
administration of the tax relief program and to assist, if requested by the
Selectman, in interviewing and making recommendations on taxpayer
appeals to the Board of Selectmen.
§ 430-20. Duties of Assessor.
The Assessor or his or her designee shall determine the income of each
applying taxpayer, as defined in § 430-22 below. The Assessor or designee
shall compile a list of all applying taxpayers whose income qualifies for tax
relief. The Assessor or designee shall compute the amount of such relief.
§ 430-21. Applicant to sign affidavit.
The purpose of this article is to provide tax relief based upon an assessment
of the taxpayer's ability to pay taxes. Each applicant shall sign an affidavit
certifying that the information provided with respect to such applicant's
total income in the home is true and accurate to the best of the applicant's
knowledge and other information as requested on the application form is
true.
§ 430-22. Qualifying household income calculation.
A. Qualifying household income shall include the income of the taxpayer,
taxpayer's spouse, and all other adults who reside in the household unless
such other resident is a full-time student, a person receiving social security
disability income, or a renter. A renter is a resident of the household who is
not related to the applicant and pays fair market rent and the rental income
is included in the applicant's 1040 tax return. Documentation required to
determine a resident's income includes his or her income tax return for the
prior tax year and documentation of health care and health care insurance
premium expenses.
B. If qualifying household income is over the amount shown in Table 1 for
maximum income, the taxpayer shall not be entitled to a tax credit.
7. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 430-19 EASTON CODE § 430-22
1:136
Table 1 — Income Limits and Abatement Calculation Values
IRS Tax Year
Town Fiscal
Year
Maximum
Income
Maximum Tax
Credit
2011 2012-2013 $85,000 42.0%
2012 2013-2014 $85,000 42.0%
2013 2014-2015 $85,000 42.0%
C. Income of each resident shall be calculated as follows:
No. Income Item Definition
1 IRS adjusted gross income
(AGI)
AGI as shown on Line 37 of IRS
Form 1040 or Line 21 of Form
1040A
2 Add: federal tax-exempt
interest
IRS Form 1040 Line 8b
3 Add: the portion of social
security benefits exempt from
taxation
IRS Form 1040 Line 20a - 20b
4 Add: other nontaxable income,
if any
Any other income or funds received
and not reported as taxable income
on the 1040, including but not
limited to all IRA distributions,
pensions and annuities
5 Less: 1/2 of all out-of-pocket
health insurance premiums
Medicare Parts B, C and D,
Medicare supplement insurance,
other private health care insurance
and long-term health care insurance
(not including the amount in 1040
Line 29)
6 Less: medical expenses From IRS Form 1040 Schedule A
(less the amount in Line 5 above) in
excess of 20% of the balance of
income calculated resulting from
Lines 1 to 5 herein
§ 430-23. Tax abatement.
Subject to all other limitations contained in this article, the tax abatement
provided under this article for the Town of Easton fiscal years 2012-2013,
2013-2014 and 2014-2015 (and for future years if this article remains in
effect pursuant to § 430-11) shall be based upon the qualifying household
income of an eligible applicant as follows:
A. The tax credit shall be a maximum percentage (as shown in Table 1)
of taxes due at zero income on a straight declining line to a lesser
percentage of taxes due calculated via the tax abatement formula using
§ 430-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 430-23
1:137
values from Table 1. Each such person shall receive a credit determined
on the basis of the formula shown in § 430-24.
B. The tax credit will be rounded to the nearest dollar.
C. In no case shall the tax credit exceed the maximum tax credit percentage
of the taxes due from Table 1 times percentage of ownership.
D. The tax abatement provided under this article to a resident or residents
shall in no event, together with any relief received by such resident or
residents under the provisions of §§ 12-129b to 12-129d, inclusive, of the
General Statutes, exceed in the aggregate 75% of the tax which would,
except for §§ 12-129b to 12-129d, inclusive, and this article, be laid
against such resident or residents. Where the aggregate relief provided
exceeds 75%, such resident or residents will receive only that portion of
such tax relief equal to 75% of the tax due.
§ 430-24. Tax abatement calculation.
Tax abatement shall be calculated as follows:
A. Basis. Tax abatement is based on the following:
(1) Taxpayer's total prior year qualifying income.
(2) Real estate taxes due in the previous tax year.
(3) Percentage ownership.
(4) Maximum tax credit from Table 1.
(5) Maximum income qualifying for tax abatement from Table 1.
B. Tax abatement formula. Tax Abatement = Maximum Tax Credit x Ownership
Taxes Due x Income Multiplier.
(1) Maximum tax credit is: from Table 1.
(2) Property taxes due are: assessed value x mil rate.
(3) Ownership taxes due are: percentage ownership x property tax due.
(4) Income multiplier is: [maximum income - qualifying household
income]/maximum income.
Example 1:
Maximum credit = 42%
Ownership = 100%
Last year's property taxes
due
= $8,000
Last year's income = $45,000
Income multiplier = [85,000-45,000]/85,000 = 0.47
Tax abatement = 0.42 x 1.0 x 8,000 x 0.47 = $1,579
Assume this year's taxes due = $8,200
Taxes due after abatement = $8,200 - $1,579 = $6,621
Example 2:
Maximum credit = 42%
Ownership = 50%
§ 430-23 EASTON CODE § 430-24
1:138
Last year's property taxes
due
= $8,000
Last year's income = $50,000
Income multiplier = [85,000-50,000]/85,000 = 0.41
Tax abatement = 0.42 x 0.5 x 8,000 x 0.41 = $689
Assume this year's taxes due = $8,200
Taxes due on 50% ownership = $4,100 (co-owner pays the other $4,100)
Taxes due after abatement = $4,100 - $689 = $3,411
C. The tax credit is rounded to the nearest dollar.
§ 430-25. Tax deferral.
A. Tax deferral shall be allowed in addition to tax abatement.
B. The taxpayer may defer up to 75% of taxpayer's remaining tax bill after
all other programs have been applied (subject to any state-mandated
percentage maximum on relief).
C. The total deferral pool for each year shall be $80,000 plus the excess
deferral amount over $80,000 of the last taxpayer to qualify.
D. Deferrals will be allocated by income, lowest income first, until all of the
deferral pool is allocated.
E. Deferral shall apply separately to each year's tax bill (i.e., 2012-2013
taxes of a taxpayer who is awarded deferral for 2012-2013 fiscal year
shall continue to be deferred in all subsequent years, without further
qualification, until termination as per Subsection I below).
F. For the next year's (fiscal year 2013-2014) taxes and every subsequent
year the taxpayer must apply and qualify again for deferral and must
also fit within the $80,000 allocation as per Subsection C above.
G. Interest.
(1) Interest on deferred taxes shall be accrued each tax year at a rate
equal to the Town's borrowing cost on its most recent long-term
bond issue as of January 1 of the previous tax year.
(2) The interest rate remains constant for the duration of the lien.
H. Lien.
(1) The Tax Collector shall make a list of the deferrals granted for the
coming tax year and shall, as soon as possible following January 1,
file a tax lien on the land records for each deferral granted.
(2) The lien shall be filed using a form to be prepared by the Tax
Collector. The form shall, inter alia, state the rate of interest
applicable for the duration of the lien.
(3) Interest will be calculated and applied to the lien according to the
Tax Collector's standard practices.
I. Termination. The tax deferral shall terminate and all accrued interest
shall become due and payable, along with the total amount of deferred
taxes, upon the taxpayer's sale or transfer of the property, or when
the taxpayer no longer resides in the residence on the property, or the
taxpayer's death, whichever comes first, except that if the title passes by
§ 430-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 430-25
1:139
deed or by operation of law (will, intestacy or survivorship) to a qualified
spouse, the tax deferral shall continue.
J. Thirty days after termination (but six months in the case of death),
the interest rate on all deferred taxes shall resume at the then current
tax year's interest rate plus 4%, and the Town may thereafter bring
foreclosure proceedings on all of the unpaid deferral tax liens.
K. Individual deferral limits. For any taxpayer the total of all tax deferrals
(with interest either calculated or approximated at 4% per annum) may
not exceed the assessed value of the taxpayer's home, less the then
current mortgage (or home equity loan) balances and less any overdue
and unpaid Town taxes (with statutory 18% interest on overdue and
unpaid Town taxes).
L. Prepayment. Deferred taxes may be repaid at any time. A partial
prepayment will be applied first to prepayment of interest on the oldest
tax lien, then to principal on the oldest tax lien.
§ 430-26. Tax deferral calculation.
The tax deferral benefit shall be calculated as follows:
A. Basis. Tax deferral is based on the following:
(1) Calculation of abatement amount is done prior to deferral calculation.
(2) Calculation of state circuit breaker amount is also done prior to deferral
calculation.
(3) Amount of taxes allowed to be deferred is 75% of the remaining tax after all
other tax relief has been taken.
(4) Interest on the deferred taxes is equal to the Town borrowing rate.
B. Tax deferral formula.
(1) Tax deferral = (taxes due - tax relief) x 0.75.
(2) Tax relief = (tax abatement amount) + (circuit breaker amount).
Example
Last year's property taxes due = $8,000
Ownership = 100%
Last year's income = $35,000
Income multiplier = [85,000-35,000]/85,000 = 0.59
Tax abatement = 0.42 x 1.0 x 8,000 x 0.59 = $1,982
Circuit breaker = $750
This year's taxes due = $8,200
Taxes due after all relief = $8,200 - $1,982 - $750 = $5,468
Tax deferral allowed = $5,468 x 0.75 = $4,101
§ 430-25 EASTON CODE § 430-26
1:140
ARTICLE VI
Tax Abatement for Surviving Spouses of Police Officers and
Firefighters
[Adopted 1-1-2013]
§ 430-27. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to honor a police officer or firefighter who
dies while in the performance of his or her duties for the Town of Easton
and to ease the resulting financial burden of his/her surviving spouse.
§ 430-28. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 12-81x,
which authorizes a municipality to provide for the abatement of property
taxes with respect to real property owned and occupied as the principal
residence of the surviving spouse of a police officer or firefighter who dies
while in the performance of such officer's or firefighter's duties.
§ 430-29. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
DUTIES —
FIREFIGHTER — Any person who is a duly designated member of Easton
Volunteer Fire Company Number 1, Inc. ("Fire Company"), or an employee
of the Easton Fire Department ("Fire Department").
POLICE OFFICER — A duly sworn member of the Easton Police
Department.
SURVIVING SPOUSE — A person who was a resident of the Town of Easton
and married to or partner in a civil union with a police officer or a firefighter
at the time of the police officer's or firefighter's death.
With regard to firefighters, the term "duties" shall be defined as duties
performed while traveling to, at, or returning from fires or fire-related
calls, answering alarms of fires or calls for mutual aid assistance, while
traveling to, at, or returning from tests or trials of any apparatus or
equipment normally used by the Fire Department and/or Fire Company,
while instructing or being instructed in fire duties, and while
performing any other duty ordered to be performed by a superior or a
commanding officer in the Fire Company or Fire Department.
A.
With regard to police officers, the term "duties" shall be defined as any
action which a police officer is obligated or authorized by law, rule,
regulation or written condition of service to perform.
B.
§ 430-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 430-30
1:141
§ 430-30. Abatement program established.
In accordance with § 12-81x of the Connecticut General Statutes, there is
hereby established an abatement of 100% of the property taxes due with
respect to real property owned and occupied as the principal residence of
the surviving spouse of a police officer or a firefighter who dies while in the
performance of such officer's or firefighter's duties.
§ 430-31. Applicability.
The tax abatement program adopted hereunder shall apply to all such
property taxes due as of January 1, 2013, and thereafter.
§ 430-32. Term of abatement.
The tax abatement in any given case shall remain in effect for so long as
the surviving spouse occupies the property as his or her primary residence
and holds legal title to the property. If a surviving spouse subsequently
purchases a different property in the Town of Easton as his or her primary
residence and all other qualifying criteria are satisfied, the tax abatement
shall apply to the newly purchased property. The tax abatement may only
apply to one property at any time.
§ 430-33. Death of person receiving abatement.
Upon the death of any person receiving tax abatement pursuant to this
article, the tax abatement hereunder shall end 90 days thereafter.
§ 430-34. Conveyance of property.
If a person entitled to tax abatement hereunder conveys legal title to the
property with respect to which the tax abatement hereunder has been
granted, the tax abatement shall terminate as to that property as of the
date of the conveyance and the nonqualifying grantee of such property shall
henceforth be liable for the payment of municipal taxes on the property
in accordance with the provisions of § 12-81a of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
§ 430-35. Title held by more than one person.
In the event title to the property with respect to which tax abatement has
been granted hereunder is held in the name of a qualifying surviving spouse
and one or more other nonqualifying persons, the subject abatement shall
be limited to the same proportion of the total tax due as the surviving
spouse's ownership interest bears to the total. In such an instance, the
surviving spouse must make application to the Easton Tax Assessor to
make a determination as to the percentage of assessed taxes to be abated
based upon his or her proportionate ownership interest before any such
abatement may be granted or continued.
§ 430-30 EASTON CODE § 430-36
1:142
§ 430-36. Administration.
The Tax Collector and the Tax Assessor shall prescribe such forms and
procedures as they deem necessary to implement this article. The Assessor,
in addition, shall take steps as necessary to satisfactorily establish the facts
as to the surviving spouse's ownership interest in the property, on an initial
and continuing periodic basis.
§ 430-37. Record of taxes abated.
The Tax Collector shall maintain a cumulative record of all taxes abated in
accordance with this article.
§ 430-38. Abatement terminates with remarriage.
If such surviving spouse remarries or enters into another civil union, the
abatement shall terminate as of the date of the remarriage or civil union.
§ 430-39. Commuting not part of duties.
For purposes of this article, police officers and firefighters shall not be
deemed to be in the performance of their respective duties while
commuting "portal to portal" between residence and work except for
members of the Fire Company responding to a fire call, members of the Fire
Department responding to a fire call or a call back while not on a regular
shift, or members of the Police Department responding to a call.
§ 430-40. Death of nonresident police officer or firefighter.
If a police officer or a firefighter who does not reside in the Town of
Easton dies while in the performance of his or duty, a determination shall
be made as to whether the surviving spouse would have been eligible
for benefits under this article if the spouse had resided in Easton. This
determination shall be made by a special committee appointed by the Board
of Selectmen and consisting of one member of the Board of Selectmen,
the Tax Assessor, one member each of the Police Commission and Fire
Commission and one member of the Board of Finance. If it is determined
that the surviving spouse would have been eligible for abatement under this
article if the spouse had been an Easton resident, the special committee
shall recommend to the Board of Selectmen that a payment be made to the
surviving spouse's town of residence for the real property taxes assessed
to the surviving spouse. The special committee will meet annually to
determine the ongoing eligibility of the surviving spouse and to make a
recommendation to the Board of Selectmen based upon its findings.
§ 430-41. Effective date.
This article will take effect retroactive to January 1, 2013.
§ 430-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 430-41
1:143
Chapter A500
SPECIAL ACTS
§ 430-41 EASTON CODE § 430-41
A500:144

EASTON, CONNECTICUT
ZONING REGULATIONS
April 11, 2019
PUBLIC HEARING ON POSSIBLE ADOPTION
MAY 20, 2019 @ 6:00 PM
Helen Keller School - Cafetorium
PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1000 REGULATORY BASICS 1
1100 AUTHORITY ..................................................................................................... 1
1200 PURPOSES ....................................................................................................... 1
1300 ZONING DISTRICTS .......................................................................................... 2
1400 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS ...................................................................... 3
1500 ENFORCEMENT ............................................................................................... 4
1600 SEVERABILITY .................................................................................................. 5
1700 EFFECTIVE DATE .............................................................................................. 5
2000 WORDS AND TERMS 7
2100 BASIC USAGE ................................................................................................... 7
2200 DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................... 9
3000 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS 21
3100 PURPOSE ....................................................................................................... 21
3200 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES AND USES ............................................. 21
3300 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES ........................................................................ 24
3400 PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES ........................................................... 28
3500 AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS .......................................................... 31
3600 DIMENSIONAL EXCEPTIONS ........................................................................... 33
4000 OTHER DISTRICTS 35
4100 EASTON CENTER DISTRICT ............................................................................. 35
4200 FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT ................................................................... 38
5000 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS 47
5100 HOME-BASED BUSINESSES ............................................................................ 47
5200 ACCESSORY APARTMENTS ............................................................................. 48
5300 LODGING FACILITIES ...................................................................................... 49
5400 FLAG LOTS / INTERIOR LOTS .......................................................................... 52
5500 DRIVEWAYS .................................................................................................. 53
5600 AGRICULTURE-RELATED ACTIVITIES ............................................................... 57
5700 INSTITUTIONAL USES ..................................................................................... 61
5800 DAY CARE ...................................................................................................... 62
5900 CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT .................................................................... 63
6000 STANDARDS 67
6100 SIGNS ............................................................................................................ 67
6200 PARKING AND LOADING ................................................................................ 72
6300 EXTERIOR LIGHTING ...................................................................................... 75
6400 LANDSCAPING ............................................................................................... 77
6500 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ...................................................................... 78
6600 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL ...................................................... 79
6700 FENCES AND WALLS ...................................................................................... 80
7000 SPECIAL PROVISIONS 81
7100 NON-CONFORMING CONDITIONS ................................................................. 81
7200 TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES ................................................................ 83
7300 EARTHWORK OPERATIONS ............................................................................ 89
8000 PROCEDURES 93
8100 ZONING PERMIT / CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE ............................. 93
8200 PRE-APPLICATION REVIEWS .......................................................................... 96
8300 SITE PLAN APPLICATION ................................................................................ 97
8400 SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION .................................................................... 102
8500 TEXT AMENDMENT APPLICATION ................................................................ 109
8600 ZONE CHANGE APPLICATION ....................................................................... 112
8700 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS ....................................................................... 116
8800 PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS .................................................................... 120
(this page intentionally left blank)
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 1200
REGULATORY BASICS
PURPOSES
1
1000 REGULATORY BASICS
1100 AUTHORITY
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Easton, Connecticut, in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS Section 8-1 et seq.), as amended, has adopted and
established the following Zoning Regulations for the Town of Easton, Connecticut.
1200 PURPOSES
1210 STATUTORY PURPOSES
In accordance with CGS Section 8-2, these Regulations are adopted to:
1. Protect the public health, safety, convenience and property values;
2. Lessen congestion in the streets;
3. Secure safety from fire, panic, flood and other dangers;
4. Promote health and the general welfare;
5. Provide adequate light and air;
6. Prevent the overcrowding of land;
7. Avoid undue concentration of population; and
8. Facilitate the adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements.
1220 ADDITIONAL PURPOSES
In addition, these Regulations are intended:
1. To protect the quality of surface water and groundwater resources in the Town of Easton.
2. To guide the future growth and development of the Town in accordance with a comprehensive plan
designed to promote the most beneficial and convenient relationship among the various uses within the
Town considering the appropriateness of various existing uses in each area, the suitability of each area for
such uses as indicated by existing conditions and the needs of all the residents of the Town.
3. To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the Town and to ensure that
all development shall be orderly and beneficial.
4. To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the Town and the value of the buildings
appropriate to the various zones established by these Regulations.
5. To bring about the gradual conformity of the uses of land and buildings throughout the Town to these
Regulations and to minimize conflicts among the uses of the land and· buildings.
Section 1300 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
REGULATORY BASICS
ZONING DISTRICTS
2
6. To promote the most beneficial relation between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of
traffic throughout the Town having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the roads and the
provision of safe and convenient traffic access appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings
throughout the Town.
7. To aid in providing a guide for public policy and action in the efficient provision of public facilities and
services, and for private enterprises in building, development, investment; and other economic activity,
relating to uses of land and buildings throughout the Town.
8. To assure development that is commensurate with the availability and capacity of public facilities and
services thereby avoiding overtaxing of transportation, water, sewage disposal capacity, schools, parks
and other public facilities.
9. To prevent the pollution of wetlands and watercourses; safeguard the water table and encourage the
wise use and sound management of natural resources throughout the Town in order to preserve the
integrity, stability and beauty of the community and the value of the land and to preserve and protect the
water supply for the entire region.
10. To safeguard and protect the tranquility and quality of life throughout the Town and to provide for the
health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town of Easton.
1300 ZONING DISTRICTS
1310 ZONING MAP
1. In order to accomplish the purposes of these Regulations, the Town is divided into districts as
enumerated within these Regulations and as shown on the most current Zoning Map adopted by the
Commission. Such Zoning Map is hereby declared to be a part of these Regulations.
1320 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
1. The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be as shown on the most current Zoning Map adopted by the
Commission.
2. Where so indicated on the Zoning Map, district boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines or center
lines of streets, rights-of-way or water courses, or be parallel or perpendicular thereto at the distance
indicated on the Zoning Map.
3. In the event that the Zoning Map is unclear as to the zoning designation of a property or portion thereof,
the interpretation of the Zoning Map as to zone boundaries or dimensions shall be made by the
Commission.
4. These Regulations shall apply to land under water as well as land above water.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 1400
REGULATORY BASICS
APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
3
1400 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
1410 CONFORMITY REQUIRED
1. No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied, in whole or in part, except in conformity with all
applicable Sections of these Regulations.
2. No building, structure or premises or any part thereof shall be built, erected, moved or altered except in
conformity with all applicable Sections of these Regulations.
3. No lot shall be reduced, divided, or created such that the area, width or other dimensions of the lot or
any of its required yards or required open areas shall be less than prescribed by these Regulations.
4. A certificate of zoning compliance shall be required for all new construction and for any alteration of an
existing structure or a change in use of the premises.
1420 PROHIBITED IF NOT PERMITTED
1. Any use or activity within a zoning district which is not explicitly permitted by these Regulations shall be
deemed to be prohibited within such district.
1430 MINIMUM REQUIREMENT
1. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these Regulations shall be held to be the
minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare unless the
context clearly indicates that the provision is intended to be a maximum limitation.
2. In cases of uncertainty as to the proper application of any of the requirements of these Regulations to a
particular lot because of its peculiar or irregular shape, the Commission shall determine how such
Regulations shall be applied.
1440 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGULATIONS
1. These Regulations are not intended to impair or interfere with:
a. Any existing or future rules or regulations relating to the use of lots, buildings or structures; or
b. Any easements, covenants or other agreement between parties.
2. Where these Regulations impose a greater restriction upon the use or height of buildings or structures, or
require larger setbacks, yards, courts, or other open areas than are imposed or required by other rules,
regulations, easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of these Regulations shall control.
Section 1500 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
REGULATORY BASICS
ENFORCEMENT
4
1500 ENFORCEMENT
1510 Enforcement
1. The Commission is hereby designated as the official authority which shall be authorized to cause any
building, structure, place or premises to be inspected and examined and to order, in writing, the
remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereon in violation of any provision of these
Regulations, and to take such other action as shall be necessary and proper to enforce these Regulations
as provided by law. Any such remedial action shall be accomplished by the violator within 10 days of the
date of such order.
2. The Commission may appoint a Zoning Enforcement Officer, who shall be responsible to the Commission
and act as its representative in the performance of such inspection duties in connection with the'
enforcement of these Regulations as may be assigned to such Officer by the Commission.
3. No commission, board, agency, officer or employee of the Town shall issue, grant, or approve any permit,
license, certificate, or other authorization for construction, reconstruction, alteration, enlargement, or
moving of any building or structure or for any use of land or building that would not be in full compliance
with the provisions of these Regulations, except as permitted by the Zoning Board of Appeals in
accordance with Section 8700. Any such permit, license, certificate, or other authorization issued,
granted or approved in violation of the provisions of these Regulations shall be null and void and of no
effect without the necessity of any proceeding or revocation or nullification thereof.
1520 Penalties
1. Any person who shall violate any provision of these Regulations shall be subject to any applicable remedy
and/or penalty prescribed by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended.
2. The penalties prescribed in CGS Section 8-12, as amended, shall be applied to any person who:
a. Having been served by the Zoning Enforcement Officer with an order to discontinue any such
violation, fails to comply with such order within 10 days after such service; or,
b. Having been served with a cease and desist order with respect to a violation involving unauthorized
cutting of trees, grading of land or earthwork operations, fails to comply with such order
immediately; or,
c. Continues to violate any provision of these Regulations in the manner named in such order.
3. Penalties in accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 8-12, as amended, may apply to:
a. The owner or agent of a building or premises where a violation of any provision of these Regulations
has been committed or exists;
b. The lessee or tenant of an entire building or an entire premises where such violation has been
committed or exists;
c. The owner, agent, lessee or tenant of any part of a building or premises in which such violation has
been committed or exists; and/or
d. The agent, architect, builder, contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in
any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation exists.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 1700
REGULATORY BASICS
EFFECTIVE DATE
5
1600 SEVERABILITY
If any section, part or provision of these Regulations shall be determined to be illegal or otherwise unenforceable
by any court having jurisdiction with respect thereto, such determination shall have no effect upon the continued
validity, effect and enforceability of the remaining portions of these Regulations which shall continue in full force
and effect.
1700 EFFECTIVE DATE
These comprehensively revised and amended Zoning Regulations were adopted by the Planning and Zoning
Commission pursuant to CGS Section 8-1 et seq. and became effective on _______________________.
Zoning Regulations originally became effective in Easton on June 25, 1941.
Section 1700 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
REGULATORY BASICS
EFFECTIVE DATE
6
(this page intentionally left blank)
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 2100
WORDS AND TERMS
BASIC USAGE
7
2000 WORDS AND TERMS
2100 BASIC USAGE
2110 RULES AND TERMS
2. In the construction, interpretation, application, use and enforcement of these Regulations, words or
terms shall be construed to carry out the purposes of these Regulations.
3. In the construction, interpretation, application, use and enforcement of these Regulations, the rules,
terms, and definitions contained in this Section shall be observed and applied, except where the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
4. In the construction, interpretation, application, use and enforcement of these Regulations, words or
terms not defined in this Section shall carry their customary meaning or shall be interpreted by the
Commission after consulting one or more of the following:
a. The State Building Code, as amended.
b. The Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
c. The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers University, Center for Urban Policy
Research (Piscataway, NJ), as amended.
d. Black's Law Dictionary.
e. A comprehensive general dictionary.
2120 BASIC RULES
In the construction, interpretation, application, use and enforcement of these Regulations, the following rules shall
apply:
1. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular.
2. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
3. Words which are specifically masculine or feminine shall be interpreted as interchangeable.
4. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
5. The word "may" is permissive.
6. Any official, agency, commission, board or department identified in these Regulations is that of the Town
of Easton, unless otherwise specified.
7. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally.
Section 2100 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
WORDS AND TERMS
BASIC USAGE
8
2130 COMMON TERMS
In the construction, interpretation, application, use and enforcement of these Regulations, commonly used terms
shall be interpreted as follows unless the natural construction of the wording indicated otherwise:
1. The phrase "these Regulations" refers to the entire Zoning Regulations of the Town of Easton.
2. The word "Section" refers to a Section of these Regulations (all paragraphs starting with the same
numbers), unless otherwise specified.
3. The word "premise" or "premises" includes land and any buildings or structures thereon.
4. The word "building" includes the word "structure", and any part thereof.
5. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel".
6. The phrase "used for" includes the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained
for" and "occupied for", and vice versa.
7. The word "built" includes the words "erected", "constructed", "reconstructed", "altered", or "enlarged".
8. The word "person" or "applicant" includes any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
organization or other legal entity.
9. The words "zone", "zoning district", and "district" have the same meaning.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 2200
WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
9
2200 DEFINITIONS
ACCESSORY - See “Principal vs Accessory”.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT - A separate living area, having its own kitchen, bath and living quarters, located within
an existing principal building or added to· an existing principal building.
ACRE - 43,560 square feet.
Agriculture-Related Terms
AGRICULTURE – As defined in CGS Section 1-1 and to the extent permitted by these Regulations:
? Cultivation of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural or horticultural
commodity, including the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management of
livestock, including bees, poultry, fur-bearing animals and wildlife, and the raising or harvesting of
oysters, clams, mussels, other molluscan shellfish or fish;
? The operation, management, conservation, improvement or maintenance of a farm and its
buildings, tools and equipment, or salvaging timber or cleared land of brush or other debris left by
a storm, as an incident to such farming operations;
? The production or harvesting of maple syrup or maple sugar, or any agricultural commodity,
including lumber, as an incident to ordinary farming operations or the harvesting of mushrooms,
the hatching of poultry, or the construction, operation or maintenance of ditches, canals,
reservoirs or waterways used exclusively for farming purposes;
? Handling, planting, drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing, grading, storing or delivering
to storage or to market, or to a carrier for transportation to market, or for direct sale any
agricultural or horticultural commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or, in the
case of fruits and vegetables, as an incident to the preparation of such fruits or vegetables for
market or for direct sale.
FARM - A tract of land, the principal use of which is for agricultural purposes, including farm buildings and
structures accessory thereto, truck gardening and the raising and keeping of livestock but excluding any
facilities for the display, processing or sale of the products of the farm unless specifically allowed by these
Regulations.
LIVESTOCK - Domestic animals such as horses, cows, goats and sheep.
NURSERY GARDEN - A facility where plants (such as trees and shrubs) are grown for transplanting, for use as
stocks for budding and grafting, or for sale.
TRUCK GARDEN - A facility, other than a farm, where edible produce is grown for ultimate sale on-site or offsite
to the public.
Section 2200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
10
ALTERATION - As applied to a structure:
? A change or rearrangement in the structural parts;
? An enlargement or reduction whether horizontally or vertically; or
? The moving from one location or position to another on a lot.
ATTIC – See “Story”
BASEMENT –See “Story” (also see Flood-related definitions in Section 4200)
BOARD OF APPEALS - The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Easton, Connecticut.
BUILDABLE AREA –The area of lot or parcel excluding the area of any wetlands or watercourses.
Buildings vs Structures
BUILDING - A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or intended for the shelter, housing,
or enclosure of any person, animal, process, equipment, goods, tangible personal property or other
materials.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY - See “Principal vs Accessory”.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL - See “Principal vs Accessory”.
BUILDING, NON-CONFORMING - See “Non-Conforming Terms”.
STRUCTURE - Anything constructed, the use of which requires location on the ground, or attachment to
something having location on the ground.
STRUCTURE, NON-CONFORMING - See “Non-Conforming Terms”.
CELLAR – See “Story”.
CGS - The General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended.
CLUB - An association of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated, which is a bona fide organization and
which is the owner, lessee or occupant of premises operated solely for a recreational, social, patriotic,
political, benevolent or athletic purpose, or any combination of these purposes.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 2200
WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
11
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE - A vehicle or equipment regularly used to carry, deliver, handle or move goods in
the conduct of a business, commerce, profession or trade.
Vehicles Or Equipment Generally Considered To
Be Commercial Vehicles
Vehicles Or Equipment NOT Generally
Considered To Be Commercial Vehicles
? Step vans,
? Cargo vans,
? Box trucks,
? Flat bed or stake bed trucks,
? Buses,
? Semi-trailers,
? Tractor trailers,
? Dump trucks,
? Wreckers, and
? Trailers for commercial purposes.
? Vehicles used on a farm for activities
associated with that farm which are not in
violation of any other Town Regulation
and/or Town Ordinance.
? Earth moving equipment, cement mixers,
trenching and pipe laying equipment and
other similar type of contractors/
construction/ site work equipment.
? Construction vehicles or equipment engaged
in a bona fide construction project and
parked at the construction site while
construction is in progress.
COMMISSION - The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Easton, Connecticut unless otherwise
specified.
CONTIGUOUS - Sharing a common border.
Section 2200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
12
Day Care-Related Terms
DAY CARE - A program of supplementary care or instruction provided, generally for remuneration, to people
outside their own homes on a regular basis for a part of the 24 hours in one or more days in the week.
CHILD DAY CARE - An establishment which offers or provides day care for children as provided in CGS
Section 19a-77.
ADULT DAY CARE - An establishment which offers or provides day care for adults.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME - An establishment which offers or provides day care for not more than six
people, including the provider’s own children or relatives, in a private family home.
GROUP DAY CARE HOME - An establishment which offers or provides day care for:
? Seven to twelve related or unrelated people, including the provider’s own children or
relatives, in a private family home, or
? That meets the definition of a family day care home except that it operates in a facility
other than a private family home.
DAY CARE CENTER - An establishment which offers or provides day care:
? To more than twelve related or unrelated people, or
? Provides day care other than a family day care home or a group day care home.
DEEP – Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
DISTRICT - A zoning district established by the provisions of these Regulations.
DISTURBED AREA – In relation to erosion and sediment control, an area where the ground cover is destroyed or
removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion.
DRIVEWAY - A paved or gravel roadway providing or intended to provide vehicular access to a street.
DWELLING - A single detached building used by one family, which is the principal building on a lot constructed in
conformance with the basic building code of the State of Connecticut but excluding trailers, mobile
homes, or temporary structures.
EQUINE FACILITY - The boarding of horses on a property owned by an organization or institution or the boarding
of five or more horses not the personal property of the owner of the premises.
EROSION - The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments or the wearing away of the land surface by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
EXCAVATION - The severance from the earth’s surface or removal from the ground of soil, loam, sand, gravel, clay,
rock, topsoil or any other earth material.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 2200
WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
13
EXTERIOR DIMENSIONS - Dimensions of any building which define the height, width and length of the building and
the surface area of all exterior walls.
FAMILY - Any number of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption occupying one dwelling unit and residing
and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit maintaining a common household and up to three
additional unrelated persons.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME - See “Day Care Related Terms”.
FARM - See “Agriculture-Related Terms”.
Flood-Related Terms
Definitions of flood-related terms are located in Section 4200
FLOOR AREA - The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors contained within a structure, measured from the
exterior face of outside walls.
FRONTAGE - See “Lot Frontage”.
GENERAL STATUTES - The General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended.
GRADING - Any excavating, stripping, cutting, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth, or
any combination thereof, which results in a change of contour or elevation.
“GRANDFATHERED” - See “Non-Conforming Related Terms”.
GROUP DAY CARE HOME - See “Day Care Related Terms”.
HALF-STORY - See “Story-Related Terms”.
Home-Based Business And Related Terms
HOME-BASED BUSINESS – The use of a portion of a building on the same property as the residential dwelling
for business purposes by a resident occupant.
HOME-BASED PROFESSIONAL OFFICE – A home-based business used as an office of a physician, dentist,
psychologist, attorney, engineer, architect, landscape architect, teacher, artist, musician, sculptor,
writer, photographer, real estate agent, insurance agent, accountant, veterinarian, and other
professional persons.
KITCHEN - A room, place or space within a structure equipped for the preparation and/or cooking of food.
LIVESTOCK - See “Agriculture Related Terms”.
Section 2200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
14
Lot
LOT - A plot or parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one principal building and accessory
buildings and structures.
LOT, NON-CONFORMING - See “Non-Conforming Terms”.
Lot Types
LOT, CORNER - A lot at the intersection of and abutting on two or more streets.
LOT, FLAG - A lot located generally to the rear of another lot and served by an unobstructed accessway owned
by the owner of the rear lot with such accessway having frontage on and providing access to a public
street or highway.
LOT, INTERIOR - A lot having no frontage on any public street or highway but which has access to a public street
or highway by means of an unobstructed easement for access and egress not less than twenty-five (25)
feet nor more than fifty (50) feet wide and otherwise meets the requirements of these Regulations.
Lot Measurements
LOT AREA –The total area within the lot lines of a lot excluding the area of any accessway or easement
providing access to a flag lot or interior lot.
LOT FRONTAGE - The distance between the boundaries of a lot measured along the property line(s) abutting
the street.
MOTOR VEHICLE - Any passenger motor vehicle excluding campers, buses, trucks and any other vehicle whose
primary function is other than transportation of people.
NON-CONFORMING - A situation where a lot, building, structure, or use does not conform to the dimensional or
locational or other applicable provisions of these Regulations which existed at the time these Regulations
were first adopted or which were permitted prior to an amendment to the Regulations that rendered
such lot, building structure or use non-compliant with the Regulations.
NURSERY GARDEN - See “Agriculture-Related Terms”.
PLACE OF WORSHIP - A structure used primarily for the conduct of religious services.
PREMISES - A lot together with any structures thereon.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 2200
WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
15
Principal vs Accessory
PRINCIPAL BUILDING - The primary or predominant building or structure on a property or a building in which is
conducted the primary or predominant use on the piece or parcel of land or on a contiguous parcel of
land under the same ownership. Accessory buildings or structures connected by roofs or breezeways
shall be considered part of the principal building. See also “Accessory Building”.
ACCESSORY BUILDING - A building which is subordinate and customarily incidental to the principal building and
use on the piece or parcel of land or on a contiguous parcel of land under the same ownership.
Accessory buildings or structures connected by roofs or breezeways shall be considered part of the
principal building. See also “Principal Building”.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE –A structure, the size and use of which is subordinate and customarily incidental to the
principal structure and use on the piece or parcel of land or on a contiguous parcel of land under the
same ownership.
PRINCIPAL USE - A primary or predominant use or activity of a lot, building, structure, or property. A property
may have more than one principal use provided such use is in accordance with the requirements of
these Regulations. See also “Accessory Use”.
ACCESSORY USE - A use or activity on a property which is subordinate and customarily incidental to a principal
use or activity on the same property or on a contiguous lot under the same ownership with the
principal use. See also “Principal Use”.
Parameters For Being “Accessory”
CUSTOMARY – Something commonly practiced, used, or observed such that it is considered conventional and
typical rather than unusual.
INCIDENTAL - Something likely to ensue as a minor consequence of another activity or something that happens
as a minor part or result of something else.
SUBORDINATE – Something inferior, smaller, fewer, and of less importance or impact or something placed in or
occupying a lower class, rank, or position.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: See “Home-Based Business And Related Terms”.
SEDIMENT - Solid material, either mineral or organic that is in suspension or has been moved from its site of origin
by erosion.
Section 2200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
16
Setbacks Versus Yards
SETBACK LINE - On any lot, a line parallel to the street or to one of the sides or rear boundary lines at a distance
that provides the required front, side, or rear yard.
YARD - The area between the principal structure and a lot line. Any measurement shall be taken at right angle
from the lot line to the nearest point of the structure.
Setbacks (defined from the property lines in)
Yards (defined from the building out)
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 2200
WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
17
SF – Square foot or square feet.
Sign-Related Terms
SIGN - Any device for visual communication, whether located outdoors or within a structure in such manner
that it is visible outdoors, which is arranged or intended to convey a graphic message to the general
public in written, pictorial or symbolic form, or in a combination of these forms.
As used in these Regulations the term includes all message displaying and advertising devices which
are freestanding, attached to buildings, mounted on trees or poles, portable, vehicle mounted, hanging
or suspended from a cable, mounted on fences or structures, painted on or otherwise attached to
walls or abutments, displayed in windows, projected electrically or contrived in any other manner to
attract attention to a message. Examples of signs include: posters, name plaques, advertising bills,
product symbols, commercial streamers or pennants, display cases, identification signs, and directional
signs.
The term “sign”, however, does not include:
? Traffic signals, safety markers and signs essential for traffic control or public safety erected by
public authorities;
? The flag, banner, or insignia of the United States, of the State of Connecticut, or of any civic,
patriotic, charitable, religious, fraternal or similar public service organization; or
? Civic, religious or private displays such as seasonal decorations, balloons, decorative banners,
crèches, menorahs and other religious symbols, postal boxes and address number plaques.
? Political/candidate signs, provided that such signs are erected fewer that ninety (90) days prior to
the election to which they apply and removed within fifteen (15) days after the election to which
they apply.
SIMILAR USE - A use which the Commission shall find to be similar to a permitted use.
SOIL - Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of whatever origin.
STATE - The State of Connecticut.
Section 2200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
18
Story-Related Terms
STORY - That portion of the building which is between the surface of a floor and the surface of the next floor
above or, in the absence of a floor above, the next ceiling above except that:
? A basement shall be considered a story but a cellar shall not be considered a story, and
? An attic shall be considered a story if the floor area of any finished or habitable space exceeds 50
percent of the gross floor area of the story directly below (see “half-story”).
ATTIC –That part of a building that is immediately below and wholly or partially within the roof framing (see
“half-story”).
BASEMENT – A portion of a building located partially below grade and where 50 percent or more of the floorto-
ceiling height is above the average finished grade at the perimeter walls. (also see flood-related
definitions in Section 4200)
CELLAR – A portion of a building located wholly or partially below grade and where 50 percent or more of the
floor-to-ceiling height is below the average finished grade at the perimeter walls.
HALF-STORY –An attic where the floor area of any finished or habitable space is 50 percent or less of the gross
floor area of the story directly below.
Story Chart
Considered A Story Not Considered A Story
Below the Roof When the amount of finished or
habitable floor space is greater than 50
percent of the gross floor area of the
story directly below.
When the amount of finished or
habitable floor space is 50 percent or
less of the gross floor area of the story
directly below.
Other Level Considered a story
Below Grade When more than 50 percent of the
floor-to-ceiling height is above the
average finished grade
at the perimeter walls.
When 50 percent or more of the floorto-
ceiling height is below the average
finished grade at the perimeter walls.
STREET - A road, highway, lane, avenue, boulevard, or any other public or private way, or a way opened to the
public or private use, which provides a principal means of access to a lot. "Street" shall be deemed to
include the entire width of the right-of-way but shall not include private driveways and private rights-ofway.
STRUCTURE - See “Buildings vs Structures”.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 2200
WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
19
TOPSOIL - Earth materials, including loam, which are arable and constitute the surface layer of earth material.
TOWN - The Town of Easton, Connecticut.
TOWN CLERK - The Town Clerk of the Town of Easton, Connecticut.
TRUCK GARDEN - See “Agriculture-Related Terms”.
USE - The specific purpose or activity for which a building, structure or lot is intended.
USE, ACCESSORY - See “Principal vs Accessory”.
USE, PRINCIPAL - See “Principal vs Accessory”.
USE, TEMPORARY - A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use
upon the expiration of the time period.
WATERCOURSE - As defined in CGS Section 22a-38.
“Watercourses” means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps,
bogs and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or
private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon this state or any portion
thereof, ….
Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and
the occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: (A) Evidence of scour or
deposits of recent alluvium or detritus, (B) the presence of standing or flowing water for a
duration longer than a particular storm incident, and (C) the presence of hydrophytic
vegetation …
WETLAND - As defined in CGS Section 22a-38.
“Wetlands” means land, including submerged land, ... which consists of any of the soil types
designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial, and floodplain by the National
Cooperative Soils Survey, as may be amended from time to time, of the Natural Resources
Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture …
YARD - See “Setbacks versus Yards”.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (ZEO) - The Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town of Easton, Connecticut.
ZONING MAP - The latest officially adopted Zoning Map of the Town of Easton, Connecticut.
Section 2200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
WORDS AND TERMS
DEFINITIONS
20
(this page intentionally left blank)
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 3200
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
PERMITTED PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES AND USES
21
3000 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
3100 PURPOSE
The Residence districts are intended to guide residential development in accordance with soil types, terrain, and
other environmental considerations and with due consideration for the character of the community and
protection of the public water supply watershed areas that exist in Easton.
3200 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES AND USES
3210 Conservation-Related Uses
1. Open Space - Open space land, watershed land, and similar conservation lands. No Zoning Permit
Required
2. Conservation Development – Conservation development in accordance with
Section 5900.
Special Permit
(Commission)
3220 Agricultural- Related Uses
1. Agriculture - Agriculture, farming, nursery gardening and truck gardening as a
principal use in accordance with CGS Section 19a-341 and in accordance with
generally accepted agricultural practices as determined by the Connecticut
Department of Agriculture.
No Zoning Permit
Required
2. Equine Facility – Operation of an equine facility as defined in these Regulations as
a principal use provided that:
a. Such operation shall be conducted in accordance with CGS Section 19a-341
and in accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices as
determined by the Connecticut Department of Agriculture.
b. No covered riding ring shall be erected within 100 feet of any property
boundary.
c. No stable, riding ring or paddock shall be erected within 40 feet of any
property boundary.
d. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided.
e. Fencing or other suitable enclosure shall be provided as determined by the
Commission.
Special Permit
(Commission)
Section 3200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
PERMITTED PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES AND USES
22
3230 Residential-Related Uses
1. Dwelling - Single family dwelling, not to exceed one dwelling per lot.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
2. Flag/Interior Lot - A flag lot or an interior lot subject to the provisions of Section
5400.
Special Permit
(Commission)
3240 Institutional-Related Uses
1. Places of Worship - Places of worship and accessory uses thereto subject to the
provisions of Section 5700.
Special Permit
(Commission)
2. Public Schools - Public school and related facilities.
Special Permit
(Commission)
3. Private Schools - Private school provided that:
a. It delivers a comprehensive curriculum of studies considered by the
Commission to be appropriate for a residential district.
b. The site contains at least ten (10) acres unless the site provides adequate
buffer yards or separation to adjacent uses.
c. The use is subject to the provisions of Section 5700.
Special Permit
(Commission)
4. Museum / Gallery - Museum or art gallery subject to the provisions of Section
5700.
Special Permit
(Commission)
5. Cemetery - Cemetery located on at least 10 acres. Special Permit
(Commission)
6. Municipal Uses - Municipal uses including municipal recreation facilities,
firehouse, police station, public library, or other municipal facilities. The
Commission may, by separate Special Permit, modify the setback requirements of
these Regulations for such municipal use(s) subject to the following provisions:
a. The Commission shall find that:
i. The public health and safety of the community requires that additions or
changes must be made in the facility to enable it to continue to function
effectively to serve public need,
ii. Such additions or changes cannot be made in any manner which would
conform with the setback requirements of these regulations, and
iii. The reduction in the setback requirements is the minimum necessary to
allow the facility to continue to meet its public service obligation.
b. Specific measures shall be required for effective protection of all nearby
residential areas from the effects of lighting, noise, dust, traffic or activity
which might emanate from the site, and such measures may include required
berms, fences or walls, dense screening, and appropriate limitations on the
scope of operations as necessary.
Special Permit
(Commission)
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 3200
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
PERMITTED PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES AND USES
23
3250 Other Principal Uses
1. Non-Conforming Uses – Non-conforming uses as defined in these Regulations to
the extent existing as of the date of adoption.
No Zoning Permit
Required
2. Special Temporary Uses – Special social, cultural, civic, recreational, or educational
uses including art shows, musical concerts, theatrical productions, antique shows,
firemen carnivals, patriotic exercises, memorials, and other events conducted by a
non-profit organization for a calendar year when in accordance with the following:
a. The duration and nature of the event shall be fully described in the
application.
b. A sketch plan may be used to illustrate the proposed configuration.
c. Adequate off street parking shall be provided.
d. The proposed location will safely accommodate the traffic flow for the event.
e. Any requirements of the Health Code shall be complied with.
f. The proposed use and any structures proposed will be compatible with the
proposed location.
g. The Zoning Enforcement Official may refer any such application or renewal
request to the Commission.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
3. Private Recreation Facility- Private recreation facility provided that:
a. The site contains sufficient acreage to accommodate the proposed activities
and provides adequate buffer yards or separation to adjacent uses.
b. The activities to be conducted at the private recreation facility have been
approved by the Commission.
c. The use is subject to the provisions of Section 5700.
Special Permit
(Commission)
4. Utility Facility – Utility facility such as:
a. Water treatment facility or water supply facility.
b. Public utility transmission line or pipeline.
c. Public utility substation, pump station or compressor station.·
d. Telecommunication facilities as a principal use subject to the provisions of
Section 7200.
Special Permit
(Commission)
5. Country Inn / Spa / Wellness Facility – A country inn, spa, and/or wellness facility
subject to the provisions of Section 5330.
Special Permit
(Commission)
6. Other Uses - Other uses which the Commission finds are similar to one or more of
the uses permitted in Section 3200.
Special Permit
(Commission)
Section 3300 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
24
3300 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
3310 Parking
1. Parking - Off-street parking facilities of non-commercial vehicles for the use of the
occupants of the premises and their guests, subject to the provisions of Section
6200.
No Zoning Permit
Required
2. Commercial Vehicle Storage -– Storage of one (1) commercial vehicle provided
that any such vehicle shall not be stored in a required yard setback unless parked
in the driveway.
No Zoning Permit
Required
3. Commercial Vehicle Storage -– Storage of more than one (1) commercial vehicle
or any construction equipment provided that any such vehicle:
a. Shall only be stored in a side or rear yard,
b. Shall not be stored in a required yard setback unless parked in the driveway.
c. Shall be visually screened to the satisfaction of the Zoning Enforcement
Official from the street and abutting properties by location, topography,
berms, landscaping, plantings, walls, and/or fencing.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
4. Commercial Vehicle Storage -– Storage of more than one (1) commercial vehicle
or any construction equipment if not in accordance with Section 3310.3.
Special Permit
(Commission)
5. Recreational Vehicle Storage -– Storage of boats, campers, and similar
recreational vehicles provided that:
a. Any such vehicle shall only be stored in a side or rear yard and shall not be
stored in a required yard setback.
b. Any such vehicle shall be visually screened from the street and abutting
properties by location, topography, berms, landscaping, plantings, walls,
and/or fencing.
No Zoning Permit
Required
6. Recreational Vehicle Storage - Storage of boats, campers, or similar recreational
vehicles if not conducted in accordance with Section 3310.5.
Special Permit
(Commission)
3320 Residential
1. Rooming House - The keeping of roomers or boarders subject to the provisions of
Section 5310.
No Zoning Permit
Required
2. Accessory Apartment - An accessory apartment within or attached to the principal
dwelling subject to the provisions of Section 5200.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 3300
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
25
3330 Keeping Of Animals
1. Keeping of Pets - Keeping of up to four (4) domestic pets (not counting pets less
than six months old which are offspring of other pets on the premises).
No Zoning Permit
Required
2. Keeping of Pets - Keeping of up to ten (10) domestic pets (not counting pets less
than six months old which are offspring of other pets on the premises).
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
3. Keeping of Animals - Keeping of chickens, horses and livestock and other animals
on a farm or accessory to a residence when in accordance with CGS Section 19a-
341 and in accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices as
determined by the Connecticut Department of Agriculture.
No Zoning Permit
Required
3340 Agriculture
1. Agriculture - Agriculture, farming, nursery gardening and truck gardening as an
accessory use in accordance with CGS Section 19a-341 and in accordance with
generally accepted agricultural practices as determined by the Connecticut
Department of Agriculture.
No Zoning Permit
Required
2. Agriculture-Related Activities – Agriculture-related activities as provided in
Section 5600 of the Regulations when accessory to an existing farm and/or forest
operation operated on the same premises.
Approval Type
Varies
3. Equine Facility – Operation of an equine facility as defined in these Regulations as
an accessory use provided that:
a. Such operation shall be conducted in accordance with CGS Section 19a-341
and in accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices as
determined by the Connecticut Department of Agriculture.
b. No covered riding ring shall be erected within 100 feet of any property
boundary.
c. No stable, riding ring or paddock shall be erected within 40 feet of any
property boundary.
d. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 6200.
e. Fencing or other suitable enclosure shall be provided as determined by the
Zoning Enforcement Official.
f. The Zoning Enforcement Official may accept an aerial photograph or hand
drawn map depicting the location of the proposed activities if such facilities
are located at least twice the minimum yard setback or other required
separation from any property line.
Special Permit
(Commission)
4. Supplemental Space - The rental, lease, or use of space in a farm building or
buildings on an active farm, not exceeding 400 square feet in aggregate floor area
per acre of land, for office, research, or other similar use provided:
a. Such supplemental space is located on an active farm of at least twenty-five
(25) acres in one or more contiguous parcels.
b. Such farm building shall not be subdivided or separated from the farm parcel.
c. Employment in the supplemental space shall not exceed four (4) employees
per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of the building(s).
d. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 6200.
Special Permit
(Commission)
Section 3300 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
26
3350 Home-Based Business
1. Day Care - Family day care home by a resident occupant in accordance with
Section 5800.
No Zoning Permit
Required
2. Day Care - Group day care home by a resident occupant in accordance with
Section 5800.
Site Plan Approval
(Commission)
3. Home Office – Use of space within a dwelling for an office provided there are no
non-resident employees and no client or customer visits.
No Zoning Permit
Required
4. Minor Home-Based Business - Minor home-based business(es) provided that:
a. Any such home-based business is conducted only by resident occupants
entirely within the dwelling with no more than one (1) non-resident employee
on the premises at any one time.
b. The floor area devoted to all such home-based business(es) shall not exceed
25 percent of the dwelling or 600 square feet, whichever is the more
restrictive requirement.
c. Any such home-based business is operated in accordance with the provisions
of Section 5100.
d. The Zoning Enforcement Official may refer any such application to the
Commission.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
5. Home-Based Professional Office - One professional office conducted as a homebased
business entirely within the dwelling by a resident occupant of the dwelling
with not more than one non-resident employee, whether full or part time, on the
premises at any one time provided that:
a. The floor area devoted to the professional office(s) shall not exceed 25
percent of the dwelling or 600 square feet, whichever is the more restrictive
requirement.
b. Parking for employees and clients shall be provided in accordance with
Section 6200.
c. Any such professional office is operated in accordance with the requirements
of Section 5100.
d. The Zoning Enforcement Official may refer any such application to the
Commission.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
6. Major Home-Based Business - A home-based business or a home-based
professional office conducted by resident occupants which:
a. In the case of a home-based business, involves two or more non-resident
employees on the premises at any one time,
b. In the case of a home-based professional office, involves more than one nonresident
employee on the premises at any one time,
c. Will not be conducted entirely within the dwelling,
d. Occupies more than 25 percent of the dwelling or more than 600 square feet
of floor area, or
e. Will not be operated in accordance with the provisions of Section 5100.
Special Permit
(Commission)
7. Bed and Breakfast - Operation of a bed and breakfast or other home-based
lodging facility in accordance with the provisions of Section 5320.
Special Permit
(Commission)
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 3300
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
27
3360 Other Accessory Uses
1. Typical Accessory Uses - Uses and activities subordinate and customarily
incidental to a permitted use provided such uses and activities are conducted in
accordance with these Regulations.
No Zoning Permit
Required
2. Tag Sale - A tag sale provided that:
a. The tag sale may be conducted only by a resident of the premises where the
sale is taking place.
b. There shall be no more than one tag sale per year on the premises.
c. The duration of any tag sale shall not exceed three days.
d. Only articles owned by the residents of the premises may be sold at the sale.
No Zoning Permit
Required
3. Day Care - Day care center accessory to an established institutional use such as a
church or private school in accordance with Section 5800.
Special Permit
(Commission)
4. Other Uses - Other uses accessory to an active farm as approved by the
Commission.
Special Permit
(Commission)
Section 3400 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
28
3400 PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
3410 Accessory Structures
1. Minor Accessory Structure - Garden house, tool house, playhouse or other
accessory structure customarily incident to a permitted principal use of the
premises provided such structure(s) shall not exceed 200 square feet in total floor
area, shall not be placed on a permanent foundation, and shall not be operated for
profit or used as a residence.
No Zoning Permit
Required
2. Major Accessory Structure - Garden house, tool house, playhouse, hoophouse, or
other accessory structure customarily incident to a permitted principal use of the
premises when totaling more than 200 square feet in floor area or if on a
permanent foundation provided such structure shall not be used as a residence.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
3. Solar Panels - Solar panels when mounted flush to a roof surface. Zoning Permit
(Staff)
4. Solar Panels - Solar panels when not mounted flush to a roof surface. Special Permit
(Commission)
5. Emergency Generator – Emergency generator which, notwithstanding any other
provisions of these Regulations, may be located within 40 feet of the property line
provided it is not located within the front yard unless fully screened or enclosed.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
3420 Fences / Walls
1. Fences / Walls – Fence, wall, or fence/wall combination in accordance with
Section 6700.
See Section 6700
3430 Recreational Structures
1. Swimming Pool - Swimming pool provided that:
a. All in-ground swimming pools shall be fenced in accordance with the Building
Code.
b. Swimming pools shall be set at least 50 feet from the front property line and
at least 40 feet from any other property line.
c. Access to all above ground swimming pools shall be protected by a gate
normally kept closed.
d. No pool shall be artificially illuminated unless such illumination shall have
been approved by the Commission.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
2. Recreational Court - Tennis court(s) and/or similar recreation courts and facilities
provided that:
a. All recreation courts shall be set at least 50 feet from the edge of the road
right-of-way and at least 40 feet from any other property line.
b. No recreational court or facility shall be artificially illuminated unless such
illuminations shall have been approved by the Commission.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 3400
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
29
3440 Agriculture
1. Accessory Farm Structure - A structure customarily incident to the operation of a
farm provided such structure shall not be used as a residence unless specifically
authorized by the Commission by Special Permit.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
2. Minor Farm Stand - A farm stand provided that:
a. Such farm stand shall be located on the same property as where a majority of
the items offered for sale are grown.
b. The farm stand shall not exceed 200 square feet in floor area except that a
farm stand within an existing building shall not be limited as to floor area.
c. The farm stand shall not be built on a permanent foundation.
d. The farm stand shall be located at least 20 feet back from the edge of the
roadway pavement and any abutting property lines.
e. The farm stand shall provide a safe parking area for cars in an area with safe
access and egress and adequate sight lines for approaching traffic and exiting
traffic.
No Zoning Permit
Required
3. Major Farm Stand - A new or expanded farm stand built on a permanent
foundation provided that:
a. Such farm stand shall comply with the other applicable provisions of Section
3440.2, and
b. Such farm stand shall comply with the minimum yard setbacks for the zoning
district.
Zoning Permit
(Staff)
4. Farm Store - A farm store provided that:
a. Such farm store shall be accessory to, and on the same property as, a farm of
at least twenty-five (25) acres in area.
b. A substantial proportion of all items offered for sale shall be raised on the
premises by the residents thereof and the balance shall be of a character
native to Connecticut,
c. The farm store shall comply with the minimum yard setback requirements for
the zone.
d. The farm store shall provide the parking spaces as required by Section 6220
for a retail store except that the Commission may also require the applicant
provide additional safety measures at the operator’s expense, including but
not limited to the employment at owner/operator's expense of a qualified
traffic control officer at specified times, and the installation of caution signs or
other warning devices on the public street, such signs and devices being
approved for use by the Town or State, as may be applicable.
Special Permit
(Commission)
Section 3400 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
30
3450 Residential
1. Caretaker Cottage – A detached building providing separate living quarters
provided that:
a. The property shall contain at least 10 acres.
b. There shall be a residential dwelling on the property that the detached
building is accessory to.
c. The caretaker cottage shall be solely for the housing of persons who are
employed on the premises in positions customarily relating to the permitted
principal use of the premises and may include that person’s family.
d. The occupant of the principal residence shall file with the Commission by
January 31st of each year such evidence as may reasonably be required to
substantiate the employment of the occupant(s) of the accessory building by
the occupant of the principal residence.
e. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to permit the use of an accessory
building for any residential purpose other than stated above.
Special Permit
(Commission)
3460 Other
1. Windmill - Windmill accessory to a permitted use provided that:
a. There shall be no more than one such device per property.
b. No windmill structure shall exceed 80 feet in height to the turbine rotor.
c. No windmill structure shall be located in a front yard except that, for a
principal building set far back from the street, the windmill structure may be
located between the principal building and the street provided it shall be in
the rear half of the property.
d. No windmill structure shall be located closer than 80 feet to a property line
unless specifically approved by the Commission.
e. The Commission may consider anticipated noise generation and its effect on
surrounding properties.
Special Permit
(Commission)
2. Utility Facility - Telecommunications facilities as an accessory use subject to the
provisions of Section 7200.
Special Permit
(Commission)
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 3500
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
31
3500 AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
For area and dimensional standards in a Conservation Development,
see Section 5900 of these Regulations.
3510 Lot Area And Shape Requirements
Residence A Residence B
Minimum Lot Area
40,000 square feet 3.0 acres
(130,680 square feet)
Minimum Buildable Area 34,000 square feet 2.0 acres
(87,120 square feet)
Lot Shape
A square measuring
150 feet on each side
shall fit within the lot lines
A rectangle measuring
150 feet by 175 feet
shall fit within the lot lines
See Section 3600 for possible exceptions.
3520 Lot Frontage Requirements
Both Residence A and Residence B
Minimum Frontage on a public street or
highway
? Unless otherwise indicated below 200 feet minimum
? Corner lots 200 feet minimum on at least one of the intersecting roads
? Flag lots 25 feet minimum / 50 feet maximum
? Interior lots and lots on common
ownership accessways n/a
See Section 3600 for possible exceptions.
Section 3500 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
32
3530 Yard Setback Requirements
Both Residence A and Residence B
Minimum Front Yard Setback 50 feet from front property line
75 feet from the centerline of any street
Minimum Side Yard Setback 40 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 40 feet
See Section 3600 for possible exceptions.
3540 Building Height Limitations
Both Residence A and Residence B
Maximum Building Height
? Stories Two-and-a-half (2.5) stories
? Feet 35 feet above the highest elevation where
the foundation meets grade.
Attic Limitations For the purposes of these Regulations, an attic in a residential
dwelling may contain finished or habitable space and may be
equipped with heat, plumbing and electricity provided that:
1. The amount of finished or habitable floor space shall not be
greater than 50 percent of the gross floor area of the story
directly below.
2. The finished residential attic space shall not be used for an
accessory apartment.
3. Any habitable attic space shall be provided with two means
of egress acceptable to the Building Official which will be
usable in the event of an emergency.
See Section 3600 for possible exceptions.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 3600
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
DIMENSIONAL EXCEPTIONS
33
3600 DIMENSIONAL EXCEPTIONS
3610 POSSIBLE EXCEPTIONS TO LOT REQUIREMENTS
1. (none at this time)
3620 EXCEPTIONS TO SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
1. Normal Appurtenances - The front, side and rear yards may be occupied by normal appurtenances
substantially at ground level including but not limited to driveways, access bridges, terraces; mailboxes, or
driveway light posts.
2. Architectural Features - Eaves, pilasters, columns, belt-courses, sills, cornices, or similar architectural
features may project up to one foot into a required yard setback.
3. Fences and Walls - Fences and walls taller than eight feet (8’) in height shall comply with required yard
setbacks but fences and walls shorter than eight feet (8’) in height may be erected within any front, side
or rear yard provided the fence, wall, or fence/wall combination is in conformity with the following
standards:
a. The fence, wall, or fence/wall combination is not taller than six (6) feet in height as “fence/wall
height” is defined in the Regulations.
b. The fence, wall, or fence/wall combination is more than six (6) feet in height but not taller than eight
(8) feet in height as “fence/wall height” is defined in the Regulations and the solid mass of any
fencing is not over 25% of the face area of the fence (such as wire netting or widely-spaced rails) and
allows the free passage of light and air.
c. The Commission has, by Site Plan approval and determination of need, authorized:
i. A solid-screen fence, wall, or fence/wall combination up to eight (8) feet in height where
essential to protect the privacy or values of an adjacent residential property or neighborhood; or
ii. A retaining wall or fence necessary for safety, prevention of erosion, or other public purpose.
4. Handicapped Access - Entry stairs and access ramps for the handicapped may extend up to five feet into
any required yard setback.
5. Minor Accessory Structure – In the Residence A District only, an accessory structure other than an
emergency generator may be located within 20 feet of a side and/or rear lot line provided:
a. The accessory structure is not located in the front yard, and
b. The accessory structure is not more than 200 square feet in area or more than one story in height.
Section 3600 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
DIMENSIONAL EXCEPTIONS
34
3630 EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITATION
1. Cupolas, steeples, spires, chimneys, antennas, weather vanes and similar appurtenances shall not be
counted toward height provided that:
a. Such appurtenances shall not exceed more than five percent (5%) of the building footprint unless
specifically approved by the Commission.
b. No such appurtenance shall exceed 50 feet in height above ground.
2. Unless otherwise specifically approved by the Commission, any public or institutional building may,
subject to Special Permit, rise to a height not exceeding forty (40) feet provided such building is at least
fifty (50) feet from the nearest property boundary.
3640 OTHER DIMENSIONAL EXCEPTIONS
1. (none at this time)
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 4100
OTHER DISTRICTS
EASTON CENTER DISTRICT
35
4000 OTHER DISTRICTS
4100 EASTON CENTER DISTRICT
4110 PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to allow for small-scale business and other specified uses in the Easton
Center area on Sport Hill Road.
4120 VILLAGE DISTRICT DECLARED
The Easton Center District is hereby declared to be a “village district” as authorized by CGS Section 8-2j. In
accordance with CGS Section 8-2j, the Commission shall consider the design, placement, relationships and
compatibility of structures, plantings, signs, roadways, street hardware and other objects in public view. The
Commission shall encourage the conversion, conservation and preservation of existing buildings and sites in a
manner that maintains the historic value, distinctive character and landscape of the district.
Any development in the Easton Center District shall be reviewed in accordance with the requirements of Section
8890 of these Regulations.
4130 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES AND USES
No use variance of any kind shall be permitted
in the Easton Center District.
4131 No Zoning Permit Required
1. Open Space - Open space land, watershed land, and similar conservation lands. No Zoning Permit
Required
2. Agriculture - Agriculture as a principal use in accordance with CGS Section 19a-341
and in accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices as determined by
the Connecticut Department of Agriculture.
No Zoning Permit
Required
3. Special Temporary Uses – Special temporary uses subject to the same standards
and criteria as in Section 3250.2
No Zoning Permit
Required
4132 Permitted By Zoning Permit
1. Residential Dwelling - Single family dwelling, not to exceed one dwelling per lot. Zoning Permit (Staff)
Section 4100 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
OTHER DISTRICTS
EASTON CENTER DISTRICT
36
4132 Permitted By Special Permit
1. Retail - Small-scale retail stores (not to exceed 2,500 SF of floor area, except that a
small-scale grocery store up to 7,500 SF may be allowed).
Special Permit
(Commission)
2. Personal Service – Personal service establishments including but not limited to nail
salon, day spa, yoga studio, barber shop, beauty shop, gym, or fitness training
studio).
Special Permit
(Commission)
3. Restaurant / Café – A restaurant or café provided such establishment shall not
serve customers at drive-in windows. Indoor seating limited to 75 seats. Outdoor
seating approvable by separate Special Permit.
Special Permit
(Commission)
4. Food Service – A bakery, delicatessen, ice cream parlor, coffee shop, and/or
similar food retail and serving establishments. Indoor seating limited to 15 percent
of gross floor area or 15 seats. Accessory outdoor seating permitted.
Special Permit
(Commission)
5. Professional Offices - Professional offices for doctors, dentists, architects,
engineers, attorneys, psychologists, therapists, realtors, accountants, and such
other similar profession as the Commission may approve.
Special Permit
(Commission)
6. Craft Businesses – Artist’s or craftsman’s studio and/or art/craft gallery including
furniture, cabinetry, sculpture, crafts, and similar ventures.
Special Permit
(Commission)
7. Farm And Garden Centers – Retail farm and garden centers on an active farm. Special Permit
(Commission)
8. Institutional Uses – Institutional uses subject to the provisions of Section 5700. Special Permit
(Commission)
9. Mixed Use Building – Mixed residential and commercial uses within the same
building provided that:
a. No property shall contain more than 4 residential bedrooms.
b. No residential unit shall contain more than two bedrooms.
c. No residential unit shall be located at street level or below.
Special Permit
(Commission)
10. Accessory Residential Unit – Limited to two bedrooms. Special Permit
(Commission)
11. Utility Facility – Utility facility as provided in Section 3250.4. Special Permit
(Commission)
12. Other Uses - Other uses, including civic, cultural and non-profit uses, which the
Commission finds are similar to one or more of the uses permitted in Section 4130.
Special Permit
(Commission)
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 4100
OTHER DISTRICTS
EASTON CENTER DISTRICT
37
4140 AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Easton Center
Minimum Lot Area No minimum requirement
Minimum Buildable Area No minimum requirement
Minimum Frontage (on a public street or highway) No minimum requirement
Minimum Front Yard Setback No minimum requirement provided
that adequate provision is made for
pedestrian circulation and overall
accessibility with the District
Minimum Side Yard Setback No minimum requirement
Minimum Rear Yard Setback No minimum requirement
Maximum Building Height Two-and-a-half (2.5) stories and
35 feet above the highest elevation
where the foundation meets grade
Maximum Building Size No building in the Easton Center
District shall contain more than 7,500
SF of gross floor area
Parking Parking shall comply with the
provisions of Section 6200. Such
parking requirement may be satisfied
from any lot within the Easton Center
District provided that such parking is
dedicated to the proposed use and
will not be utilized to satisfy parking
requirements for any other use.
4150 APPLICATION PROCESS
1. Pre-application review as provided in Section 8200 is strongly recommended.
2. Any Special Permit application shall include a precise description of all uses proposed to be conducted on
the site and explicit data on proposed hours and days of operation, services to be rendered, and other
information requested by the Commission.
Section 4200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
OTHER DISTRICTS
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
38
4200 FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
4210 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The Floodplain Overlay District is designed to:
? Promote the public health, safety, and welfare by minimizing public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas known as the 100-year flood plain.
? Gain greater protection from flooding.
? Keep federal Flood Insurance available in the Town of Easton at reasonable costs.
4220 APPLICABILITY
1. These regulations shall apply to all special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Fairfield County, Connecticut, dated
June 18, 2010, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), dated June 18, 2010, and other
supporting data applicable to the Town of Easton. These documents, with any subsequent revisions
thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this regulation.
2. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this regulation it must take precedence when more
restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA.
3. The special flood hazard areas include any area shown on the FIRM as Zone A or Zone AE, including areas
designated as a floodway on a FIRM. Special flood hazard areas are determined by utilizing the base flood
elevation (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the FIS for a community. BFEs provided on a FIRM are
only approximate (rounded up or down) and must be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a
specific location.
4230 GENERAL
1. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered in the 100-
year flood plain without full compliance with the terms of these regulations and other applicable
regulations.
2. This regulation is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this regulation and another ordinance, regulation, easement, covenant or
deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
3. The degree of flood protection required by this regulation is considered the minimum reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration and research. Larger floods
can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
regulation does not imply or guarantee that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Area or uses permitted
in such areas will be free from flooding and flood damages. This regulation shall not create liability on the
part of the Town of Easton or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this regulation or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. The Town of Easton,
its officers and employees shall assume no liability for another person's reliance on any maps, data or
information provided by the Town of Easton.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 4200
OTHER DISTRICTS
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
39
4240 FLOOD-RELATED DEFINITIONS
Where the following words and terms are used in this Section of the Regulations, the definitions below shall take
precedence over any other definitions.
BASE FLOOD - A flood (100 year storm) which has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of occurring in any given
year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) - The elevation of the crest of the base flood (100-year flood). This elevation is
stated as its height in relation to mean sea level, based on North American Vertical Datum (NA VD) of
1988, expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of
coastal and riverine areas.
BASEMENT - Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING - See the definition for Structure.
DEVELOPMENT - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, the
construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial
improvements to buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials; and the
installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities
located within the areas of special flood hazard.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the effective date,
September 30, 1983, of the floodplain management ordinance adopted by the Town of Easton.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - The preparation of additional sites
by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) - The federal agency that administers the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP).
FLOOD or FLOODING - A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation/runoff of
surface waters from any source.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) - The official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas (100 ¬year floodplain)
and the insurance risk premium zones applicable to a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) - The official study of a community in which the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) has conducted an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Section 4200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
OTHER DISTRICTS
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
40
FLOOD PLAIN, 100 YEAR - All land area, including structures thereon, which is subject to a one percent chance of
flooding in any given year. Said areas are generally described on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study prepared for the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODWAY - The channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevations more than
one foot.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY - A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located
in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term
does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE - Any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of
the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of
historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (l) By
an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the Secretary
of the Interior in states without approved programs.
LOWEST FLOOR - The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
MANUFACTURED HOME - A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term also includes recreational vehicles, park trailers, travel trailers and similar
transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved
property.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION - A parcel or contiguous parcels of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MARKET VALUE - The value of the structure shall be determined by the appraised value of the structure, using the
cost approach to value method, prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in case of
damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.
MEAN SEA LEVEL - For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION - Structures for which the -Start of Construction - commenced on or after September
30,1983, the effective date of Easton Flood Plain Regulations.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 4200
OTHER DISTRICTS
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
41
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date,
September 30, 1983, of the floodplain management regulation adopted by the Town of Easton.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - A vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) four hundred (400) square feet or less
when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; .and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION (includes SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT)-The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
(including a manufactured home) on a site, such as pouring slabs or footings, installation of piles,
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, the installation of
streets and walkways, excavation for basement footings, piers or the installation of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA - The land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area is designated as Zones A and AE on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
STRUCTURE - A walled and roofed building which is principally above ground, including a manufactured home, a
gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alterations or improvements in a
structure, taking place within a period of ten years or less, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds
fifty percent of the market value of the structure as determined by the cost approach to value method.
The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of
the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage
occurring. For the purposes of this definition, -Substantial Improvement - is considered to occur when
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions.
Section 4200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
OTHER DISTRICTS
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
42
VARIANCE - A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management regulation that allows
construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in
unnecessary hardship.
VIOLATION - A failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor
elevation documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION - Height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NA VD) of 1988 (or other
datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
4250 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND ADMINISTRATION
1. No use shall be permitted which would substantially increase the flood hazard in any upstream or
downstream area, or would overload the available storm drainage system.
2. No fill or structure shall be placed within the mean annual flood lines (annual flood plain) of any stream in
the town of Easton, unless consistent with these regulations and also as shown on a plan approved under
the town's Subdivision Regulations and Inland Wetland Regulations.
3. In addition, the following requirements govern all land lying within the 100-year flood plain, and also
within any channel encroachment lines established by the Connecticut Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection.
a. No development activity, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction, movement or
enlargement of buildings and the placement of fill or other flood flow obstructions, shall be
undertaken except in accordance with a Special Permit from the Planning and Zoning Commission in
accordance with Section 8400 of these regulations.
b. No Special Permit shall be issued unless the Commission is satisfied that:
i. Permits required from Federal, State or Town agencies exercising jurisdiction over the project
have been obtained;
ii. All requirements of these regulations have been met;
iii. The permitted project is properly designed and will not increase flood hazards; and
iv. Improved watercourses and other constructed work will be properly maintained so that flood
capacity will not be diminished in the future, and such maintenance is identified on the site plan
as a binding condition of the permit.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 4200
OTHER DISTRICTS
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
43
c. Application for a Special Permit under this section shall include:
i. A site plan prepared and certified by a Connecticut· registered professional engineer or licensed
land surveyor which shows all lot lines and adjacent owners, accurate topography at five (5) foot
or smaller contour intervals, accurate boundaries and elevations of the 100-year flood plain, the
floodway boundaries, stream channel encroachment lines (if any), existing and proposed
structures, accurate lowest floor elevations and flood-proofing elevations of all structures
referenced to National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1988, existing and proposed utilities and
roads.
ii. Proof that notice of the proposal has been received by all abutting property owners and other
owners within the 100 year flood plain where located less than 500 feet from the site, and,
where a watercourse, flooding or encroachment line will be affected, that notice has been
received by adjacent municipalities (if any), by the Connecticut Department of Energy
Environmental Protection - Inland Water Resources Division and by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
iii. All engineer's certifications as required by this Section.
d. In the administration of this Section, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall perform the following
duties, among others:
i. Obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from
a Federal, State or other source wherever this data has not been provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
ii. Make the necessary interpretation where needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the
100-year flood plain. The actual boundary of the 100-year flood plain is subject to determination
by an accurate topographic survey in each case. Because no permit may be issued in violation of
the regulatory map, the Commission may choose not to utilize that survey data which, in the
Commission's opinion, indicates a significant discrepancy between the field conditions and the
mapped flood plain. In such case, the Commission shall only utilize that data after it has been
processed by FEMA as a letter of map revision and made an official part of the Flood Insurance
Rate Map. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article .
iii. Obtain and maintain all records and certifications required under this Section including as-built
lowest floor elevations and flood-proofing levels, flood-proofing certifications and all
certifications required by Section 4260.9.
iv. Should data be requested and/or provided in Zone A areas, adopt a regulatory floodway based
on the principle that the floodway shall convey the waters of the base flood without increasing
the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot at any point along the watercourse.
Section 4200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
OTHER DISTRICTS
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
44
4260 SPECIAL FLOOD REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS
All development within the 100 year floodplain must conform to the following standards:
1. Residential dwellings and manufactured homes as defined herein are not permitted, except as provided
in Sections 4260.5, 4260.8, and 4260.9 below.
2. Non-residential and accessory structures are not permitted except as provided in Sections 4260.6 through
4260.9 below.
3. The following uses are prohibited: fences, walls and other structures creating potential barriers to flood
flow (except flood-control dams and spillways); storage of hazardous substances, including oil, gasoline,
explosives, and unsecured buoyant materials such as timber, boats and wood products; waste dumps,
cemeteries; landfills or causeway except as provided in Sections 4260.8 and 4260.9 below.
4. Necessary roads, driveways, culverts and bridges are permitted if sufficient conduit or channel capacity is
provided to accommodate the 100-year flood plus 2 feet of vertical freeboard clearance (see Sections
4260.9 below).
5. Any residential building and or manufactured home, as defined herein, must be placed on compacted
clean fill to a height of one foot above the 100-year flood elevation surrounding the foundation of the
structure at least 5 feet on all sides. All floors, basements, and mechanical equipment areas shall be at
least 2 feet above said flood elevation. This includes any manufactured home located within the town of
Easton, including a manufactured home which has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood.
Each manufactured home shall be securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement and
hydrostatic pressures. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties
to ground anchors. All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage with adequate access and drainage provided. Recreational vehicles placed on a
site for 180 days or longer must meet the elevation and anchoring requirements listed above.
Recreational vehicles on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.
6. Non-residential structures such as those devoted to institutional, commercial, office or industrial use shall
be designed to safely withstand the hydraulic effects of a 100-year flood. The areas of the structure below
the level of the 100-year flood shall be made water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and shall be constructed of components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. Essential utilities (electric, telephone, water,
sewers) shall be installed above the 100-year flood elevation or specifically protected by flood resistant
enclosures. A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural design,
specifications, and plans for the construction. The plans for the construction shall certify that the design
and methods of construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the
provisions of this sub-section.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 4200
OTHER DISTRICTS
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
45
7. Accessory structures shall be anchored and reinforced to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral
movement including the effects of buoyancy. They shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by providing a minimum of two openings (the bottom of which shall be no higher than one foot
above grade) which have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding.
8. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be:
a. Anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads including the effects of buoyancy;
b. Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
c. Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and
d. Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other
service facilities elevated at least two (2) feet above the 100 year flood elevation.
9. Located within Special Flood Hazard Areas are areas designated as floodways on the community's Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM). Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, no encroachments,
including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, repairs to substantially damaged structures
and other developments shall be permitted unless certification, with supporting technical data, by a
Connecticut registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating, through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that encroachments shall
not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge.
10. Equal Conveyance. Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, as designated
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new
construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are
prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a registered professional engineer
demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in
flood levels (base flood elevation). Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain,
including work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an
increase in flood stage or flood velocity.
11. Compensatory Storage. The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally
influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial
improvements involving an increase in footprint to a structure, shall be compensated for by deepening
and! or widening of the floodplain. Storage shall be provided on-site, unless easements have been gained
from adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and within a volume
not previously used for flood storage; it shall also be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to
the theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation,
which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted
hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body, and shall require certification by a
Connecticut-registered professional engineer. Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved
by the municipality.
Section 4200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
OTHER DISTRICTS
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
46
(this page intentionally left blank)
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 5100
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
HOME-BASED BUSINESSES
47
5000 USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
5100 HOME-BASED BUSINESSES
Any minor home-based business and any home-based professional office shall comply with the following
standards:
1. The use shall be located in the same building in which the resident occupant resides.
2. Parking area or areas shall be of sufficient size for the home-based business(es) and shall:
a. Be suitably screened with evergreen planting, walls or fences, or combinations thereof, and
b. Have entrance and exit drives designed and located so as to minimize traffic hazards.
3. Any commercial vehicles used in connection with the home-based business shall comply with Section
3310.
4. The use shall have no adverse effect upon the neighborhood in which the use is to be conducted.
5. There shall be no mechanical or structural fabrication or assembly of any products or items except that
which is incidental to the performing of a permitted service.
6. There shall be no outside storage or other evidence of the use unless screened to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Enforcement Official from the street and adjacent property.
7. The use shall not create any noise, odor or unsightly condition noticeable beyond the boundaries of the
premises on which the use is conducted.
8. There shall be no display or advertising except a small nameplate not exceeding 2 square feet in area may
be displayed.
9. No products shall be sold on the premises unless specifically approved by the Commission and any such
products shall be made or grown on the premises except for the sale of items which are incidental to the
providing of a permitted service.
Agricultural uses and activities are not regulated as home-based businesses and are
addressed separately throughout the Regulations.
Section 5200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
ACCESSORY APARTMENTS
48
5200 ACCESSORY APARTMENTS
5210 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this section is to provide housing opportunities for people who may need it by allowing the
establishment of housing units within or attached to existing housing units.
5220 STANDARDS
One (1) accessory dwelling unit within or attached to the main dwelling unit on a parcel provided that it conforms
to all of the following requirements:
1. The owner of the property shall occupy either the principal dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit
and an annual affidavit shall be filed by January 31 of each year attesting to such occupancy.
2. The area devoted to the accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed:
a. Forty percent (40%) of the area of the principal dwelling (exclusive of garage, attic, and basement) in
the Residence A District.
b. Thirty percent (30%) of the area of the principal dwelling (exclusive of garage, attic, and basement) in
the Residence B District.
c. 1,500 square feet in any zoning district.
3. The accessory dwelling unit shall not contain more than two bedrooms.
4. Utility services for the accessory dwelling unit shall not be configured separately from those for the
principal dwelling unit.
5. The accessory dwelling unit shall be accessible from the principal dwelling by an operable door along a
common wall so that the apartment can be integrated back into the principal dwelling in the future.
6. The accessory dwelling unit shall not be located in an attic or story below the first floor (a cellar or a
basement) unless substantial portions of the walls of the accessory apartment are above grade and it is
determined that that the accessory apartment, as configured, has sufficient light, ventilation and a direct
entrance to the outside planned or in place, so as to permit use as a separate living unit.
7. The lot shall conform to the minimum lot area requirement for the district.
8. The principal dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the building code and health
and safety regulations.
9. Upon establishment of the accessory dwelling unit, the building shall:
a. Maintain the exterior appearance and style (roof line, roof pitch, building materials, window style
and spacing, etc.) of a single-family residence and no exterior evidence of the accessory apartment
use (e.g. ·outside stairs, doors, fire escapes, etc.) shall be visible from the street;
b. Have any secondary entrance incorporated into the principal residence to reflect the architectural
style of a single-family unit; and
c. Share access from the public right-of-way and parking facilities shall serve both the principal and
accessory units.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 5300
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
LODGING FACILITIES
49
5300 LODGING FACILITIES
5310 ROOMERS AND BOARDERS
The keeping of roomers or boarders (people, other than family members, who are furnished with sleeping
arrangements for remuneration) shall only be permitted subject to the following conditions:
1. The leasing of rooms and taking of boarders shall only be conducted by the owner who shall reside on the
property.
2. Roomers and boarders must be accommodated within the principal building and shall not be provided
with any separate kitchen facilities.
3. No more than 3 roomers or boarders may be accommodated on any lot and off-street parking of one
space for each such roomer or boarder must be provided for motor vehicles belonging to such roomers
or boarders.
4. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit tourist cabins, trailer camps, apartments, hotels,
motels, inns, taverns or roadhouses or other places of public accommodation.
5320 BED & BREAKFAST
Operation of a bed and breakfast or other home-based lodging facility shall only be permitted subject to the
following:
1. The bed and breakfast facility shall only be conducted by the owner who shall reside on the property.
2. The property shall contain at least 3 acres of land.
3. All lodging rooms shall be accessed from inside the principal structure.
4. In addition to the requirements as set forth in Section 6200, parking shall be provided so that there shall
be no fewer than one (1) off-street parking space for each bedroom available for use.
5. Food service, which is not limited to breakfast, shall be limited by the maximum occupancy of the bed and
breakfast.
6. Approval of the Special Permit shall consider the adequacy of the water supply and sewage disposal
systems and compliance with the Health Code, the Fire Code and Building Code.
Section 5300 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
LODGING FACILITIES
50
5330 COUNTRY INN / SPA / WELLNESS FACILITY
A country inn, spa and/or wellness facility which may include lodging and related facilities compatible in size, scale
and appearance with the rural residential character of Easton may be permitted in a residential zone upon the
granting of a Special Permit by the Commission subject to the following requirements:
1. When approved by the Commission as part of the Special Permit, the country inn, spa and/or wellness
facility use may include:
a. A restaurant,
b. Conference facilities,
c. Recreational facilities, and
d. Similar uses contributing to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the guests of the country inn,
spa and/or wellness facility.
2. When approved by the Commission as part of the Special Permit, such related uses may also be available
on a limited basis to the general public provided that:
a. The application clearly defines and limits the size and scale of general public use, and
b. The Commission determines that the additional facilities and activity associated with the public use
portion of the country inn, spa and/or wellness facility use meets all the other requirements of these
Regulations.
3. Access - In terms of access, the Commission:
a. Shall determine that the projected traffic from the proposed use(s) can be safely accommodated by
the roadway system, and
b. May require the applicant to submit a traffic and access analysis, prepared by a licensed traffic
engineer addressing the safety and adequacy of the roadway system for patrons and deliveries,
including road grade, pavement width, sight lines, bridges and any other conditions affecting safe
vehicular access to the site.
4. Building Location:
a. No building or other major structure other than an accessory building for storage purposes may be
located within 100 feet of any property line.
b. These minimum requirements may be increased by the Commission where it determines a greater
setback is needed in consideration of the proximity of surrounding residences and the adequacy of
the landscape or visual screen between the proposed use and surrounding uses.
5. Compatibility Standards:
a. The appearance of buildings and structures on the lot shall be compatible with the residential
character of the neighborhood and of Easton.
b. Where a building, building addition or changes to the site are proposed and such any such change is
visible from the road or a neighboring property, the Commission may require the applicant to submit
an architectural and/or landscape rendering showing how the proposed development meets this
standard.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 5300
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
LODGING FACILITIES
51
6. Off-Street Parking.
a. Parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 6200 of these Regulations.
b. When a proposed country inn, spa and/or wellness facility includes a restaurant or other activities
open to the public or in other cases where it is deemed necessary, the Commission may require the
applicant provide a parking analysis prepared by a traffic engineer.
c. All parking shall be screened from view from the surrounding residences.
d. Parking shall be located to the rear or side of the country inn, spa and/or wellness facility, wherever
possible.
e. Unless modified by the Commission, no parking space for the country inn, spa and/or wellness facility
shall be located within 50 feet of side or rear property lines.
f. No parking shall be permitted within the minimum setback area from the street.
7. Noise.
a. The application shall identify any proposed outdoor functions or other activity associated with the
country inn, spa and/or wellness facility use(s).
b. Any such activity not so identified in the application and approved by the Commission shall be
prohibited.
c. The Commission reserves the right to attach conditions to the Special Permit where it determines
that, in consideration of the particular location and activity, such conditions are necessary to avoid
excessive noise levels and disturbance to the residential neighborhood.
8. Lighting – Any exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 6300 of these Regulations.
9. Signs - Any sign shall be in accordance with Section 6100 of these Regulations.
10. Utility Services: Adequate water supply and sewage disposal systems shall be provided.
Section 5400 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
FLAG LOTS / INTERIOR LOTS
52
5400 FLAG LOTS / INTERIOR LOTS
1. A flag lot or an interior lot which conforms in all respects to these regulations except for its lack of street
frontage, shall be deemed a conforming lot with respect to these regulations and may be issued permits
in the same manner as a lot which meets the frontage requirements of these regulations.
2. A new flag lot or interior lot may be allowed by the Commission by Special Permit provided that:
a. The parent parcel or tract of land is capable in all respects of division or subdivision into one
additional lot except that it lacks suitable area or frontage or terrain to accommodate a conforming
accessway for such additional lot as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
b. The driveway and/or accessway to the flag lot or interior lot shall meet the requirements of Section
5500 and be approved by the Commission for safe access to the lot and for protection of the
environment of the site.
3. All flag lots and interior lots shall be governed by the following conditions:
a. A flag lot or interior lot shall comply with all requirements of the Zoning Regulations (including, but
not limited to, lot shape and minimum front, rear, and side yard requirements) for the District in
which such lot is located except that such lot shall not have to comply with the lot frontage
requirement.
b. Each interior lot or flag lot shall be served by an accessway providing access to a public street and:
i. Such accessway shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet nor greater than sixty five (65) feet
wide at all points.
ii. The accessway shall be a graveled or paved driveway which satisfies the requirements of Section
5500.
c. The Commission may consider an easement to be the accessway.
4. With regard to flag lots:
a. Each flag lot shall include an accessway in the same ownership as the lot, suitable for a driveway and
utilities, which extends to and provides the lot with frontage on a public street or highway, as
required by this Section.
b. No flag lot accessway shall be located within 300 feet of another flag lot accessway, except that the
Commission may permit not more than two (2) flag lot accessways, in one location, to adjoin for the
purpose of a shared or common driveway as provided in Section 5500.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 5500
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
DRIVEWAYS
53
5500 DRIVEWAYS
5510 PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to regulate the establishment of driveways on all lots, including interior
or flag lots, in the interest of safety, aesthetics, and the proper disposal of storm water. These requirements shall
be satisfied prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
5520 STANDARDS FOR ALL DRIVEWAYS
1. Location
a. When a lot has frontage on two (2) streets, the driveway shall be located on the street having lower
traffic volume unless the applicant can demonstrate a compelling safety, environmental, or
topographical reason why that is not feasible or desirable.
b. Driveways shall be located to preserve existing trees having a diameter of 24 inches or greater and
located within twenty (20) feet of the edge of the road right-of-way, and construction activities shall
be conducted in a manner that protects such trees from damage due to filling, excavating, or other
site work.
c. Sight lines acceptable to the Police Chief or his/her designee shall be provided and maintained.
d. No driveway, no common driveway, and no driveway off a common driveway shall create an unsafe
condition as determined by the Police Chief or his/her designee.
2. Width And Grade
a. Driveways shall be at least ten (10) feet wide except that driveways more than 200 feet in length
shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide.
b. In all cases, the turning radius at the centerline of any curve shall be no less than thirty-seven (37)
feet.
c. The owner shall maintain said driveway width and turning radius areas free of obstructions.
d. In terms of driveway grade:
i. The maximum driveway gradient within 20 feet of the edge of the travelway of the intersecting
street shall not exceed five (5) percent.
ii. On any other driveway segment, the gradient shall not exceed twelve (12) percent; provided,
however, that the Commission may, after considering site grading and safety factors, allow a
gradient of up to fifteen (15) percent for one segment up to fifty (50) feet long.
iii. No curve shall be allowed in any segment where the gradient exceeds twelve (12) percent.
3. Construction
a. That segment of a driveway which extends from the paved surface of a street to the front property
line of any lot or parcel shall be constructed as required under the applicable Town ordinance.
b. Entrance gate posts, pillars or arches must be located and constructed so as not to impede the
entrance of any of the Town’s fire apparatus (a minimum 15 foot setback and 14 foot opening).
c. Each driveway serving a dwelling shall be designed and constructed to handle large vehicles,
including emergency apparatus.
d. At all points, including bridges and curves, the driveway must be capable of supporting an H-20 wheel
loading.
e. In the construction of all driveways, regardless of length, due consideration shall be given to the need
for safety barriers for safe travel along embankments and steep slopes. '
Section 5500 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
DRIVEWAYS
54
4. Storm Water Drainage
a. Driveways shall be constructed in a manner that will not discharge storm water onto a Town street.
b. Discharge of storm water to a Town storm drainage system is allowed only with prior approval of the
Commission.
5530 STANDARDS FOR COMMON DRIVEWAYS SERVING 2-4 LOTS
A common driveway designed to serve up to four (4) single-family residential lots may be authorized by the
Commission in accordance with the following standards:
1. A common driveway designed to serve up to two (2) single-family residential lots shall be located within a
mutually-shared perpetual easement coincident with any lot accessways, or within an accessway held in
perpetual undivided common ownership by the aforesaid two lots.
2. A common driveway designed to provide access-from a street to three (3) or more lots shall be located
only within an accessway held in perpetual undivided common ownership appurtenant to the titles of
each of the benefiting lots.
3. The common driveway plan shall be approved by the Commission.
4. The design plan for the common driveway shall show essential details of property lines, easement lines,
proposed travelway, existing and adjusted land contours, proposed storm drainage, individual driveway
access to the common driveway, general locations of utilities and other features to be constructed,
including curbs, walls and guide rails where required, proposed planting including appropriate trees and
buffer planting, sight-lines at the driveway intersection with the public road, and shall bear the seal of a
Connecticut-registered professional engineer.
5. The common driveway length shall be as determined appropriate in each case by the Commission.
6. Every shared easement or common ownership accessway shall be not less than fifty (50) nor more than
sixty-five (65) feet in width, exclusive of any required turnaround at its terminus.
7. Where the principal means of access to a lot is by an adjoining common ownership accessway, over a
continuous accessway boundary of at least twenty-five (25) feet, the lot's frontage requirements shall be
deemed to be met in the same manner as for a "flag lot'.
8. Every access easement and every common ownership accessway shall be capable in its layout and
character of terrain of providing for safe access to each benefiting lot without adverse environmental
impact, and its layout and design plan shall require the specific approval of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 5500
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
DRIVEWAYS
55
9. The common driveway travelway shall be constructed in accordance with the standard road specifications
of the Town of Easton (for sub-base, base, wearing surface, drainage and other construction details),
except as provided below:
a. Minimum travelway width shall be sixteen (16) feet plus two (2) feet of graded and grassed shoulder
at each side. The Commission may reduce or waive the requirement for graded shoulders for short
distances along the travelway to the extent necessary to minimize impact on wetlands, steep slopes,
desirable natural features, or to an adjacent residential lot.
b. Maximum travelway grade for the first twenty-five (25) feet from the edge of the travelway shall be
five percent (5%), thereafter transitioning to a maximum gradient of twelve percent (12%).
c. A "hammerhead" or "T" configuration of turnaround, suitable in design to accommodate safe turning
movements for large service vehicles and fire apparatus; at maximum 4% gradient, shall be provided
at the terminus of any common driveway serving three (3) or more lots.
d. Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, all utility lines for power and communication shall be
placed-underground at the side of the travelway.
e. Curbing shall not ordinarily be required, except where determined necessary by the Commission on
advice of the Town Engineer.
f. Banksides adjacent to the travelway shall be landscaped to preserve scenic features and provide for
shade trees as determined appropriate by the Commission.
g. Each individual driveway entrance shall be clearly posted at its intersection with the common
driveway with an address-number sign designed for night-time visibility to assist in emergency
identification and access.
10. All other geometric, design and drainage standards shall be as prescribed by Section 5500.
5540 STANDARDS FOR COMMON DRIVEWAYS SERVING 5-6 LOTS
A common driveway designed to serve up to six (6) single-family residential lots may be authorized by the
Commission in accordance with the following standards:
1. The common driveway plan shall comply with the standards in Section 5500 except that the minimum
width of the common driveway travelway serving five or six lots shall be sixteen (16) feet plus two (2) feet
of constructed, graded and grassed travelway base on each side.
2. If the common driveway is proposed to serve five (5) lots, at least one (1) lot shall have the road frontage
on a public street specified by Section 3400.
3. If the common driveway is proposed to serve six (6) lots, at least two (2) lots shall have the road frontage
on a public street specified by Section 3400.
4. No single-lot driveway entrance from either a common driveway or a public street, shall be located within
150 feet of the intersection of a common driveway and a public street.
5. The Commission may, in its determination, limit any lot to access only from the common driveway on
which it abuts.
Section 5500 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
DRIVEWAYS
56
5550 COMMON DRIVEWAY AGREEMENTS
1. The plan approved by the Commission shall reference all pertinent easement and maintenance covenant
documents, and shall be filed, along with such documents, following Commission approval, in the Town
Land Records.
2. The common driveway plan shall include a perpetual easement and enforceable maintenance covenant
which incorporates the full extent of the common driveway and shall require approval by the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
3. The easement shall grant full rights of access for all legal purposes, including utility installations, to each
of the sharing lots.
4. The maintenance covenant shall obligate each benefiting lot owner to pay a specified pro rata share of all
work required to maintain the common driveway at all times in a safe and properly functional condition,
and shall further obligate the owners to contract for specified services which at a minimum will guarantee
prompt clearance of snow and ice, trimming of overhanging tree branches, removal of debris and objects
tending to impede safe travel, and essential periodic repairs (such as repaving, maintenance of drainage
systems, guard rail replacement, mowing, regrading of banksides, and other necessary work).
5. The maintenance covenant shall provide appropriate legal remedies which may be applied by any lot
owner(s) paying for work required under the covenant against any non-paying or delinquent lot owner(s),
and shall provide that the Town may take enforcement action against any lot owner jointly and severally
in the event that driveway conditions are found by the Commission or its agent to constitute a hazard to
Town or other emergency services such as fire, police or medical response. The following text shall be
incorporated within each common driveway maintenance covenant:
"The undersigned parties to this covenant, owners of lots (insert lot identification here) as shown
on (insert title and date of map), duly filed in the Easton Town Land Records as Map (insert Town
Clerk map reference here), their heirs, successors and assigns, hereby jointly and severally
assume full maintenance responsibility and liability for the condition of all improvements shown
on (insert title of common driveway plan), as more particularly described in the Long-term
Maintenance Program attached hereto as Exhibit A, and hereby agree to indemnify and to hold
harmless the Town of Easton from any and all claims whatsoever which may arise from the
condition of said improvements on the said common driveway irrespective of their cause."
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 5600
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
AGRICULTURE-RELATED ACTIVITIES
57
5600 AGRICULTURE-RELATED ACTIVITIES
5610 MINOR NON-AGRICULTURAL USES
1. Any working farm or any agricultural, horticultural or agri-business operation may complement their
agricultural activities by any or all of the following subject to the parameters provided in this Section:
a. Pick-your-own operations or similar on-farm processing operations.
b. Events of limited duration that are open to the public, including (but not limited to) hayrides, corn
mazes, festivals, and other similar activities provided such activities comply with all applicable state
and municipal codes.
c. Outdoor recreation activities such as bird watching, snowshoeing, and/or other passive recreational
activities.
2. The following activities shall only be conducted in accordance with the following hierarchy:
a. Events conducted on thirty (30) or fewer days per calendar year No Zoning Permit
Required
b. Events conducted on more than thirty (30) days per calendar year Zoning Permit
(Staff)
3. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to provide adequate off-street parking for the event, provide
safe and adequate access and egress, and to manage traffic flow as may be necessary.
4. Notwithstanding any other requirements of these Regulations with regard to Zoning Permits or plan
requirements, any application for an agricultural-related activity under Section 5610 shall, at a minimum,
include a letter describing the proposed activities and an aerial photograph or hand drawn map depicting
the location of the proposed activities (there shall be no requirement for a plot plan or site plan drawn to
scale by a licensed land surveyor, civil engineer. or architect provided the aerial photograph or hand
drawn map provides adequate information for a full evaluation of the request).
5. The Zoning Enforcement Officer or staff may forward any Zoning Permit application to the Commission
for action and the Commission may require the submission of additional information or may deny the
permit request if the proposed activity will not be appropriate for the proposed location.
Section 5600 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
AGRICULTURE-RELATED ACTIVITIES
58
5620 MAJOR NON-AGRICULTURAL USES
1. Major non-agricultural uses including (but not limited to) retreats, weddings, workshops, education,
training, and classes in accordance with the following hierarchy:
Events
Per Year
Provided there is
no amplified sound outdoors
If there will be
amplified sound outdoors
1 No Zoning Permit Required Special Permit
(Commission)
2 No Zoning Permit Required Special Permit
(Commission)
3 Zoning Permit
(Staff)
Special Permit
(Commission)
4 Zoning Permit
(Staff)
Special Permit
(Commission)
5+ Special Permit
(Commission)
Special Permit
(Commission)
2. Notwithstanding any other requirements of these Regulations with regard to Zoning Permits or plan
requirements, any application for a major agricultural-related activity under Section 5620 shall, at a
minimum, include a letter describing the proposed activities and an aerial photograph or hand drawn
map depicting the location of the proposed activities (there shall be no requirement for a plot plan or site
plan drawn to scale by a licensed land surveyor, civil engineer. or architect provided the aerial
photograph or hand drawn map provides adequate information for a full evaluation of the request).
3. The Zoning Enforcement Officer or staff may forward any Zoning Permit application to the Commission
for action and the Commission may require the submission of additional information or may deny the
permit request if the proposed activity will not be appropriate for the proposed location.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 5600
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
AGRICULTURE-RELATED ACTIVITIES
59
5630 FARM WINERY / BREWERY / DISTILLERY
A farm winery, brewery, distillery and/or similar operation accessory to an agricultural operation occupying a
minimum of 25 acres of land is permitted by Special Permit provided that:
1. The winery / brewery / distillery / other operation(s) shall be accessory to the growing of grapes, grains,
fruits and/or other ingredients used in the winery / brewery / distillery / other operation.
2. The winery / brewery / distillery / other operation(s) shall comply with all State permit requirements for
such facilities (including, but not limited to, CGS Section 30-16).
3. The Commission may, by Special Permit, approve appropriately scaled special events or uses, such as
dinners, luncheons, weddings, corporate parties and/or teas as an accessory use to a winery / brewery /
distillery / other operation.
4. The Commission may, by Special Permit, authorize the establishment on the property of a tasting room
and/or retail sales of sealed containers of winery / brewery / distillery / other products produced on the
property. A winery may sell wine from other Connecticut wineries. Unless otherwise authorized by the
Commission by Special Permit, no brewery / distillery / other operation permitted hereunder shall sell any
beer, cider, or other alcoholic product on the property not manufactured in such brewery / distillery /
other operation on the property.
5. The Commission may, by Special Permit, allow the sale and service of food and beverages at a winery /
brewery / distillery / other operation as an accessory use, provided that such activities must be incidental
to and on the same property as the winery / brewery / distillery / other operation.
Section 5600 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
AGRICULTURE-RELATED ACTIVITIES
60
5640 AGRICULTURAL PROCESSING
The processing and sale of forest and tree products, such as firewood, leaf mulch, brush and bark chips, and
similar products of a character native to Connecticut, specifically excluding bulk sawmills and any process which
results in refined chemical or manufactured products; may be permitted by the Commission by Special Permit
provided:
1. The use shall:
a. Be located on a site of at least ten (10) acres unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
b. Be accessory to an active farm or forestry operation located in Easton.
c. Process only natural material (such as wood, brush and other vegetative material), of which a major
proportion has been harvested from land within the Town of Easton.
2. A complete description of all activities, materials used, and end products shall be supplied to the
Commission for its determination of appropriateness within a rural residential environment.
3. The use of dyes or coloring agents applied to mulch, chips and similar materials may be authorized by the
Commission provided that:
a. Any such proposal located within a public water supply watershed area shall be referred to the
appropriate water company for comment.
b. There shall be no manufacture of dyes or chemicals on the site;
c. The chemical constituents and concentration of such coloring agents are within the safe limits for
human health and environmental protection as established by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency and any applicable State Agencies;
d. The storage of said dyes and coloring agents shall only be in secure containers and the transfer and
use of said materials shall not be allowed to create contamination of earth, groundwater or streams,
or to jeopardize the public health, safety or welfare; and
e. Each of the above uses shall be fully compliant with relevant Federal and State codes.
4. Each proposed use shall be considered a unique case and be evaluated by the Commission in terms of
compatibility with its neighborhood, traffic generation, effects if any on a public water supply watershed
and on the natural environment of the site, and benefit to the community.
5. In granting permission for any use the Commission may specify hours of operation, screening, and specific
controls on lighting, noise, dust, odors, traffic and other effects of the activity as it deems necessary to
protect the neighborhood.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 5700
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
INSTITUTIONAL USES
61
5700 INSTITUTIONAL USES
1. Any use subject to the provisions of this Section shall be permitted only in locations fronting on or having
direct, safe and convenient access to a major road (such as a collector or arterial road as may be
identified in the Plan of Conservation and Development adopted by the Commission).
2. Unless modified by the Commission as specified in Section 5700.3 below, institutional uses shall be
subject to the following limitations:
a. Building coverage shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the site area.
b. The total of the land covered by all buildings, structures and other impervious improvements
including impervious parking areas and driveways shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the site
area (the Commission may allow greater coverage if it consists of pervious surfaces and appropriate
drainage improvements).
c. All principal structures shall have a minimum front yard setback of 75 feet from the property line and
110 feet from the street centerline.
d. All principal structures shall have a minimum side yard setback and rear yard setback of 80 feet from
any other property line.
3. The Commission may, by Special Permit, increase the building coverage up to twenty percent (20%),
increase the total coverage up to forty percent (40%), and/or decrease the setbacks to those required for
residences provided that:
a. The applicant demonstrates that the community and the neighborhood will not be adversely affected
due to the nature of the use, the intensity of the use, design and/or configuration of the use, and the
screening or buffering provided.
b. The applicant demonstrates that water quality will not be adversely affected due to specific
enhancements made as part of the proposed development.
c. An adequate buffer area with effective screening is established and maintained, without other uses,
throughout any side or rear setback area adjoining a residential lot or lots.
4. All parking areas and access drives shall be located, designed, and visually screened as necessary so as not
to adversely affect the character of the neighborhood in which the premises are located.
5. An adequate buffer area shall be required along property lines adjoining residential or undeveloped
properties.
Section 5800 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
DAY CARE
62
5800 DAY CARE
1. The site shall contain an area suitable and securely fenced for outdoor exercise area or play space which
is reserved for exclusive day care use during times that the day care is in session. Such outdoor exercise
area shall be in accordance with State licensing requirements; but in no case less than 2,000 square feet
in area and shall have provision for access by emergency services.
2. Effective screening shall be provided and maintained for the protection of adjacent properties, especially
with respect to outdoor play areas and any parking or passenger loading areas. No night-time activities
associated with school use shall be permitted.
3. An appropriate license from the State of Connecticut to operate a day care facility of any type shall
accompany the application and remain in effect as a condition of any permit under this section.
4. Minimum lot area for a group day care home or a day care center shall be 40,000 square feet in the
Residence A District and 3 acres in the Residence B District.
5. A family day care home shall:
a. Be operated by the resident/owner, and
b. Be an integral part of the structure housing the principal residence on the site.
6. A group day care home shall:
a. Have the director of the group day care home reside on the site as his/her principal domicile,
b. Have the director of the group day care home directly supervise all activities of the group day care
home, and
c. Be an integral part of the structure housing the principal residence on the site.
7. A day care center shall be:
a. Conducted as an adjunct to an established institutional use such as a church or private school
regulated under Section 3200,
b. Permitted only in locations fronting on or having direct, safe and convenient access to a major road
(such as a collector or arterial road as may be identified in the Plan of Conservation and Development
adopted by the Commission), and
c. Provided with ample on-site parking.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 5900
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT
63
5900 CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT
5910 PURPOSE AND INTENT
Conservation Development may, by Special Permit, be allowed in the Residential B District in Easton in order to:
? Encourage or require the use of flexible site design so that development will be constructed in harmony
with natural resources and the natural capability of the land;
? Protect water quality and water resources;
? Encourage preservation of open space, farmland and farmland soils, and community character;
? Encourage variation in residential developments that would not otherwise be possible; and
? Permit residential developments that are sensitive to parcel configuration, topography, natural resources,
historic resources, character resources, solar access, and the surrounding area.
5920 DETERMINATION OF MAXIMUM NUMBER OF LOTS
The maximum number of lots that may be approved in a Conservation Development shall be determined by one of
the following methods:
1. Soil Testing Approach - The developer may conduct on-site soil testing and prepare a sketch plan of a
conventional subdivision design for review by the Commission. After determining the feasibility of the
conceptual design, the Commission shall establish the maximum number of lots permitted in the
Conservation Development.
2. Mathematical Approach:
a. Determine “net land area” which shall be the parcel area minus:
? Watercourses, waterbodies, ponds, streams,
? 100-year floodplains,
? Wetlands, and
? Areas with pre-development grades in excess of twenty-five percent (25%).
b. Multiply the net land area by 0.25 lots per acre of net land area (this density factor is based on the
minimum lot size requirement, the open space set-aside requirement, the area typically required for
road rights-of-way, and historic pattern of development in Easton).
c. The result of this calculation, rounded to the nearest whole number, shall represent the maximum
number of lots permitted in the Conservation Development.
Section 5900 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT
64
5930 OVERALL DESIGN OF DEVELOPMENT
1. Any application for a Conservation Development shall include a site inventory / analysis map prepared by
a landscape architect, civil engineer, or surveyor licensed to practice in Connecticut except that the
requirement to prepare such analysis may be waived for:
a. A very low density development.
b. The intention of deeding a significant portion of the property as open space.
2. Such site inventory / analysis map shall identify the following areas within the proposed development:
a. Primary Conservation Areas – important environmental resources such as:
? Watercourses,
? Wetlands,
? Vernal pools,
? Steep slopes (25 percent or more), and
? 100-year floodplain.
b. Secondary Conservation Areas - environmental, scenic, and cultural resources such as:
? Prime farmland soils and farmland soils of statewide significance,
? Existing farm fields and farm structures,
? Areas within 100 feet of existing streets or roads (including State highways),
? Areas within 50 feet of a wetland or within 100 feet of a watercourse or vernal pool,
? 500-year floodplain,
? Ridgelines, scenic views and vistas from the public roadway(s),
? Significant geologic formations, including ledge and rock outcroppings and cliffs,
? Natural Diversity Database sites or wildlife corridors,
? Identified historic structures or historic resources,
? Notable individual trees (>18” diameter) and/or mature woodlands,
? Stone walls and /or farm hedgerows, and
? Possible open space and trail connections between conservation areas on the site and adjacent
protected and unprotected open space.
3. If the Commission is not satisfied with the quality of the analysis submitted with the application, it may
hire another landscape architect, civil engineer, or surveyor licensed to practice in Connecticut to prepare
such analysis and charge the applicant for the cost of such services.
4. To assist with its consideration of a Conservation Development, the Commission may refer the plan to any
department, agency or official it deems appropriate, to review and comment upon those technical
matters which are the concern or responsibility of such department, agency or official.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 5900
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT
65
5940 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1. The overall layout plan for the Conservation Development shall reflect the site inventory / analysis map.
a. Areas of the site which are considered Primary Conservation Areas or Secondary Conservation Areas
shall be considered for permanent protection which may include preservation as open space.
b. Areas of the site which are not considered Primary Conservation Areas or Secondary Conservation
Areas may be considered potential development areas and lots, streets, trails, and other
improvements may be sited in these areas.
2. It is anticipated and intended that a significant portion of the parcel being subdivided will be preserved as
open space in perpetuity in a location, configuration, form and manner acceptable to the Commission.
3. Any lot created as part of a Conservation Development shall comply with the following requirements:
ZONE Residence B
Minimum Parcel SIze No minimum requirement
Minimum Lot Size 40,000 SF provided the parcel complies with the
Public Health Code
Minimum Lot Frontage (on a public or private street) 100 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback 50 feet from front property line
75 feet from the centerline of any street
Minimum Side Yard Setback 20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 40 feet
Maximum Building Height Two stories plus attic.
35 feet above the highest elevation
where the foundation meets grade
Lot Shape All lots shall contain a square having a minimum
dimension of 80 feet wide per side and such
square shall not include any area designated as a
Primary Conservation Area or a Secondary
Conservation Area.
5950 ROAD AND DRAINAGE STANDARDS
1. Roads within the Conservation Development may be public or private.
2. Unless otherwise approved by the Commission as part of the approval, the road system serving a
Conservation Development shall be designed in conformance with the Road Standards contained in the
Easton Subdivision Regulations.
3. Drainage shall be constructed in accordance with these Regulations and other Town specifications and
requirements.
Section 5900 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
USE-RELATED PROVISIONS
CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT
66
(this page intentionally left blank)
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 6100
STANDARDS
SIGNS
67
6000 STANDARDS
6100 SIGNS
6110 PURPOSE AND INTENT
These sign regulations are intended to protect the established rural and residential character of the Town of
Easton, the property values of residents, and the safety and welfare of the general public.
6120 PERMITTED SIGNS
6121 Public And Directional Signage
1. Public Signs - Essential traffic control, emergency information, construction,
road name, and directional signs erected by State and Town traffic
authorities.
No Sign Permit
Required
2. Private Directional Signs - Necessary traffic and parking control signs in
common driveways, private roads, and parking facilities, not exceeding two
(2) square feet in area for each sign face.
No Sign Permit
Required
3. Municipal Signs - A municipal sign or sign post which conveys public
information essential to health, safety, public meetings, elections, referenda
or other matters of public concern, or any sign required by any agency of the
State or Federal government, provided the size, location, duration and
general design of such sign or signs is approved by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer.
No Sign Permit
Required
6122 Agricultural Signage
1. Farm Identification Sign - One sign per farm not exceeding sixteen (16)
square foot in area per sign face located within twenty (20) feet of the
entrance driveway to the farm.
No Sign Permit
Required
2. Farmstand /Farm Store Sign - One sign per farm not exceeding eight (8)
square foot in area per sign face located within twenty (20) feet of the
entrance to the farmstand or farm store.
No Sign Permit
Required
3. Agricultural Activity Signage - One or more signs per farm not exceeding
eight (8) square foot in area per sign face located along the street frontage of
the farm (not more than one sign per 300 feet of frontage) indicating an
agricultural activity being conducted in accordance with Section 5600 or the
farm products available that are in season.
No Sign Permit
Required
4. Off-Site Agricultural Activity Signage – Up to four (4) off-site signs per farm
not exceeding eight (8) square foot in area per sign face directing people to
an agricultural operation for up to 4 weeks in each season of the year.
No Sign Permit
Required
Section 6100 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
STANDARDS
SIGNS
68
6123 Identification Signage
1. House Numbers - Sign(s) in compliance with the Town Ordinance
“Assignment Of Numbers To Houses” which otherwise comply with these
Regulations.
No Sign Permit
Required
2. Identification - One sign per lot (such as identifying the name of the resident,
the name of the property, or the address) not exceeding one (1) square foot
in area per each sign face, located within ten (10) feet of the entrance
driveway to the lot.
No Sign Permit
Required
3. Warning Signs - Private property posting or warning signs (such as "no
trespassing" or "police protected"), non-illuminated, maximum of one sign
along each 100 feet of property boundary or fraction thereof, not exceeding
one (1) square foot in area per each sign.
No Sign Permit
Required
4. Special Use Identification Sign - An identification sign indicating a permitted
professional office, home-based business, home-based professional office, or
other legitimate sales activity, or any special use as provided by Section 3240
or Section 4100 of these Regulations, not more than one such sign per lot;
such sign in conformance with all side line and rear line setback requirements
of these Regulations, not over four (4) square feet in area for each sign face,
and not above eight (8) feet in height above ground level.
Sign Permit
(Staff)
5. Special Identification Sign - An identification sign indicating a permitted
professional office, home-based business, home-based professional office, or
other legitimate sales activity, or any special use as provided by Section 3240
or Section 4100 of these Regulations if:
a. More than one such sign per lot;
b. To be illuminated and then only when illuminated by low-intensity
lighting confined to the surface of the sign ·so that no direct sources of
illumination are visible ,
c. More than four (4) square feet in area for each sign face, or
d. More than eight (8) feet in height above ground level.
Special Permit
(Commission)
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 6100
STANDARDS
SIGNS
69
6124 Temporary Event Signage
1. On-Site Real Estate Signs - One temporary sign indicating sale or rental of the
property where the sign is located; sign not illuminated, maximum area of
four (4) square feet per sign face, maximum height of eight (8) feet. The sign
shall be removed within five (5) days of completion of the transaction.
No Sign Permit
Required
2. Special Event Sign - One temporary sign indicating construction on the
premises or a special event occurring on the same premises; sign not
illuminated, maximum area of eight square feet (8 SF) per sign face, height of
eight (8) feet. The sign shall be removed within 24 hours of completion of the
construction or scheduled event.
No Sign Permit
Required
3. Off-Site Sign - One temporary off-site sign indicating a real estate open house
or private event (wedding, shower, tag sale, etc.) for the sole purpose of
guiding people to the property, limited to the date of the event, area of sign
face to not more than eight square feet (8 SF). Such sign shall be removed
not later than one (1) hour after completion of the event.
No Sign Permit
Required
4. Special Event Signage Program – Multiple temporary signs relating to a
special event open to the public (such as a church fair, an auction, a
permitted sale or carnival for a civic organization); signs not illuminated, one
face only per sign, each sign not over eight square feet (8 SF) in face area;
provided however; that the number, duration and approximate locations of
such signs shall require advance approval by the Zoning Enforcement Officer
and such signs shall be removed within 48 hours after completion of the
referenced event.
Sign Permit
(Staff)
Section 6100 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
STANDARDS
SIGNS
70
6130 STANDARDS GOVERNING ALL SIGNS
2. Sign Location
a. The location of each sign shall be limited to the premises it identifies or serves and no off-premises
signs are allowed, except as specifically provided in Section 6120.
b. Signs mounted on buildings shall not extend above the principal eave line, nor extend outward more
than four (4) feet from the face wall of the building.
c. Free-standing signs shall be located inside the front lot line of the lot, except as specifically provided
in Section 6120.
d. No sign shall be placed in such position that it interferes with safe visibility from a street or a
driveway.
3. Number Of Signs / Faces
a. Except as specifically provided in Section 6120, there shall be not more than one sign on any single
lot or premises.
b. The number of faces, or separate message-bearing surfaces, is limited to two (2) per sign.
4. Sign Area / Height
a. The area of the sign shall comprise the entire surface area (all faces) on which the message is
inscribed.
b. The height of a sign shall be measured from finished grade at the base of its supporting structure to
the highest part of the sign.
5. Sign Illumination / Movement
a. External illumination of signs (gooseneck lamps, shielded light sources, etc.) is permitted.
b. Internal illumination of signs (sign boxes, channel letters, halo letters, backlit letters, etc.) is expressly
not permitted.
c. No sign shall result in glare or reflections visible off the premises.
d. Signs of moving, flashing, intensely glowing (such as neon) or highly reflective character are
prohibited.
e. Any LED lighting installed shall not produce illumination rated above three thousand degrees Kelvin
(3000K).
6. Portable Signs - Portable signs are limited to the following:
a. An identification logo or company nameplate permanently affixed to a vehicle in daily use away from
the premises where it is stored; or
b. As specifically provided in Section 6120.
7. First Amendment – Nothing in these regulations shall be deemed to authorize the prohibition or
unreasonable or unlawful regulation of any speech, whether located on a sign or otherwise, that is
otherwise protected speech under the Constitutions of the United States or the State of
Connecticut
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 6100
STANDARDS
SIGNS
71
6140 SIGN PERMIT APPLICATIONS
1. Application for a sign permit shall be on a form prescribed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and shall
be accompanied by an accurate diagram or pictorial facsimile of the proposed sign indicating its
dimensions, character, height, type of support or mount, location(s) and such other information as may
be required to determine full compliance with all requirements of these regulations.
2. Each application for a sign permit shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer not later than
fifteen (15) days before its proposed erection.
3. The Zoning Enforcement Officer:
a. Shall issue the sign permit on determination that all requirements of these Regulations have been
met.
b. Refer the sign permit application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for decision when required
by these Regulations or in any instance in which there is doubt as to permissibility of a proposed sign.
6150 ENFORCEMENT
1. The Zoning Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to inspect signage and determine whether a sign is
in compliance with these Regulations.
2. All illegal signs shall be removed promptly, and the Zoning Enforcement Officer may, after affixing a
notice of violation to an illegal sign, remove and impound such sign three or more days after such notice.
3. Violations of these regulations shall be subject to the same penalties as other infractions of the
Regulations, as provided by law.
6160 PRE-EXISTING NON-CONFORMING SIGNS
1. Any sign which has been in legal and continuous existence since May 1, 2003, as verified by graphic
evidence established to the satisfaction of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be continued.
2. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of such sign to provide such graphic or documentary evidence.
Section 6200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
STANDARDS
PARKING AND LOADING
72
6200 PARKING AND LOADING
6210 PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to establish parking standards in order to meet community needs and
expectations and to help promote public safety and welfare.
6220 MINIMUM PARKING REQUIREMENTS
6221 Basic Requirement
1. The following table establishes the minimum number of parking spaces to be provided unless modified by
the Commission as provided in Section 6223:
Use Minimum Number Of Spaces
a. Single-family dwelling 2.0 spaces
b. Accessory dwelling unit 2.0 spaces in addition to residence requirement
c. Roomers and/or boarders 1.0 space per roomer and/or boarder in addition
to residence requirement
d. Country inn / spa / wellness facility As determined by the Commission.
e. Home-based business involving customers or
clients
2.0 spaces in addition to other requirements
f. Home-based business involving employees 1.0 space per employee in addition to other
requirements
g. Retail store / specialty shop 4 spaces / 1,000 SF of gross floor area
h. Restaurants / eating establishments 8 spaces / 1,000 SF of gross floor area
i. Places of worship 1 space for each 4 seats provided.
j. Public buildings, community buildings, aznd
non-profit organizations (organizations not
for profit) and
1 space for every 4 persons at maximum expected
usage of facility or for each 200 sq. ft. of GFA
whichever is greater.
k. Public schools, private schools 1 space for each faculty member and 1 space for
every 50 students at rated capacity.
l. Day care center 1 space for each employee and 1 space for every
10 enrollees.
m. Other uses not listed above As determined by the Commission.
2. As part of a Special Permit application, the Commission may determine that additional parking spaces are
necessary to meet the Special Permit criteria contained in Section 8440 of these Regulations.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 6200
STANDARDS
PARKING AND LOADING
73
6222 Potential Reduction Of Parking Requirements
1. Permanent Parking Reduction - The Commission may, by Special Permit, reduce the cumulative number
of required parking spaces on one or more contiguous properties provided the Commission finds one or
more of the following based on information provided by the applicant:
a. Peak parking demands among uses occur at different hours of the day and this offset results in a
lower net peak parking demand;
b. Synergistic relationships among uses allow patrons to park once while accessing multiple locations or
allow for multiple purpose trips to occur within the development(s); or
c. The uses are likely to generate transit, bicycle or pedestrian trips and accommodations have been
made to support these alternative forms of transportation.
d. Any reduction for two or more properties shall:
i. Provide a functional and interconnected parking arrangement within and between the
properties, and
ii. Provide for an agreement among and between property owners providing for joint access and
parking, in perpetuity unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
2. Temporary Change of Use Exemption - In the event that no new buildings or structures are being
established and the land area, structures or permitted uses are simply being changed from one permitted
use to another permitted use allowed under these Regulations, no additional parking spaces shall be
required provided that:
a. The number of spaces that presently exist on the property is at least 90 percent of the cumulative
parking requirement for the new use(s) and the other existing use(s) on the property, and
b. No “grandfathering” or other exception shall be provided relative to any future use of such premises.
3. Temporary Parking Installation Reduction –
a. The Commission may, by Special Permit, delay the immediate installation of up to 25% of the
required parking spaces where sufficient evidence has been presented, in the judgment of the
Commission, to show that the reduced parking facilities will adequately serve the proposed use.
b. The Special Permit shall be applicable only to the particular use or occupancy of land, buildings, or
other structures specified in the application, and such Special Permit and certificate of zoning
compliance issued for the use shall become null and void in the event that such use or occupancy is
changed to another use or occupancy.
c. Before approval of a delay by the Commission, the applicant shall show upon the site development
plan the complete layout for the full parking requirements and the design of the complete
stormwater management system designed to handle the deferred parking pavement.
d. The owner shall file the plan approved by the Commission in the Office of the Town Clerk, stipulating
that:
? The complete stormwater management system shall be installed at the time of initial
development, and
? The owner, or the successor and assigns of the owner, will install as many of the delayed parking
spaces as the Commission deems necessary within six months of the Commission's request,
when the Commission has determined that such installation is needed.
Section 6200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
STANDARDS
PARKING AND LOADING
74
6230 STANDARDS
1. Parking spaces shall be at least 9 feet wide by at least 18 feet long.
2. Parking spaces shall be located off-street unless otherwise authorized and such spaces shall be served by
an access aisle of at least 16 feet wide for one-way traffic flow or at least 24 feet wide for two-way traffic
flow.
3. Handicapped spaces shall be provided in accordance with State requirements.
4. For a use permitted by Special Permit, the Commission may require that parking areas be:
a. Paved and continuously maintained in good condition.
b. Located at least 40 feet from a side or rear property line abutting a residential use unless otherwise
approved by the Commission.
5. Bicycle racks are strongly encouraged in the Easton Center District and as part of major Special Permit
uses and such bicycle racks may be required by the Commission.
6. Electric car charging stations are strongly encouraged in the Easton Center District and as part of major
Special Permit uses and such charging stations may be required by the Commission.
7. In the Easton Center District, parking spaces should generally be located to the side and rear of buildings
in order to enhance the desired pedestrian-friendly character and streetscape. Parking spaces located
between buildings and the street are discouraged unless they enhance the desired pedestrian-friendly
character and streetscape (i.e., shared on-street spaces, etc.).
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 6300
STANDARDS
EXTERIOR LIGHTING
75
6300 EXTERIOR LIGHTING
6310 PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to establish lighting standards in order avoid negative impacts of
lighting and to help promote public safety and welfare.
6320 APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this Section shall apply to any development activity required to obtain Special Permit approval.
Temporary lighting used by the Police Department, Fire Department or Emergency Services and traditional
seasonal lighting is exempt from the following standards.
6330 STANDARDS
1. Exterior lights and sign illumination shall be designed, installed and directed in such a manner as to:
a. Be top downward (to illuminate the ground) and not upward or sideways (to illuminate buildings,
vegetation or the sky),
b. Be cut-off type fixtures or shielded/recessed fixtures to minimize direct or objectionable glare or light
trespass,
c. Employ soft, transitional light levels which are consistent from area to area,
d. Minimize contrast between light sources, lit areas and dark surroundings, and
e. Be confined within the target area.
2. The Commission may, by Special Permit, allow lighting that does not comply with the requirements of
Section 6330.1 in the following cases provided the Commission determines that such proposed lighting is
consistent with the purpose of these Regulations:
a. Where an applicant can demonstrate, such as by means of a history of vandalism or other objective
means, that an extraordinary need for security exists,
b. Where an applicant can show that conditions hazardous to the public, such as steep embankments or
stairs, may exist in traveled ways or areas,
c. Where special lighting is indicated for historic buildings,
d. Where special consideration is given to maintain a uniformity with similar uses in the immediate
vicinity,
e. Where ornamental up-lighting of sculpture, buildings or landscape features shall enhance the
character of the area,
f. The lighting is for a temporary use approved under these Regulations, or
g. The Commission finds that the modification is necessary to provide for motorist and pedestrian
safety, to address topographic constraints, or to protect adjacent residential zoned areas.
3. Any LED lighting installed shall not produce illumination rated above three thousand degrees Kelvin
(3000K).
Section 6300 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
STANDARDS
EXTERIOR LIGHTING
76
Discouraged / Not Permitted Encouraged / Permitted
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 6400
STANDARDS
LANDSCAPING
77
6400 LANDSCAPING
6410 PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to provide standards for the retention of natural vegetation and/or the
installation of landscaping material as part of development activities in order to prevent soil erosion and
sedimentation, encourage infiltration of rainfall, and enhance the overall appearance of the community.
6420 APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this Section shall apply to any development activity required to obtain Special Permit approval
except that the Commission may exempt agricultural activities.
6430 STANDARDS
6431 Perimeter Landscaping
1. Non-residential development (other than an agricultural use) shall have a landscaped area of adequate
width, exclusive of driveways and sidewalks to and from the street, around the entire perimeter of the
lot.
6432 Buffer Requirements
Where a Special Permit use shall abut a residential use:
1. An adequate buffer shall be provided and existing natural screening within the buffer area shall remain
undisturbed to the maximum extent possible or additional planting shall be provided.
Section 6500 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
STANDARDS
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
78
6500 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
6510 PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to:
? Minimize degradation of water resources within the Town of Easton from pollution from non-point
source runoff,
? Mitigate impacts to the hydrologic system from development, including reduced groundwater recharge
and pollutants found in stormwater runoff,
? Reduce or prevent flooding, stream channel erosion, and/or other negative impacts created by the
volume of stormwater runoff resulting from development, and
? Promote the application of Low Impact Development (LID) strategies for the analysis and design of
stormwater treatment systems.
6520 APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this Section shall apply to any development activity required to obtain Special Permit approval.
6530 REQUIREMENT
1. Unless modified by the Commission by Special Permit as provided in Section 6540 below, any
development within the Town of Easton shall implement the following provisions of Chapter 7 of the
Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (CSQM), as amended:
a. Pollutant Reduction (CSQM Section 7.4).
b. Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Volume Reduction (CSQM Section 7.5).
c. Peak Flow Control (CSQM Section 7.6) for the 10-year, 25-year, and 100-year storm events.
2. In the design of a stormwater management system, design professionals may utilize low impact
development techniques as contained in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, as amended.
6540 MODIFICATIONS
Where the requirements of Section 6530 cannot be met due to physical conditions on the site, the Commission
may, by Special Permit, approve an alternative stormwater management approach provided that adequate
information has been submitted by the applicant to evaluate the request and:
1. The Town Engineer has provided a positive recommendation regarding the modification, or
2. The Commission has received a report from a professional engineer hired by the Commission providing a
positive recommendation regarding the modification.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 6600
STANDARDS
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
79
6600 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
6610 PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to prevent or minimize the erosion and/or sedimentation of soil as a
result of development or other activities.
6620 GENERAL REQUIREMENT
1. All development shall establish, implement, and maintain soil erosion and sediment controls in
accordance with the publication entitled “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control”,
as amended.
2. Erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be in place prior to the start of development.
3. Erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition and in
accordance with any approved Control Plan.
4. During development, the Zoning Enforcement Office may inspect the site at any time to review sediment
and erosion control measures, ensure compliance with any approved Control Plan, and ensure that
control measures and facilities have been properly performed, installed and maintained.
6630 CONTROL PLAN REQUIRED
1. A soil erosion and sediment control plan (“Control Plan”) prepared in accordance with the publication
entitled “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control”, as amended, shall be required in
conjunction with any application for development when the cumulative disturbed area is more than 1/2
acre except that a single-family dwelling that is not a part of a subdivision of land shall be exempt from
the requirement to submit a Control Plan.
2. The Control Plan shall identify proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and
sedimentation and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best
available principles, methods, technology and practices as found in the “Connecticut Guideline for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control”, as amended.
3. Alternative principles, methods and practices from those found in the Connecticut Guideline for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control, as amended, may be used with prior approval of the Commission.
4. Said plan shall contain, but not be limited to:
a. A narrative describing the development project and proposed erosion and sediment control
measures
b. A site plan map showing location of and other detailed information concerning erosion and sediment
control measures and facilities.
c. Such other information as is necessary to explain design criteria, construction details, detailed
installation/application procedures and the proposed maintenance program;
Section 6700 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
STANDARDS
FENCES AND WALLS
80
6700 FENCES AND WALLS
6710 PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to provide standards for fences and walls.
6720 HEIGHT MEASUREMENT
For the purposes of this Section of the Regulations:
1. The height of a free-standing fence or wall or combination fence / wall shall be measured vertically from
the finished grade at the base of the fence / wall to the highest point of the structure, excluding however
any post, column or finial with a girth not exceeding forty (40) inches (typically a 10" x· 10" square post or
a 12" round post).
2. The height of a retaining wall or combination fence / retaining wall (including when a fence is placed
within 12 inches of the retaining wall) shall be measured above the finished grade at the lower side of the
retaining wall.
6730 GENERAL REQUIREMENT
1. A fence, wall, or fence/wall combination up to six feet (6’) in height and/or a deer fence up to ten feet
(10’) in height may be installed with a required yard setback or elsewhere on the lot.
2. Any fence, wall, or fence/wall combination more than six feet (6’) in height or a deer fence more than ten
feet (10’) in height shall observe required yard setbacks.
3. Any fence, wall, or fence/wall combination more than six feet (6’) in height shall obtain a Zoning Permit.
4. No fence, wall, or fence, wall combination shall exceed the following height:
Freestanding Retaining
Fence 6 Feet N/A
Wall (masonry, stone, etc.) 6 Feet 6 Feet
Fence/Wall Combination 8 Feet 8 Feet
Deer Fence 10 Feet N/A
5. Any modification of an existing stone wall or erection of a new fence or wall within five (5) feet of the
boundary of a Town-designated Scenic Road is subject to Site Plan Approval by the Commission.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 7100
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
NON-CONFORMING CONDITIONS
81
7000 SPECIAL PROVISIONS
7100 NON-CONFORMING CONDITIONS
7110 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the purpose and intent of these Regulations to permit non-conforming lots, uses and structures to continue
until such non-conformity has been abandoned by the beneficiary of such non-conformity. It is further the
purpose and intent of these Regulations that non-conforming lots, uses and structures shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded or extended unless such enlargement, expansion or extension is specifically approved by the
Commission by Special Permit.
7120 NON CONFORMING LOTS
1. In any district, a principal building and customary accessory buildings and structures may be erected on a
lawful lot existing as of the effective date of adoption or amendment of these Regulations, or any
applicable amendments hereto, provided that the yard dimensions and requirements other than those
applying to lot area or lot width shall conform to the requirements of the district in which such lot is
located.
2. A non-conforming lot shall not be reduced in area, dimension or any other manner which would increase
its non-conformity.
3. If a non-conforming lot is converted to a conforming lot, it shall thereafter conform to the requirements
of the district in which it is located, and the non-conforming lot shall not thereafter be resumed.
7130 NON CONFORMING USES
1. Non-conforming uses are declared by these Regulations to be potentially incompatible with permitted
uses in the districts involved.
2. Where a lawful use exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these Regulations, or any
applicable amendments hereto, which use is no longer permitted under these Regulations as adopted or
amended, such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful.
3. After the effective date of adoption or amendment of these Regulations or any applicable amendments
hereto, a non-conforming use shall not be:
a. Enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater floor area or area of land than was occupied
at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these Regulations.
b. Moved in whole or in part to any portion of the land other than that occupied by such use at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of these Regulations.
c. Extended or enlarged by the attachment to a building or land of additional signs intended to be seen
from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited
generally in the district involved.
Section 7100 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
NON-CONFORMING CONDITIONS
82
4. A non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming use provided that:
a. The Commission shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the
district than the existing non-conforming use.
b. The Commission may attach such conditions and safeguards as may be required to protect the public
health, safety and general welfare and to ensure continued compliance with these Regulations.
5. Ordinary repairs may be made or remodeling done to any structure devoted in whole or in part to a
non-conforming use, provided that such work does not increase the non-conformity.
6. If a non-conforming use is superseded by a permitted use or a less intensive non-conforming use, the
previous non-conforming use shall not thereafter be resumed.
7140 NON CONFORMING STRUCTURES
1. Non-conforming structures are declared by these Regulations to be potentially incompatible in the
districts where located.
2. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these Regulations, or
any applicable amendments hereto, which could not be built under the provisions of these Regulations as
enacted or amended by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot,
or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful.
3. After the effective date of adoption or amendment of these Regulations or any applicable amendments
hereto, a non-conforming structure:
a. Shall not be enlarged or altered in a manner which increases the non-conformity.
b. May be altered to decrease the non-conformity.
4. If such non-conforming structure is damaged or destroyed by any means, it may be repaired or replaced
to an extent which does not increase the non-conformity.
5. A non-conforming structure may be moved within its existing lot so long as such move decreases its nonconformity.
6. Ordinary repairs may be made to a non-conforming structure, provided that such work does not increase
the non-conformity.
7. Nothing in these Regulations shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe
condition of any non-conforming structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged
with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 7200
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
83
7200 TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
7210 PURPOSE AND INTENT
This section of the Regulations is intended to:
1. Provide for the establishment and expansion of wireless telecommunications services while protecting
neighborhoods and minimizing adverse visual and operational effects of wireless telecommunications
facilities through careful design, siting, and screening,
2. Preserve the character and appearance of the Town of Easton while allowing adequate
telecommunications services to be developed,
3. Protect the scenic, historic, and environmental resources of the community,
4. Provide standards and requirements for the regulation, placement, design, and construction of wireless
telecommunications facilities, '
5. Establish a review process that ensures action within a reasonable period of time for requests to place,
construct, operate, or modify a wireless telecommunications facility.
6. Minimize the total number and height of towers throughout the community by requiring tower sharing
and clustering of wireless telecommunications facilities,
7. Provide screening and landscaping to minimize the visual impact of ground facilities,
8. Prevent potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure.
These regulations are intended to be consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 in that:
? They do not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of wireless I telecommunications
services,
? They are not intended to be used to unreasonably discriminate among wireless providers,
? They do not regulate wireless telecommunications services on the basis of the environmental effects of
radio frequency emissions to the extent that the regulated services and facilities comply with the Federal
Communications Commission’s (FCC) regulations concerning such emissions. '
Section 7200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
84
7220 DEFINITIONS
ANTENNA - Device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves. Examples include, but are not limited to,
whip, panel, or dish antennas.
CO-LOCATION - Locating wireless communication equipment of more than one provider on a single site.
MONOPOLE - A circular self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wire anchors. Usually consisting of a galvanized
metal or wood.
PROPAGATION ANALYSIS - An analytical technique used to determine and delineate the location of areas and
strength in which electronic communications can be conducted.
PROVIDER - An entity authorized by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to be a signal carrier for
cellular telephones, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced
specialized mobile radio (ESMR), and paging services or other modes of communication as described in
the Federal Communications Act of 1996.
TOWER – A structure, whether freestanding or attached to another structure that is used to support equipment
used to receive or transmit electromagnetic/radio waves. Examples include monopoles, self-supporting
lattice, and guyed towers.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS - Commercial wireless and telecommunications systems that include but are
not limited to cellular, personal communications services.(PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR),
enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and related systems.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES - All ground and roof-mounted equipment, ancillary equipment and
other structures associated with the transmission and reception of wireless telecommunications. .
7230 PERMITTED USES
1. Police, fire, ambulance, other municipal transmission facilities, satellite receivers, and amateur (HAM)
radio antenna are allowed subject to all other zoning regulations.
2. Other telecommunication towers, antennas, and associated equipment are allowed by Special Permit
only in the Residence B District.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 7200
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
85
7240 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. All wireless telecommunications sites shall comply with the rules and regulations set forth by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC).
2. The design of the wireless telecommunications facility shall comply with the standards promulgated by
the FCC for non-ionizing electromagnetic emissions.
3. The minimum lot area of the wireless telecommunications facility shall be that of the zone in ,which it is
located and the lot shall meet the buildable land requirements for a lot in that zone.
4. The wireless telecommunications facility shall comply with the setback requirements of the zone, in which
it is located or, in the case of a new tower, be set back from all property lines a distance equal to the
height of the tower plus twenty-five (25) feet whenever the collapse of a tower would create a safety
hazard to the people occupying an adjoining property.
5. Generators, air conditioners, compressors, or other machinery installed shall comply with State and local
noise regulations.
6. A chain link fence with a height of six (6) feet shall be required around the tower and accompanying
equipment.
7. Landscaping shall be required around the fence. At a minimum, the landscaping shall consist of a row of
evergreen trees planted not less than ten (10) feet on center. The evergreen trees shall be a minimum
height of six (6) feet at planting. Landscaping shall be maintained to ensure screening effectiveness.
8. Antenna or accessory building or equipment mounted to or on an existing structure or building shall to
the greatest degree possible blend with the color and design of the underlying structure.
9. Roof mounted antenna shall not exceed more than fifteen (15) feet above the highest part of the building
or structure and shall be set back from the roof edge a minimum of (10) feet.
10. Buildings shall be designed to be in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood properties.
11. Commercial advertising shall not be allowed on any antenna, tower, or accessory building or equipment.
12. No wireless telecommunications facility shall be designed, located, or operated as to interfere with
existing public safety communications.
13. Plans for the wireless telecommunications facility shall be prepared and signed by a professional engineer
licensed in the State of Connecticut.
14. All applications shall comply with any applicable requirements of the Flood Plain Management Ordinance
and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations.
15. No wireless telecommunications facility shall be designed, constructed, located or operated in a manner
that interferes, pollutes, threatens to pollute or in any way compromises the environmental integrity.
Section 7200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
86
7250 LOCATIONAL PREFERENCES
In order to accomplish the objectives of this Section, the following order of preference is established to guide the
location of wireless telecommunication facilities:
More Preferred
Locations
? On or completely concealed within an existing government or
institutional structure in Residence B District.
? On or completely concealed within an existing government or
institutional structure in Residence A District.
? Completely concealed within an existing structure located in
Residence B District.
? Completely concealed within an existing structure located in
Residence A District.
? Externally mounted on an existing structure in Residence B
District.
? Externally mounted on an existing structure in Residence A
District.
? A new tower on existing government or institutional land
located in Residence B District.
? A new tower on existing government or institutional land
located in Residence A District.
? A new tower on other land
Less Preferred
Locations
7260 CO-LOCATION REQUIREMENTS
1. Providers are required to maximize the use of existing or proposed wireless communication facilities
through the mutual sharing of sites.
2. All applicants for new facilities are required to provide:
a. Satisfactory demonstration by a qualified licensed engineer that the proposed wireless
communications facility cannot be reasonably accommodated on a site-containing an existing
wireless communications facility due to safety issues, structural reasons, potential interference, lack
of height, etc.
b. Satisfactory demonstration by a qualified licensed engineer that the proposed wireless
telecommunication facility or the structure to which it is attached is designed for or is able to
accommodate both applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least two additional users.
3. All applicants for new facilities are required to provide a notarized affidavit stating that space on the
proposed facility or structure shall be made available to future users when technically possible.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 7200
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
87
7270 NEW TOWER REQUIREMENTS
1. Any proposed tower shall be designed in all respects to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and
comparable antennas for at least two additional users if the tower is over 150 feet in height or for at least
one additional user if the tower is 150 feet in height or under.
2. All towers shall be a monopole design unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
3. The maximum height of a tower proposed under these regulations shall be 190 feet.
4. No lights shall be mounted on proposed towers unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA).
5. No tower shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of a residence.
7280 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
In addition to meeting the Special Permit requirements under Section 8400 of these regulations, applications
pursuant to this Section shall be accompanied by the following:
1. New Towers
a. A recent survey of the wireless telecommunications site at a scale no smaller than 1" = 40' with
topography drawn with a minimum of 5 foot contour intervals. The survey should show existing
utilities, property lines, existing buildings or structures, stone walls or fence lines, wooded areas and
the boundary of any wetlands floodplains, or watercourses within 200 feet of the site area.
b. A description of the slopes, wetlands, watercourses, and other environmental characteristics of the
site and any historically designated areas of the site and the impact that the tower will have on these
resources.
c. A design drawing including a cross section and elevation of the proposed tower. A description of the
tower's capacity as well as the proposed location of all mounting positions for collocated antennas
and the minimum separation distances between antennas. The design, shall also illustrate how the
tower will collapse upon itself without encroaching upon any adjoining property.
d. A propagation analysis that illustrates the predicted propagation for the location of the proposed
wireless telecommunications site.
e. A map depicting the extent of the service area of the proposed wireless telecommunications site
along with a map indicating the search radius for the proposed site.
f. The applicant must certify that existing towers located within the Town of Easton do not meet the
applicant's technical requirements.
g. The applicant must demonstrate that it has examined all wireless telecommunications sites or
existing structures over 50 feet in height within the Town of Easton to determine whether those
existing facilities can be used to provide adequate coverage and or capacity as part of the applicant's
system.
(continued)
Section 7200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
88
h. An elevation of all proposed equipment building or ancillary equipment.
i. Details including dimensions and appearance of all proposed antennas and associated equipment
j. Proposed utilities, including distance from source of power, sizes of service available and required,
locations of proposed utility lines, whether underground or above ground
k. Plans indicating locations and specifics of proposed screening, landscaping, fencing, and lighting.
l. Erosion and sedimentation plan for both during construction and as a permanent measure.
m. A graphic representation of the proposed installation in relation to the site and its vicinity in order to
ascertain the visual impacts associated with such proposal. Examples of such representation include:
photo simulations or architectural drawings or renderings.
2. New Antennas On Existing Towers And Buildings
a. Details including dimensions and appearance of all proposed antennas and associated equipment.
b. An elevation of all proposed equipment building or ancillary equipment.
c. Proposed utilities, including distance from source of power, sizes of service available and required,
locations of proposed utility lines, whether underground or above ground
d. A graphic representation of the proposed installation in relation to the site and its vicinity in order to
ascertain the visual impacts associated with such proposal. Examples of such representation include:
photo simulations or architectural drawings or renderings.
7290 REVIEW AND DECISION
In its review and decision on the application for a wireless telecommunications tower, antennas; and/or facilities,
the Commission shall find, in the case of an approval, at least one of the following:
1. That the proposed equipment cannot be structurally accommodated on an existing tower as documented
by a licensed professional engineer registered in the State of Connecticut.
2. That existing structures will not accommodate the technical requirements of the applicant.
3. That the proposed equipment would cause unacceptable interference with the operation of other
existing or planned equipment of an existing structure.
72100 ABANDONMENT
1. There shall be a presumption that a wireless telecommunications tower, antenna, or facility not in use for
twelve (12) consecutive months has been abandoned.
2. Unless proven by the facility owner that it was not such owner’s intent to abandon the tower, antenna or
facility, the facility owner shall remove the facilities at its expense within ninety (90) days from the date of
abandonment.
3. Upon removal, the site shall be restored to its previous appearance minus ordinary wear and tear.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 7300
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
EARTHWORK OPERATIONS
89
7300 EARTHWORK OPERATIONS
7310 PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Section of the Regulations is intended to regulate the filling and removal of earth materials from the ground in
order to ensure that such activities will not adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood; will not result in
unsafe, unsightly or unsanitary conditions; will result in land which in the future can be put to a use permitted by
these Regulations; and will protect the land from erosion and sedimentation.
7320 APPLICABILITY
No person shall fill or excavate or otherwise remove soil, loam, clay, sand, gravel, rock or any other natural
material (hereinafter collectively referred to as "materials") for sale or use on any premises within the Town other
than on the premises from which the materials are taken (except from land owned or leased by the Town) except
in accordance with this Section of the Regulations.
7330 PERMITTED ACTIVITIES
7331 Permitted By Right (No Zoning Permit Required)
1. Bona fide agriculture or farming projects involving excavation or fill.
2. The excavation and removal of materials from one part of an owner's land to another part of the same
tract or parcel of land of the owner when such excavation and removal is not for the purpose of selling
materials and is done as part of a minor landscaping project.
3. The construction, improvement or changing of contours or grades of proposed roads or lots in accordance
with a subdivision plan approved by the Commission.
7332 Permitted By Zoning Permit (Staff)
1. The construction of a building or structure on the premises and excavating or grading incidental thereto
provided a building permit has been issued for such construction or alteration.
2. The excavation and removal off-site of subsoil materials incident to the excavation of basements or
cellars, or the installation of footings, foundations, tennis courts, swimming pools, or in-ground sewage
disposal systems.
3. The construction of a wall, driveway, road, fence, waterbody, watercourse; swimming pool, tennis court,
recreational facilities, sewage system or drainage or water facilities, or public utility lines or services when
such construction has been approved by the Commission and any other relevant agencies.
Section 7300 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
EARTHWORK OPERATIONS
90
7333 Permitted By Site Plan Approval (Commission)
1. (reserved)
7334 Permitted By Special Permit (Commission with Public Hearing)
1. Any excavation and/or removal of materials not authorized above.
7340 STANDARDS FOR ALL EARTHWORK OPERATIONS
1. Operation - The owner or person in charge shall so conduct the operations that there shall be no sharp
declivities, pits or depressions and in such a manner that the area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of
debris, graded to drain, and graded to conform with the contour lines and grade on any plan approved by
the Commission.
2. Machinery – Unless specifically authorized by the Commission, no sorting, grading, crushing or other
machinery for the treatment of excavated material shall be maintained or erected on any premises.
3. Topsoil - The top layer of arable soil to a depth of at least six inches shall be suitably set aside for
retention on the premises, and shall be re-spread over the premises when the excavation and removal of
the materials has been completed.
4. Hours Of Operation - Unless otherwise specifically authorized by the Commission, excavation or removal
operations shall only be conducted during daylight hours on weekdays (except weekdays which are
holidays).
5. Access By Town - The Commission and Zoning Enforcement Officer, or their authorized agents, shall at all
times have reasonable access to the premises for the purpose of inspection and determination of
compliance with this Section.
7350 PROVISIONS WHEN APPLICATION REQUIRED
Any application to the Commission for earthwork operations under Section 7333 or Section 7334 of these
Regulations shall be in accordance with the following:
1. Considerations - In addition to any other criteria in Section 7300 of these Regulations, the application
shall be evaluated by the Commission in terms of whether the proposed activity will:
a. Create conditions inimical to the public health, safety or welfare.
b. Result in the creation of any sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion by water or wind, soil
fertility problems, or depressed land values.
c. Result in loss of lateral support with regard to slopes or grades of abutting streets and lands.
d. Create any damage to the environment or drainage or sewage problems or other conditions of
danger or nuisance.
e. Have an unreasonable impact on road traffic.
f. Such other factors as may bear upon and relate to the coordinated, adjusted and harmonious
physical development of the Town.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 7300
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
EARTHWORK OPERATIONS
91
2. Financial Guarantee - Any earthwork operations authorized under Section 7333 or Section 7334 of these
Regulations shall file with the Commission cash, a savings account, letter of credit, or other financial
guarantee, in form and substance acceptable to the Town in an amount to be determined by the Town
Engineer and approved by the Commission to assure the faithful performance of the work in accordance
with the provisions of this Section. The financial guaranteeshall also guarantee to the Town
reimbursement for the cost of any repairs to Town or State roads that may be necessitated because of
damage caused by transport of the excavated materials.
3. Time Limit - Any permit issued by the Commission under the provisions of this Section shall expire no
later than one year from the date of its issuance but may be extended by the Commission for good cause
shown for such additional period as the Commission may determine.
4. Liability Insurance - The applicant shall obtain and maintain public liability insurance with limits of not
less than $3,000,000 for personal injury and $1,000,000 for property damage and shall furnish a
certificate of insurance to the Commission. In the event of cancellation of this insurance, the permit shall
terminate.
5. Access By Town - The Commission may require the applicant to submit periodic reports, prepared by a
licensed land surveyor or civil engineer, showing the status and progress of the work.
6. Safety Measures - Any person engaged in excavating and removal of topsoil or subsoil materials pursuant
to a permit issued under this Section shall exercise such suitable dust control and safety precautions
including the employment of special policemen to direct traffic and the posting of adequate warning signs
as may be required by the Commission or otherwise warranted.
Section 7300 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
EARTHWORK OPERATIONS
92
7360 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
1. Cease And Desist – If it shall appear to the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer at any time
that earthwork operations are not in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations or is a threat to
the public health, safety, or welfare, the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer, as the case may
be, may issue a cease and desist order and the permittee shall cease all such work until the permittee
shall show cause to the Commission that the permittee shall be allowed to resume such work. In addition
to any notice to the operator in the field, the property owner shall be notified by registered mail, return
receipt requested. Work shall not thereafter be resumed until the Commission has rescinded the cease
and desist order or authorized the resumption of work with corrective actions taken, as appropriate.
2. Revocation Of Permit – If it shall appear to the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer at any
time after the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this Section and prior the completion of the
work thereunder that the work is not in accordance with the permit, the Commission or the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, as the case may be, shall notify the permittee of any such violation by registered
mail, return receipt requested, and the permittee shall cease all such work until the permittee shall show
cause to the Commission that the permittee shall be allowed to resume such work. Work shall not
thereafter be resumed until the Commission has rescinded the notice of violations or authorized the
resumption of work with corrective actions taken, as appropriate. If the permittee shall not diligently
respond the notice of violation in a timely manner, the Commission may revoke the permit and take such
other action as shall. be suitable against the permittee and/or the financial guarantee.
3. Penalties - Any person; firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Section shall be subject
to penalties and fines in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. Any such
penalties shall be in addition to and shall not preclude the right of enforcement by injunction or other
lawful means or the collection of damages for the violation of these Regulations.
4. Damage To Roads - Any person who conducts an earthwork activity or who conducts any activity
associated with an earthwork activity which results in any damage to any Town road shall be liable for the
cost of repairing the damage and shall reimburse the Town for such cost immediately upon demand by
the Town.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8100
PROCEDURES
ZONING PERMIT / CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
93
8000 PROCEDURES
8100 ZONING PERMIT / CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
8110 Applicability
1. Until the Zoning Enforcement Officer has issued a Zoning Permit or a Certificate Of Zoning Compliance
which certifies conformance of the building, structure or use with these Regulations or with a variance
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals:
a. No building, structure or part thereof shall be constructed, reconstructed, altered, extended,
enlarged, moved, gutted, or occupied;
b. No building or land shall be first occupied or used;
c. No use of an existing building or land shall be changed;
d. No Building Permit, including a permit for a building foundation, shall be issued; and
e. No use of an existing structure shall be undertaken or changed.
2. Pursuant to CGS Section 8-3(g), no Zoning Permit will be issued until a decision by the inland wetlands
agency, if applicable, has been reported to the Commission.
3. No Zoning Permit will be issued for any lots within a subdivision or resubdivision until a financial
guaranteehas been posted in accordance with the Easton Subdivision Regulations securing the
subdivision improvements, or in lieu thereof, the subdivision improvements have been completed to the
satisfaction of the Commission.
4. A Zoning Permit application shall not be needed for interior alterations, provided there is no change of
use, number of uses, or number of bedrooms.
5. No Building Permit shall be issued by the Building Official without the prior issuance of the Zoning Permit
or a Certificate Of Zoning Compliance.
Section 8100 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
ZONING PERMIT / CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
94
8120 Application Procedures And Requirements
1. Application Form - An application for a Zoning Permit shall be made on a form to be furnished by the
Commission.
2. Plan Requirements - An application for a Zoning Permit shall be accompanied by plans and/or other
information sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of these Regulations.
3. Location Verification –
a. After the foundation has been completed and prior to any additional construction thereon, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer may order the submission of a certified plot plan drawn by a land
surveyor currently licensed to practice in Connecticut showing the exact location of the foundation
on the site.
b. Such order shall be in writing and shall state the reasons such survey is warranted.
c. No building or structure shall thereafter be constructed above the foundation walls until the certified
survey has been approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Commission as complying with
the zoning permit and all applicable provisions of the Zoning Regulations.
d. Failure to submit a certified plot plan may result in a demolition order for that portion of the building
in violation of these Regulations.
e. Upon confirmation that the location of said foundation is in compliance with these Regulations and
any permit issued therefore, additional construction may proceed.
4. Final “As Built” Survey - Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer and/or the Commission may require an "as-built" survey to ensure compliance with
these regulations. Such "as-built" survey shall:
a. Be prepared at the same scale as the Site Plan or Sketch Plan by a surveyor registered and licensed to
conduct business in Connecticut;
b. Show the actual installation of all site improvements, the exact location of buildings, and other
required items at a level of detail at or exceeding that of the approved Site Plan or Sketch Plan;
c. Include a certification as to substantial compliance with the approved Site Plan or Sketch Plan; and,
d. List or show all deviations from the approved Site Plan.
5. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall submit all "as-built" drawings which substantially deviate from the
approved Site Plan to the Commission for its determination of acceptance or need for plan amendment.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8100
PROCEDURES
ZONING PERMIT / CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
95
8130 Issuance of Zoning Permit / Certificate Of Zoning Compliance
1. Issuance –
a. When the Zoning Enforcement Office and/or the Commission finds, from written application,
submitted plans and/or other information, that a proposed building, structure or use will conform
with the requirements of these Regulations or with a variance granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals, a Zoning Permit (for the proposed building structure, or use) shall be issued.
b. When the Zoning Enforcement Office and/or the Commission finds, from written application,
submitted plans and/or other information, that a building, structure or use conforms with the
requirements of these Regulations or with a variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance (for an existing building, structure. or use) shall be issued.
2. Pursuant to CGS Section 8-3(f):
a. No Building Permit shall be issued until a Zoning Permit has been issued.
b. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued.
3. No Zoning Permit shall be issued for a use requiring Special Permit approval unless such Special Permit
has been approved by the Commission.
4. Temporary Certificate - If the site improvements cannot be completed because of weather, or if an
alteration does not require the vacating of the premises, or if a portion of a building or development is
ready for occupancy before the completion of the entire building or development, or for other pertinent
reasons, a conditional Certificate of Zoning Compliance may be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer
for a period not to exceed 180 days, provided that a portion of the posted performance guarantee shall
be retained in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of completing the remaining site improvements or, if
necessary, a new performance guarantee shall be posted. Upon satisfactory completion of the remaining
site improvements and the written request of the applicant, the Zoning Enforcement Officer and/or the
Commission shall then release the performance guarantee.
5. Void If Information Not Correct - In the event that any Zoning Permit or Certificate Of Zoning Compliance
is issued based on incorrect information or the specific conditions of approval are not strictly adhered to,
such Zoning Permit or Certificate Of Zoning Compliance shall be null and void.
6. Notice of Issuance - In accordance with CGS Section 8-3(f), the recipient of a Zoning Permit may publish
notice of issuance of the Zoning Permit in order to establish the appeal period per CGS Section 8-7. Any
such notice to be published by the recipient shall contain:
a. A description of the building, use or structure and its location,
b. The identity of the applicant, and
c. A statement that an aggrieved person may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with
the provisions of CGS Section 8-7.
8140 Expiration
Any Zoning Permit issued under these Regulations shall expire two (2) years from the date of issuance unless a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued, a valid building permit is in effect or the Commission renews the
Zoning Permit for one additional period not to exceed twelve (12) months when it is determined that the use,
building and/or site development authorized by the Zoning Permit is in conformity with these Regulations.
Section 8200 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
PRE-APPLICATION REVIEWS
96
8200 PRE-APPLICATION REVIEWS
8210 Overall Approach
1. The Commission recommends that, prior to the submission of an official application, the applicant
present a pre-application plan for informal consideration by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and/or the
Land Use Director.
2. Under extra-ordinary circumstances, a potential applicant may request a pre-application discussion with
the Commission and the Commission may allow the submission of a pre-application plan for informal
consideration by the Commission.
3. The optional pre-application plan is recommended to facilitate consideration of factors and problems that
may be associated with a particular proposal before the applicant proceeds with preparation of official
maps, plans and documents required for formal consideration by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Land
Use Director, and/or Commission.
4. Neither the pre-application plan nor the informal consideration by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Land
Use Director, and/or Commission, however, shall be deemed to constitute any portion of the official and
formal procedure of applying for any approval as contemplated herein or under the provision of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
5. In accordance with CGS Section 7-159b, such pre-application review and any results or information
obtained from it may not be appealed under any provision of the general statutes, and shall not be
binding on the applicant or the Commission or other official having jurisdiction to review the proposed
project.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8300
PROCEDURES
SITE PLAN APPLICATION
97
8300 SITE PLAN APPLICATION
8310 Purpose
A Site Plan is intended to provide the Commission with information that will enable it to determine that the
proposed building, use or structure is consistent with the requirements of these Regulations.
8320 Applicability
A Site Plan application shall be submitted:
1. For any activity designated in the Regulations as requiring Site Plan approval.
2. For any activity designated in the Regulations as requiring Special Permit approval.
8330 Submission Requirements
1. A Site Plan application shall be submitted to the Commission or its agent and shall include a completed
application form and the appropriate fee.
2. A Site Plan application shall be accompanied by plans and other information sufficient to demonstrate
compliance with the requirements of these Regulations (ten printed sets and one electronic PDF set).
3. The Commission may, in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations, require the submission
of additional information as deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the application.
Section 8300 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
SITE PLAN APPLICATION
98
8340 Proceedings
1. The date of receipt for the Site Plan application shall be determined in accordance with Section 8820.
2. An incomplete Site Plan application may be denied in accordance with Section 8830.
3. If a Site Plan application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45,
inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Inland Wetlands Commission not
later than the day such Site Plan application is filed with the Commission.
4. Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the requirements of Section
8862.
5. Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of Section 8863.
6. Notification to the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP) may be required in
accordance with the requirements of Section 8864.
7. Whenever a Site Plan application is required in conjunction with another application requiring a public
hearing (such as a Special Permit application or a Zone Change application):
a. The time period for acting on the Site Plan application shall coincide with the time period for acting
on the related application, and
b. A decision on the Site Plan application shall be rendered within sixty-five days after the close of the
public hearing on such other application except that the applicant may consent to one or more
extensions of such period provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not
exceed sixty-five days.
8. Whenever approval of a Site Plan is the only approval required, a decision on the application shall be
rendered within sixty-five (65) days after the date of receipt of such Site Plan application except that the
applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such period provided the total period of any such
extension or extensions shall not exceed sixty-five (65) days.
9. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, if an application involves an activity regulated pursuant to
CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive and the time for a decision by the Commission would elapse prior
to the thirty-fifth (35th) day after a decision by the Inland Wetlands Commission, the time period for a
decision shall be extended to thirty-five (35) days after the decision of such agency.
10. The Commission may hold a public hearing on a Site Plan application except that any such hearing shall
not alter or change the timeframes in Section 8340.8 of these Regulations.
11. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3(g), a Site Plan shall be presumed approved unless a decision to deny
or modify it is rendered within the applicable time period specified above.
12. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such application.
13. To assist with its consideration of an application for Site Plan approval, the Commission may refer the
plan to any department, agency or official it deems appropriate, to review and comment upon those
technical matters which are the concern or responsibility of such department, agency or official.
14. If the Commission requires additional technical assistance in evaluating an application, the expense of
such additional technical assistance shall be paid by the applicant.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8300
PROCEDURES
SITE PLAN APPLICATION
99
8350 Considerations
1. On a Site Plan application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45,
inclusive, the Commission shall:
a. Wait to render its decision until the Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted a report with its final
decision, and
b. Give due consideration to any report of the Inland Wetlands Commission when making its decision.
2. On a Site Plan application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under Section 8862 or notice to
water companies under Section 8863 or notice to DEEP under Section 8864, the Commission shall give
due consideration to any report or testimony received.
3. In accordance with CGS Section 8-25a, no proposal for development using water supplied by a company
incorporated on or after October 1, 1984 shall be approved by the Commission unless such company has
been issued a certificate pursuant to CGS Section 16-262m.
4. On a Site Plan application involving a “village district” established in accordance with CGS Section 8-2j, the
Commission shall review the application with the village district considerations as enumerated in Section
8890 of these Regulations.
5. Before the Commission approves a Site Plan application, it shall determine that the application is in
conformance with these Regulations.
6. A Site Plan may be approved with modifications by the Commission or denied only if it fails to comply
with the standards set forth in these Regulations.
7. In approving a Site Plan application, the Commission may impose conditions deemed necessary to protect
public health, safety, welfare, convenience, and/or property values.
8. In cases where the development of the property is proposed to be undertaken in phases, the Commission
may grant Site Plan approval limited to each phase of development. Each phase shall be capable of
independent existence without the completion of succeeding phases.
9. As provided in CGS Section 8-3)g), the Commission may, as a condition of approval, require a financial
guarantee in accordance with Section 8870 to ensure:
a. The timely and adequate completion of any site improvements that will be conveyed to or controlled
by the municipality, and
b. The implementation of any erosion and sediment controls required during construction activities.
10. The amount of such financial guarantee shall be calculated so as not to exceed the anticipated actual
costs for the completion of such site improvements or the implementation of such erosion and sediment
controls plus a contingency amount not to exceed ten per cent of such costs.
Section 8300 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
SITE PLAN APPLICATION
100
11. As provided in CGS Section 8-3(g)(1), the Commission may, as a condition of approval of a site plan or
modified site plan, require a financial guarantee in the form of a bond, a bond with surety or similar
instrument to ensure:
a. The timely and adequate completion of any site improvements that will be conveyed to or controlled
by the municipality, and
b. The implementation of any erosion and sediment controls required during construction activities.
12. When a performance guarantee in accordance with CGS Section 8-3 is required by the Commission, the
applicant shall provide a cost estimate of improvements to be guaranteed, together with a description of
the basis for the estimate.
13. When a performance guarantee is provided, the performance guarantee shall be held by the Commission
and the Commission shall not release the performance guarantee until it has determined that all of the
improvements subject to the guarantee have been satisfactorily completed.
14. The Commission may require an "as built" A-2 survey of the lot showing the location of the buildings and
improvements to determine compliance with the approved Site Plan.
15. The Commission shall not approve any Site Plan for any property on which there exists a zoning violation,
unless such Site Plan application will remedy such violation.
8360 Action Documentation
1. Whenever it grants or denies a Site Plan application, the Commission shall state upon its record the
reason(s) for its decision.
2. The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision to the applicant within fifteen (15)
days after such decision is rendered.
3. The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of a Site Plan to be published in a newspaper
having a substantial circulation in Easton within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered and, in
any case where such notice is not published by the Commission, the person who submitted such plan may
provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.
4. On any application for which the period for approval has expired and on which no action has been taken,
the Commission shall send a letter of approval to the applicant within fifteen (15) days of the date on
which the period for approval expired and such letter of approval shall state the date on which the fiveyear
completion period, as set forth in Section 8380 below, expires.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8300
PROCEDURES
SITE PLAN APPLICATION
101
8370 Following Approval
1. Following approval of a Site Plan application and expiration of the appeal period, one (1) “mylar” of each
approved plan shall, unless not required by the Commission, be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement
Officer for signature by the Chairman:
a. Each such plan shall bear the seal and signature of the appropriate professional(s) which prepared
the drawing.
b. Each such plan shall contain a signature block where the Chairman of the Commission can indicate
the approval of the Commission and state the date on which the five-year period for completing all
work in connection with such Site Plan, as set forth in Section 8380 below, expires.
c. At least one (1) sheet shall bear a copy of the decision letter of the Commission and any other Town
regulatory agencies authorizing the activity.
2. Following signature by the Chairman, such plans shall be filed in the Town Clerk’s Office within ninety (90)
days after the expiration of the appeal period or conclusion of any appeal and failure to file such plans in
the required time frame will render the approval null and void.
3. Any plans to be filed in the Town Clerk’s Office shall be accompanied by an electronic file of the map in
ACAD format that can be opened with ACAD 2016 or earlier.
4. Such plans shall be so filed before any Zoning Permits are issued for the activities shown on the approved
plan.
5. All site improvements shall be carried out in strict compliance with the Site Plan approved by the
Commission. Minor amendments to the approved Site Plan may be approved only in writing by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer upon the written request of the applicant. All other amendments or
modifications to the Site Plan shall require the approval of the Commission.
6. All conditions and improvements shown on the approved Site Plan shall continue in force as long as the
use indicated on the approved Site Plan shall be in operation, regardless of any change in ownership of
the property.
8380 Expiration and Completion
1. All work in connection with a Site Plan shall be completed within the time periods as set forth in Section
8-3 of the General Statutes. All extensions and requests therefor shall also be governed by the provisions
of said Section 8-3.
2. The Commission may condition the approval of such extension on a determination of the adequacy of any
performance guarantee in accordance with Section 8870 or other surety.
Section 8400 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
102
8400 SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
8410 Applicability
1. A Special Permit application shall be submitted for any activity designated in the Regulations as requiring
Special Permit approval.
2. All Special Permit uses are declared to possess characteristics of such unique and distinct form that each
specific use shall be considered as an individual case.
8420 Submission Requirements
1. A Special Permit application submitted to the Commission or agent shall include a completed application
form and the appropriate fee.
2. Each application for a Special Permit shall be accompanied by detailed plans unless the Commission or its
designee finds that there are no physical changes proposed to the site or any building or structure and
the submission of detailed plans is not necessary for the Commission to evaluate the proposal (ten
printed sets and one electronic PDF set).
3. Each application for a Special Permit shall be accompanied by a written statement describing the
proposed use in sufficient detail to permit the Commission to determine whether the proposed use
complies with these Regulations (ten printed sets and one electronic PDF set).
4. The Commission shall not be required to hear an application relating to the same request or substantially
the same request, more than twice in a twelve-month period.
5. Notwithstanding the basic submission requirements, the Commission may require the submission of such
additional information as the Commission deems necessary to determine compliance of the proposed use
with these Regulations.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8400
PROCEDURES
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
103
8430 Proceedings
1. The date of receipt of the Special Permit application shall be determined in accordance with Section 8820.
2. An incomplete Special Permit application may be denied in accordance with Section 8830.
3. If a Special Permit application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45,
inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Inland Wetlands Commission not
later than the day such application is filed with the Commission.
4. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Special Permit application and publish a legal notice in
accordance with the requirements of Section 8861 of these Regulations.
5. Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the requirements of Section
8862.
6. Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of Section 8863.
7. Notification to the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP) may be required in
accordance with the requirements of Section 8864.
8. The Commission shall process the Special Permit application within the period of time provided under
CGS Section 8-7d:
a. the public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application,
b. the public hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences,
c. all decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing, and
d. the applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the
total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days.
9. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, if an application involves an activity regulated pursuant to
CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, and the time for a decision by the Commission would elapse
prior to the thirty-fifth day after a decision by the Inland Wetlands Commission, the time period for a
decision shall be extended to thirty-five (35) days after the decision of such agency.
10. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such application.
Section 8400 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
104
8440 Special Permit Criteria
In considering an application for a Special Permit, the Commission shall evaluate the application with respect to
the following factors, except that the Commission may determine that some factors may not be applicable to
certain types of applications:
1. Zoning Purposes
Whether the proposed use or activity is consistent with the purposes of these Zoning Regulations.
2. Environmental Protection and Conservation
Whether the use or activity will materially impair the natural environment of the nearby area or the
community and whether appropriate consideration has been given to the protection, preservation,
and/or enhancement of natural, scenic, historic, or unique resources including, where appropriate, the
use of conservation restrictions to protect and permanently preserve natural, scenic, historic, or
unique features which enhance the character and environment of the area.
3. Overall Compatibility
Whether the proposed use will serve a community need or convenience and whether the proposed use
will have a detrimental effect on neighboring properties or the development of the district.
4. Suitable Location For Use
Whether the nature, scope, size and intensity of the operations involved with the use or resulting from
the proposed use and the location of the site are such that the use will be in harmony with the
appropriate and orderly development in the district in which it is located.
5. Appropriate Improvements
Whether the design elements of the proposed development (such as location, type, size and height of
buildings and other structures, parking, access, landscaping, screening, lighting, signage, etc.) will be
attractive and suitable in relation to the site characteristics, the style of other buildings in the
immediate area, and the existing and desirable future character of the neighborhood in which the use
is located.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8400
PROCEDURES
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
105
6. Suitable Transportation Conditions
Whether the streets, driveways and other travelways are or will be of such size, condition and capacity
(width, grade, alignment, sight lines, and visibility) to adequately accommodate the traffic volume and
parking demand to be generated by the particular proposed use and not create problems.
7. Adequate Public Utilities and Services
Whether the provisions for water supply, sewage disposal, waste management, storm water drainage,
and emergency access conform to accepted engineering practices, comply with all standards of the
appropriate regulatory authorities, and will not unduly burden the capacity of such facilities.
8. Long Term Viability
Whether adequate provision has been made for the sustained maintenance of the proposed
development (structures, streets, and other improvements).
9. Nuisance Avoidance
Whether the use, configuration, design and/or hours of operation are appropriate in order to control
noise, light, odors, parking visibility, unsightly appearance, erosion, water contamination and stormwater
runoff on the site and in relation to the surrounding area and whether the proposed activities
will unreasonably disturb the peace and tranquility of nearby properties.
10. Plan of Conservation and Development
Whether the proposed use or activity is in accordance with or facilitates achievement of one or more
of the goals, objectives, policies, and recommendations of the Plan of Conservation and Development,
as amended.
11. Mitigation
Whether adequate provisions have been made to moderate or mitigate neighborhood impacts by
limiting the intensity of use of the property (including, without limitation, such considerations as the
area devoted to the use, the number of people involved in the use, the number of events or activities
proposed, the hours of operation, etc.) or by modifying the location or configuration of the proposed
use.
Section 8400 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
106
8450 Decision Considerations
1. Special Permit uses are declared to possess such special characteristics that each shall be considered on
an individual basis subject to the standards and requirements of these Regulations.
2. The applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating that the applicable Special Permit criteria in Section
8440 of these Regulations are addressed.
3. Before the Commission approves a Special Permit application, it shall determine that the application:
a. Has satisfied the applicable Special Permit criteria in Section 8440 of these Regulations, and
b. Is in conformance with other applicable provisions of these Regulations, and
c. Is in harmony with the purposes and intent of these Regulations.
4. For a Special Permit application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45,
inclusive, the Commission shall:
a. Wait to render its decision until the Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted a report with its final
decision, and
b. Give due consideration to any report of the Inland Wetlands Commission when making its decision.
5. On a Special Permit application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under Section 8862 or notice
to water companies under Section 8863 or notice to DEEP under Section 8864, the Commission shall give
due consideration to any report or testimony received.
6. In accordance with CGS Section 8-25a, no proposal for development using water supplied by a company
incorporated on or after October 1, 1984 shall be approved by the Commission unless such company has
been issued a certificate pursuant to CGS Section 16-262m.
7. In granting a Special Permit, the Commission may determine whether and to what extent permitted uses
may be undertaken and stipulate such conditions as are reasonable and necessary to:
a. Protect or promote the public health, safety or welfare;
b. Protect or promote public convenience or property values; or
c. Enhance overall neighborhood compatibility.
8. A Special Permit and any condition attached to the granting of a Special Permit shall:
a. Remain with the property as long as the Special Permit use is in operation, and
b. Continue in force and effect regardless of any change in ownership of the property.
9. The Commission shall not approve any Special Permit for any property on which there exists a zoning
violation, unless such Special Permit application will remedy such violation.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8400
PROCEDURES
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
107
8460 Action Documentation
1. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve, disapprove or approve with conditions the proposed
Special Permit.
2. Whenever it acts on a Special Permit application, the Commission shall state upon its record the reason(s)
for its decision.
3. In granting a Special Permit, the Commission may attach such conditions and safeguards as may be
required to protect the public health, safety and general welfare and to ensure continued compliance
with these Regulations. Such conditions and safeguards may include, but shall not be limited to:
a. Periodic review and renewal of the Special Permit by the Commission to determine continuing
compliance therewith.
b. Conservation restrictions necessary to protect and permanently preserve unique natural site
features.
c. A performance guarantee in accordance with the provisions of Section 8870.
4. Whenever it acts on a Special Permit application, the Commission may:
a. Establish a condition that commencement of the use or construction begin within a certain time
frame.
b. Require a performance guarantee in accordance with Section 8870 of these Regulations in an amount
and in a form satisfactory to the Commission, based upon a cost estimate of improvements provided
by the applicant, to ensure satisfactory completion of site improvements other than buildings.
5. Any decision to grant a Special Permit shall:
a. State the name of the owner of record,
b. Contain a description of the premises to which it relates,
c. Identify the Section of the Regulations under which the Special Permit was granted,
d. Specify the nature of the Special Permit, and
e. State the conditions of approval, if any.
6. Within 15 days of the approval of a Special Permit, the Commission shall file with the Building Inspector
and Zoning Enforcement Officer one print of the approved plans, with the approval noted thereon, and a
copy of the Commission’s resolution including any conditions pertaining to the approval.
7. The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Special Permit application to the
applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.
8. The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Special Permit application to be
published within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered in a newspaper having a substantial
circulation in Easton.
9. In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen-day period after a decision has been
rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice
within ten (10) days thereafter.
Section 8400 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
108
8470 Following Approval
1. A Special Permit granted by the Commission shall become effective only upon the filing of a copy,
certified by the Commission, in the land records of the Town, in accordance with the provisions of CGS
Section 8-3d.
a. A Special Permit shall expire if the Special Permit approval is not filed in the Town of Easton’s land
records within one (1) year after approval.
b. A Special Permit shall expire if the detailed plans associated therewith are not submitted and
approved within one (1) year following approval of the Special Permit. However, an extension of not
more than six months may be granted by the Commission upon written request by the applicant
prior to the expiration date.
2. Following approval of a Special Permit application, one (1) “mylar” of each approved plan shall, unless not
required by the Commission, be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer for signature by the
Chairman and:
a. Each such plan shall bear the seal and signature of the professional(s) which prepared the drawing.
b. Each such plan shall contain a signature block where the Chairman of the Commission can indicate
the approval of the Commission.
c. At least one (1) sheet shall bear a copy of the decision letter of the Commission and any other Town
regulatory agencies authorizing the activity.
3. Any plans to be filed in the Town Clerk’s Office shall be accompanied by an electronic file of the map in
ACAD format that can be opened with ACAD 2016 or earlier.
4. A Special Permit shall authorize only the particular use or uses specified in the Commission's approval.
5. Failure to strictly adhere to the documents, plans, terms, conditions and/or safeguards approved by the
Commission shall be a violation of these Regulations. The Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Commission
shall notify the applicant in writing of the specifics of the non-compliance and shall provide a reasonable
time period for compliance therewith. Unless there is full compliance within such time period, the
Commission may, following a duly advertised public hearing, rescind and revoke such Special Permit.
6. An approved Special Permit may be amended or modified, provided that application shall be made in the
same manner as the original application:
a. Amendments to the Special Permit which the Commission finds to be minor in nature, do not
substantially alter the Special Permit, and will not adversely affect adjacent properties or the
neighborhood, may be approved by the Commission without another public hearing.
b. Amendments to the Special Permit which would substantially alter the Special Permit or increase the
existing building coverage or gross floor area of the use may be approved by the Commission only
after a public hearing and subject to the same procedures for approval of a Special Permit.
7. The Special Permit uses as set forth in these Regulations are deemed to be permitted uses in their
respective districts when the Special Permit is granted by the Commission, subject to compliance with the
requirements and standards set forth in this Section in addition to all other requirements of these
Regulations.
8. Unless otherwise established by the Commission, a Special Permit, along with any conditions and
safeguards attached thereto, shall remain with the property as long as the use allowed by the Special
Permit has not been abandoned. Such conditions and safeguards shall continue in force regardless of any
change in ownership of the property.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8500
PROCEDURES
TEXT AMENDMENT APPLICATION
109
8500 TEXT AMENDMENT APPLICATION
8510 Applicability
A Text Amendment application shall be submitted for any proposal to amend, change, or repeal any Section of
these Regulations.
8520 Submission Requirements
1. A Text Amendment application shall be submitted to the Commission or agent and shall include a
completed application form and the appropriate fee. The Commission shall not be required to pay a fee
for a text amendment application made on its own initiative or as a result of a petition submitted by
residents.
2. A Text Amendment application shall clearly indicate the wording of the existing and proposed text and
any other supporting information, including reason(s) for the proposed amendment (ten printed sets and
one electronic PDF set).
3. When required by the Commission, an environmental impact statement relating, but not limited, to the
possible effects of the proposed amendment shall be submitted.
4. The Commission shall not be required to hear any petition or petitions relating to the same text changes,
or substantially the same text changes, more than once in a period of twelve (12) months unless it finds,
on facts presented in writing, that a material change in the situation justifies this action. A change of
ownership of property or any interest therein shall not be deemed a material change in the situation for
the purpose of this Section.
8530 Proceedings
1. The date of receipt for the Text Amendment application shall be determined in accordance with Section
8820.
2. An incomplete Text Amendment application may be denied in accordance with Section 8830.
3. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Text Amendment application and:
a. Shall cause a legal notice to be published in accordance with the requirements of Section 8861. of
these Regulations.
b. May publish the full text of such proposed regulation in such notice.
4. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3b, the Commission shall give written notice to the regional planning
agency when any portion of the land affected by a regulation change affecting the use of a zone is located
within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of another municipality and:
a. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested.
b. Such notice shall be made not later than thirty (30) days before the public hearing.
c. The regional planning agency may submit its advisory findings and recommendations to the
Commission at or before the hearing but if such report is not submitted, it shall be presumed that
such agency does not disapprove of the proposal.
Section 8500 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
TEXT AMENDMENT APPLICATION
110
5. Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the requirements of Section
8862.
6. The Commission may refer any application to amend these Regulations to any Town department or other
agency the Commission deems appropriate and may request any such department or agency to submit a
report to the Commission on matters that are of concern to such department or agency.
7. A copy of the proposed regulation shall be filed by the applicant in the office of the Town Clerk for public
inspection at least ten (10) days before the public hearing.
8. The Commission shall process the Text Amendment application within the period of time provided under
CGS Section 8-7d:
a. The public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application.
b. The public hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences.
c. All decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing.
d. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the
total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days.
e. These provisions shall not apply to any action initiated by the Commission regarding adoption or
change of any Regulation.
9. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such application.
8540 Decision Considerations
1. The Commission shall act upon the changes requested in such Text Amendment application.
2. On a Text Amendment application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under Section 8862 or
notice to a regional planning agency under CGS Section 8-3b:
a. Any report received from those agencies shall be made a part of the record of such hearing.
b. The Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received.
3. In making its decision the Commission shall:
a. Consider whether the text amendment will be in accordance with a comprehensive plan (the overall
scheme of the zoning map and these Regulations), and
b. Take into consideration the Plan of Conservation and Development, prepared pursuant to CGS
Section 8-23.
4. Before approving any Text Amendment application, the Commission shall determine that the proposed
regulation change will aid in:
a. Protecting the public health, safety, welfare, or property values, and
b. Attaining the purposes of these Regulations.
5. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3(b), such text change(s) shall be established, changed or repealed only
by a majority vote of all the members of the Commission except that, if a protest against a proposed
change is filed at or before a hearing with the Commission, signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent
or more of the area of the land affected by such proposed change or of the lots within five hundred feet
in all directions of the property included in the proposed change, such change shall not be adopted
except by a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the Commission.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8500
PROCEDURES
TEXT AMENDMENT APPLICATION
111
8550 Action Documentation
1. Whenever the Commission acts upon a Text Amendment application, it shall state upon the record the
reason(s) for its decision.
2. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3a(a), the Commission shall state on the record its findings on
consistency of a proposed zoning regulation or text change with the Plan of Conservation and
Development, as may be amended.
3. As part of approving a Text Amendment application:
a. The Commission shall establish an effective date for the Regulation change provided that a notice of
the decision of the Commission shall have been published in a newspaper having a substantial
circulation in Easton before such effective date, or
b. If an effective date is not so specified, the text amendment shall become effective upon publication
in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Easton.
4. The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Text Amendment application to
the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.
5. The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Text Amendment application to be
published within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered in a newspaper having a substantial
circulation in Easton.
6. In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen-day period after a decision has been
rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice
within ten (10) days thereafter.
8560 Following Approval
A regulation amendment approved by the Commission shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk before the
effective date.
Section 8600 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
ZONE CHANGE APPLICATION
112
8600 ZONE CHANGE APPLICATION
8610 Applicability
A Zone Change application shall be submitted for any proposal to alter the zoning designation of any parcel(s) of
land or part thereof.
8620 Submission Requirements
1. A Zone Change application shall be submitted to the Commission or agent and shall include a completed
application form and the appropriate fee. The Commission shall not be required to pay a fee for a zone
change application made on its own initiative or in response to a petition submitted by residents.
2. A Zone Change application shall be accompanied by one (1) map at an appropriate indicating existing and
proposed zone boundaries (ten printed sets and one electronic PDF set).
3. When required by the Commission, an environmental impact statement relating, but not limited, to the
possible effects of the proposed amendment shall be submitted.
4. The Commission shall not be required to hear a Zone Change application that has been rejected within
one (1) year from the date of rejection unless it finds, on facts presented in writing, that a material
change in the situation justifies this action. A change of ownership of property or any interest therein
shall not be deemed a material change in the situation for the purpose of this Section.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8600
PROCEDURES
ZONE CHANGE APPLICATION
113
8630 Proceedings
1. The date of receipt for the Zone Change application shall be determined in accordance with Section 8820.
2. An incomplete Zone Change application may be denied in accordance with Section 8830.
3. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Zone Change application and shall publish a legal
notice in accordance with the requirements of Section 8861 of these Regulations.
4. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3b, the Commission shall give written notice to the regional planning
agency when any portion of the land affected by a map change is located within five hundred (500) feet
of the boundary of another municipality and:
a. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested.
b. Such notice shall be made not later than thirty (30) days before the public hearing.
c. The regional planning agency may submit its advisory findings and recommendations to the
Commission at or before the hearing but if such report is not submitted, it shall be presumed that
such agency does not disapprove of the proposal.
5. Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the requirements of Section
8862.
6. The Commission may refer any application to amend the zoning map to any Town department or other
agency the Commission deems appropriate and may request any such department or agency to submit a
report to the Commission on matters that are of concern to such department or agency.
7. A copy of the proposed zoning map change shall be filed by the applicant in the office of the Town Clerk
for public inspection at least ten (10) days before the public hearing.
8. The Commission shall process the Zone Change application within the period of time provided under CGS
Section 8-7d:
a. The public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application.
b. The public hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences.
c. All decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing.
d. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the
total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days.
e. These provisions shall not apply to any action initiated by the Commission regarding a zoning map
change.
9. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such application.
Section 8600 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
ZONE CHANGE APPLICATION
114
8640 Decision Considerations
1. The Commission shall act upon the changes requested in such Zone Change application.
2. On a Zone Change application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under Section 8862 or notice to
a regional planning agency under CGS Section 8-3b:
a. Any report received from those agencies shall be made a part of the record of such hearing.
b. The Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received from such agencies.
3. Changes in zone district boundaries:
a. Should be in harmony with the Plan of Conservation and Development for Easton, as amended.
b. Shall, where possible, constitute logical extensions of like or compatible districts.
c. Follow property lines or geo-physical features ,where appropriate.
4. Except where a proposed zone change is to extend an existing zoning district, no area of land having less
than 300 feet of frontage on one street shall be changed from one zoning district to another zoning
district except by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the Commission.
5. Before approving any Zone Change application, the Commission shall determine that the proposed
regulation change:
a. Is in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and Development,
b. Is suitable for the intended location,
c. Will aid in protecting the public health, safety, welfare, or property values, and
d. Will aid in attaining the purposes of these Regulations.
6. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3(b), such zone change(s) shall be established, changed or repealed
only by a majority vote of all the members of the Commission except that, if a protest against a proposed
change is filed at or before a hearing with the Commission, signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent
or more of the area of the land affected by such proposed change or of the lots within five hundred feet
in all directions of the property included in the proposed change, such change shall not be adopted
except by a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the Commission.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8600
PROCEDURES
ZONE CHANGE APPLICATION
115
8650 Action Documentation
1. Whenever the Commission acts upon a Zone Change application, it shall state upon the record:
a. The reason(s) for its decision.
b. Its findings on consistency of the proposed zone change with the Plan of Conservation and
Development, as amended.
2. As part of approving a Zone Change application:
a. The Commission shall establish an effective date for the zoning map change provided that a notice of
the decision of the Commission shall have been published in a newspaper having a substantial
circulation in Easton before such effective date, or
b. If an effective date is not so specified, the zoning map change shall become effective upon
publication in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Easton.
3. The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Zone Change application to the
applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.
4. The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Zone Change application to be
published within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered in a newspaper having a substantial
circulation in Easton.
5. In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen-day period after a decision has been
rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice
within ten (10) days thereafter.
8660 Following Approval
1. A zoning map change approved by the Commission shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk before the
effective date.
2. When a zone boundary is changed by the Commission, such change shall:
a. Be made on the Zoning Map, and
b. Be noted with an entry on the Zoning Map as follows: "Amended to (date)," such date to be the
effective date of the boundary amendment.
Section 8700 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
116
8700 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
8710 Powers And Duties
The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by Chapter 124 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, prescribed by these Regulations, or conferred by general law.
1. Appeals - The ZBA shall have the authority to hear and decide upon any appeal where it is alleged that
there is an error in the order, requirements, decision or determination of any official charged with the
enforcement of these Regulations. No question of hardship shall be involved in such an appeal, and the
action of the ZBA thereon shall be limited to the question of whether or not, and to what extent such
order, requirement, decision, or determination was a correct interpretation of the subject provision of
these Regulations.
2. Variances – Except as provided below, the ZBA shall have the authority to vary or adjust the strict
application of these Regulations in only those cases where the unusual size, shape or topography of a lot
or other unusual physical conditions pertaining to it or to any building situated thereon make it
impossible to strictly apply a specific provision of these Regulations to such lot without resulting in
exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship, so that substantial justice shall be done and the public health,
safety and welfare secured. The Board shall not grant a variance:
a. In the case of Special Permits (Section 8400), Procedures (Section 8000) and special density
exemptions pursuant to CGS Section 8-2g.
b. Which permits or extends a use which is otherwise not permitted by these Regulations.
3. Other Matters - To hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under any provisions of
these regulations or the Connecticut General Statutes.
8720 Appeals
1. All appeals to the ZBA from an order, requirement, decision or determination of any official charged with
the enforcement of these Regulations shall be taken within thirty (30) calendar days of such order,
requirement, decision or determination.
2. Such appeals shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the ZBA and shall be accompanied by a
filing fee to cover the cost of processing the appeal.
3. No appeal shall be granted that would alter, revise or otherwise change any of the conditions attached to
the granting of a Special Permit by the Commission, if such conditions are more restrictive than otherwise
provided for in these Regulations or if such conditions do not refer to specified standards in these
Regulations.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8700
PROCEDURES
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
117
8730 Variances
1. All applications for variances shall be submitted in writing in a form prescribed by the ZBA. The ZBA may
deny an application for incomplete information having been submitted.
2. The Board may require the filing of a survey prepared by a land surveyor licensed to practice in
Connecticut when the variance is dimensional in nature or such survey is integral to the understanding of
the application.
3. The date of receipt for the Variance application shall be determined in accordance with Section 8820.
4. The ZBA shall hold a public hearing on all appeals and applications for variances, shall decide thereon, and
shall give notice of the date of the public hearing on the application and on its decision in accordance
with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes.
5. To assist with its consideration of an appeal or application, the ZBA may refer such appeal or application
to any department, agency or official it deems appropriate, to review and comment upon those technical
matters which are the concern or responsibility of such department, agency or official.
6. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Board, withdraw such application.
7. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to vary the application of the
Zoning Regulations.
8. No variance shall be granted by the ZBA unless it makes the following findings:
a. A peculiar or unique characteristic of the property (which shall be recorded in the minutes of the
Board) is such that the literal enforcement of the zoning regulations would result in exceptional or
unusual hardship other than a financial hardship or loss of financial advantage;
b. The nature of the hardship (which shall be recorded in the minutes of the Board) is not a self-inflicted
hardship which is the result of an action by the applicant or by someone other than the applicant
such as a previous owner of the property, nor is the hardship a result of conditions which the
applicant can alter, but prefers not to change;
c. The applicant has demonstrated that he or she has pursued all other alternatives available under
these Regulations; and .
d. The applicant has demonstrated that the granting of the requested variance will have no adverse
effect on the surrounding properties with regard to health, safety, welfare or property values, and
that the variance is consistent with the general purpose of these Regulations.
9. Whenever the ZBA grants a variance, it shall include in its minutes as part of the record:
a. The specific provision of these Regulations which was varied,
b. The extent of the variance,
c. The reason for its decision, including the findings in Section 8730.8, and
d. The specific hardship upon which its decision was based.
10. In exercising any of its authority, the ZBA may attach any conditions and safeguards as may be required to
protect the public health, safety and general welfare, and to ensure ongoing compliance with these
Regulations. Violation of such conditions and safeguards shall be deemed to be a violation of these
Regulations.
Section 8700 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
118
11. Any variance granted by the ZBA shall become effective upon its filing by the applicant in the office of the
Town Clerk and in the Town land records.
12. Any variance granted by the ZBA which is not recorded within one year from its effective date shall be
null and void.
13. If the ZBA denies a variance, it shall not be required to hear an application for the same variance or
substantially the same variance for a period of six months after the date of denial, unless the
circumstances associated with the application have substantially changed. A change in ownership of
property or any interests therein shall not be deemed a substantial change.
14. No variance shall be granted that would alter, revise or otherwise change any of the conditions attached
to the granting of a Special Permit by the Commission, if such conditions are more restrictive than
otherwise provided for in these Regulations or if such conditions do not refer to specified standards in
these Regulations.
8740 Use Variances
1. In addition to complying with all the requirements contained in Section 8730, no use variance shall be
granted by the ZBA which would permit:
a. A use prohibited either implicitly or explicitly by these Regulations;
b. The expansion of a non-conforming use;
c. The number of dwelling units on a lot to exceed the maximum allowed in the district in which the lot
is located; or,
d. A use otherwise allowed by Special Permit in the district in which the use is located.
2. No use variance shall be granted where a dimensional variance would relieve the exceptional difficulty or
unusual hardship.
3. The use variance granted shall be the minimum variance necessary to allow a reasonable use of the
property
4. Prior to a public hearing on any application for a use variance, the ZBA shall transmit the application to
the Commission for its review and comment. Any report submitted by the Commission to the ZBA shall
be read into the record of the public hearing of the subject application.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8700
PROCEDURES
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
119
8750 Floodplain Variances
1. In addition to complying with all the requirements contained in Section 8730, no floodplain variance shall
be issued by the ZBA unless:
a. The ZBA finds based on evidence in the record and recorded in the minutes that there will be no
increase in the flood levels during the base flood discharge with the burden of proof lying with the
applicant, subject to review by the Town Engineer and the Planning and Zoning Commission;
b. The owner of the property shall have submitted a sworn affidavit indicating that he or she
acknowledges that:
i. Construction in the floodplain will result in increased premium rate for flood insurance
ii. Construction below the base flood level increases the risk to life and property;
iii. The Town of Easton assumes no liability for any damage or loss of life relating to the granting of
the variance or subsequent construction; and
iv. The owner, successor and assigns agree to hold the Town of Easton harmless from any and all
claims which might result from granting the variance
2. No floodplain variance shall be effective until filed on the Land Records along with the sworn affidavit
provided in Section 8750.1.
Section 8800 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
120
8800 PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
8810 Application Submittal Requirements
1. Applications to the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Board of Appealsshall be submitted to
the Zoning Enforcement Officer or agent.
2. Applications shall be submitted on forms obtained from the Zoning Enforcement Officer or agent for the
type of application being submitted.
3. Applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee(s) except that the Planning and Zoning
Commission or the Town of Easton shall be exempt from any application fee.
4. Applications shall be submitted with such supporting plans, materials, and other information as required
by these Regulations.
5. Applications shall be signed by the applicant or an authorized agent.
6. Applications shall be signed by the owner of the property affected unless the application is for a text
change or is a map change initiated by the Commission.
7. Applications should be submitted at least 10 days prior to the monthly Commission meeting.
8820 Date of Receipt
For the purposes of calculating statutory timeframes for processing applications, the date of receipt of an
application to the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be:
1. The day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning
Board of Appeals immediately following the day of submission of the application to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer or agent, or
2. Thirty-five (35) days after submission, whichever is sooner.
8830 Incomplete Applications
1. Each application shall be reviewed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or agent to determine whether the
application is substantially complete.
2. An application requiring approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall not be considered actually complete until all of the information as required by these
Regulations, the Commission, or the Board has been received by the Commission or the Board at a
regularly scheduled meeting.
3. An incomplete application or an application submitted without the requisite fee may be denied.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8800
PROCEDURES
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
121
8840 Sequence of Hearings
Where a proposed development or activity requires multiple applications, the Planning and Zoning Commission or
the Zoning Board of Appeals may conduct any public hearings simultaneously or in the order they deem
appropriate.
8850 Consultations
1. On any application, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals may seek the
advice and opinion of other officials, boards, or commissions to assist it in evaluating applications.
2. The Planning and Zoning Commission may, at the applicant’s expense, retain a civil engineer, a traffic
engineer, an environmental professional, an architect, a landscape architect, a professional land use
planner, and/or other consultant(s) to review, comment, and guide its deliberations on any application.
3. Prior to actually retaining such outside consultant(s), the Commission shall make findings that the nature
and intensity of the proposal may have a significant impact on Easton and that:
a. Town staff will not be able to complete a technical review of the application in a timely fashion, or
b. That the proposal is of such a nature as to require expertise not available from staff.
4. The Commission or Zoning Enforcement Officer shall estimate the projected expenses for reviewing,
evaluating and processing the application based upon information received from the potential
consultant(s) and shall notify the applicant of such supplemental fee estimate.
5. The applicant shall submit funds sufficient to cover the basic application fee plus the cost of the
consultant review within fifteen (15) calendar days of being notified by the Zoning Enforcement Officer
and the application shall be deemed incomplete until the fee(s) have been submitted.
6. Should the estimate of supplemental funds prove inadequate, the Commission or Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall recalculate the projected expenses for reviewing, evaluating and processing the application
and notify the applicant of such supplemental fee estimate.
7. The applicant shall submit funds sufficient to cover the supplemental fee estimate within fifteen (15)
calendar days of being notified by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and the application shall be deemed
incomplete until the fee(s) have been submitted.
8. Any portion of the estimated processing fee not expended by the Town on the project shall be refunded
to the applicant upon completion of the review, evaluation and processing of the application.
9. No permits shall be issued until all processing fees are paid.
Section 8800 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
122
8860 Notice Provisions
8861 Notice by Newspaper
1. When a public hearing is required by these Regulations or scheduled by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Zoning Enforcement Officer or agent shall cause notice
of the hearing to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Easton.
2. Such notice shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more
than fifteen (15) days, nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the date
of the hearing.
8862 Notification to Abutting Municipalities
1. In accordance with CGS Section 8-7d(f), the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall notify the clerk of an adjoining municipality of any application concerning any project on
any site in which:
a. Any portion of the property affected by a decision is within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary
of the adjoining municipality,
b. A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project shall use streets within the adjoining
municipality to enter or exit the site,
c. A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project shall flow through and
significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality, or
d. Water runoff from the improved site shall impact streets or other municipal or private property
within the adjoining municipality.
2. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed within seven (7)
days of the day of the submission to the Zoning Enforcement Officer or agent of the application, petition,
request or plan.
3. No hearing shall be conducted on any such application unless the adjoining municipality has received the
notice required under this Section.
4. Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any
such application, petition, request or plan.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8800
PROCEDURES
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
123
8863 Notification to Water Companies
1. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3i, an applicant shall provide written notice to a water company and the
Commissioner of Public Health when an application is filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission or
the Zoning Board of Appeals concerning any project on any site that is within:
a. An aquifer protection area provided such area has been delineated in accordance with CGS Section
22a-354c, or
b. The watershed of a water company provided such water company or said commissioner has filed a
map with the Commission or the Board and on the Easton land records showing boundaries of the
watershed.
2. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed not later than
seven days after the date of the day of the submission to the Zoning Enforcement Officer or agent.
3. Prior to the scheduled meeting regarding the application, the applicant shall submit the following to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer or agent or the application shall be considered incomplete:
a. A copy of the complete package of information, and
b. Proof of mailing.
4. Such water company and the Commissioner of Public Health may, through a representative, appear and
be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, request or plan.
8864 Notification of DEEP
1. If any portion of the property which is the subject of the application is located within a “shaded area”
identified on the most current Natural Diversity Database maps for Easton, the applicant shall notify the
Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP) of the pending project.
2. A report from DEEP shall be a required for any application for a Site Plan or a Special Permit for property
located within a “shaded area” identified on the most current Natural Diversity Database maps for
Easton.
3. Any application submitted without a DEEP report shall be considered incomplete (see Section 8830).
Section 8800 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
124
8870 Performance Guarantee
1. Where a performance guarantee or financial guarantee is required by any Section of these Regulations,
an itemized estimate of the cost of improvements shall be prepared by the applicant, including a separate
inflation factor for the estimated construction period, and shall be submitted to the Commission's
Engineer for approval.
2. As provided in CGS Section 8-3)g), the Commission may accept surety bonds and shall accept cash bonds,
passbook or statement savings accounts and other financial guarantees other than surety bonds
including, but not limited to, letters of credit, provided:
a. Such other financial guarantee is in a form acceptable to the Commission, and
b. The financial institution or other entity issuing any letter of credit is acceptable to the Commission.
3. Where a performance guarantee is provided, it shall be in one of the following forms and the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall require evidence of compliance with the following standards before accepting
any performance guarantee:
a. Cash deposited with the Town.
b. Certified bank check to the order of the Town when the amount of the check is fully insured by the
FDIC.
c. Bank deposit (such as a passbook savings account or a statement savings account) assigned
irrevocably and solely to the Town when the amount of the deposit is fully insured by the FDIC.
d. Irrevocable letter of credit naming the Town as sole beneficiary provided that:
i. Such letter of credit shall be issued by, and drafts thereunder presentable at, a branch of a bank
in Connecticut provided that;
? Such bank is included in the most recent list issued by the Securities Valuation Office of the
National Association of Insurance Commissioners (or any successor office or organization,
“NAIC”) as a bank meeting NAIC standards for issuing letters of credit for reinsurance
purposes; or
? The long-term unsecured debt of such bank (or the long-term unsecured debt of its holding
company) is rated BBB or better by Standard & Poor's rating service or Baa or better by
Moody's rating service.
ii. The terms and conditions of such letter of credit shall be acceptable in form and substance to the
Town, and
iii. If and when such letter of credit shall, through the passage of time, have less than thirty (30)
days remaining until its expiration or lapse date, and such date shall not have been extended,
the Town may draw under said letter of credit the full amount thereof and the proceeds may be
retained by the Town as the performance guarantee.
e. Other form of performance guarantee (such as a surety bond) acceptable in form and substance to
the Town.
4. As provided in CGS Section 8-3)g), such financial guarantee may, at the discretion of the person posting
such financial guarantee, be posted at any time before all approved site improvements are completed,
except that the Commission may require a financial guarantee for erosion and sediment controls prior to
the commencement of any such site improvements. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued before a
required financial guarantee is posted or the approved site improvements are completed to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Commission or its agent.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8800
PROCEDURES
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
125
5. No portion of any required performance guarantee shall be released by the Commission until:
a. A release has been requested, in writing, by the applicant,
b. The applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the Town, in writing, that an appropriate level of
improvements in relation to the requested release have been satisfactorily completed in accordance
with approved plans,
c. If such release is a final release, the applicant's engineer or surveyor has submitted a set of detailed
"Record" plans on mylar, that all improvements and other work are in accordance with approved
plans, and
d. The appropriate Town Official or another qualified person acceptable to the Commission has
confirmed, in writing, that the appropriate level of improvements in relation to the requested release
have been satisfactorily completed and that all conditions and requirements of the Commission's
approval have been satisfied.
6. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3, if the person posting a performance guarantee requests a release of
all or a portion of such performance guarantee, the Commission shall, not later than sixty-five days after
receiving such request:
a. Release any such performance guarantee or portion thereof, provided the Commission is reasonably
satisfied that the improvements for which such performance guarantee or portion thereof was
posted have been completed, or
b. Provide the person posting such performance guarantee with a written explanation as to the
additional work that must be completed before such performance guarantee or portion thereof may
be released.
7. Before the release of a performance guarantee, the Commission:
a. Shall require the applicant to submit "as-built" drawings in accordance with Section 8870.5; and,
b. May, as provided in CGS Section 8-3)g), require that the applicant provide a financial guarantee or
payment to finance the maintenance of roads, streets, retention or detention basins or other
improvements (including vegetative cover and plantings) approved with such site plan for up to one
year after the date on which such improvements have been completed to the reasonable satisfaction
of the Commission or its agent or accepted by the municipality.
8. Any cost of collecting a performance guarantee, including without limitation, attorney’s fees, bank fees,
and other collection fees and expenditures, shall be for account of the applicant and may be deducted
from amounts released accordance with this Section.
8880 Beneficiaries of a Trust
Any person who makes an application to the Commission or Board pertaining to real property, the record title to
which is held by a trustee of any trust, shall file with said application a sworn statement disclosing the name(s) of
the equitable owner (s) of such real property or the beneficiary(ies) of the trust.
Section 8800 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
126
8890 Village District Considerations
8891 Design Considerations
1. Within any Village District, special attention shall be paid to protecting the distinctive character,
landscape, and historic structures.
2. The conversion, conservation, and preservation of existing buildings and sites in a manner that maintains
the historic or distinctive character of a Village District is encouraged. The removal or disruption of
historic, traditional, or significant structures or architectural elements shall be avoided or minimized.
3. All applications submitted within the Village District shall be reviewed against the standards and criteria
included in the CGS Section 8-2j, as contained elsewhere in these Regulations, and specifically the
following:
a. The proposed buildings or modifications to existing buildings shall be harmoniously related to their
surroundings, the terrain in the district, and to the use, scale and architecture of existing buildings in
the district that have a functional or visual relationship to a proposed building or modification;
b. All spaces, structures, and related site improvements visible from public roadways shall be designed
to be compatible with the elements of the area of the Village District in and around the proposed
building or modification;
c. The color, size, height, location, proportion of openings, roof treatments, building materials, and
landscaping of commercial or residential property, and any proposed signs and lighting, shall be
evaluated for compatibility with the local architectural motif;
d. Maintenance of views, historic buildings, monuments, and landscaping shall be encouraged;
e. The applicant shall provide information within the application indicating that the proposed
building(s) architecture is compatible with the existing architecture of buildings within 200 feet of the
site in question within the Village District; and
f. The removal or disruption of historic traditional or significant structures or architectural elements
shall be minimized.
4. In addition, all development in the village district shall be designed to achieve the following compatibility
objectives:
a. The building and layout of buildings and included site improvements shall reinforce existing buildings
and streetscape patterns and the placement of buildings and included site improvements shall assure
there is no adverse impact on the district;
b. Proposed streets and or driveway shall be connected to the existing Village District road and
driveway network, wherever possible;
c. Pedestrian access shall be provided to connect with adjacent Village District sidewalks, uses, and
buildings;
d. Open spaces within the proposed development shall reinforce open space patterns of the district, in
form and siting;
e. Locally significant features of the site such as distinctive buildings, specimen trees, or sight lines or
vistas from within the district shall be integrated into the site design;
f. The landscape design shall complement the district’s landscape patterns;
g. The accessory features and structures common in the Village District shall be continued in a uniform
architectural theme throughout the proposed development and shall be compatible with their
surroundings (including exterior signs, colonial style site lighting, white picket fences, brick paver
walks, etc.); and,
h. The scale, proportions, massing and detailing of any proposed building shall be in proportion to the
scale, proportion, massing and detailing in the district.
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8800
PROCEDURES
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
127
8892 Design Guidelines
1. Overall - These design guidelines are intended to aid in maintaining and enhancing the character and
quality of the buildings and public spaces in the village district areas in Easton in order to accomplish the
design considerations in Section 8891 of these Regulations.
As used in these guidelines:
The word "shall" means that the relevant standard, criterion or action must be followed
unless the applicant demonstrates to the Commission’s satisfaction that it would be
unreasonable or undesirable to do so.
The word "should" means that the relevant standard, criterion or action will generally be
required, but the applicant may offer, and the Commission may approve, an alternative
standard, criterion or action if the Commission finds that the alternative would better
fulfill the overall goals set forth in these guidelines.
2. Building Design
a. Proposed buildings shall promote basic design elements and relationships that will help maintain and
enhance a harmonious “New England”-type architectural character.
b. Applicants should avoid long and large unarticulated structures that are uninviting and do not
contribute to a harmonious “New England”-type architectural character.
c. Applicants should maintain proportions between building height, length and width consistent with
prevailing architectural customs in Easton.
d. The public face of the building should present a clear, well-defined, and balanced façade.
e. Applicants should provide a well-defined front facade with the main entrance clearly visible and
identifiable from the primary public vantage points or public right-of-way.
f. Applicants should align buildings so that the relationships between buildings and the street (such as
front facades and major roof ridges) is either parallel or perpendicular, not oblique or diagonal.
g. Rooflines should be simple, functional, and reflective of “New England”-type architectural character
the broader community building stock.
h. Building materials should be durable and functional and the use of color and texture should be
reflective of local style and character.
i. Applicants shall coordinate all exterior elevations of the building (color, materials, architectural form,
and detailing) to achieve continuity.
j. Building equipment, storage, and service areas should be integrated into the site plan and
architectural composition in ways that minimize adverse impacts.
Section 8800 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
128
3. Site Design
a. The overall design of the site shall provide for a safe, logical approach and entry to all buildings and
site use areas for vehicles and pedestrians.
b. Applicants should minimize conflicts between pedestrians (sidewalks) and vehicles (curb cuts).
c. Applicants should locate all delivery areas toward the rear of the site concealed from the public rightof-
way.
d. The overall design of the site should integrate parking into the site design providing a positive visual
element rather than the dominating one.
e. The overall design of the site should minimize the safety hazards and visual impacts of service
equipment and supporting structures.
f. Planting material should be used in a logical, orderly manner that defines spatial organization and
relates to buildings and structures.
g. Applicants shall use indigenous plants and avoid unusual or exotic cultivars.
h. Site lighting shall provide the functional and esthetic benefits of exterior lighting while mitigating the
potential for nuisance.
i. To ensure that light sources are not visible off site, light sources shall be directed down toward the
ground surface, lighting fixtures shall have opaque hoods over all light elements, and all fixtures shall
have sharp cut off shields.
j. Fences, walls, and hedges should generally be residential in scale, character and materials, and
architecturally compatible with the main structure.
k. Site drainage should protect the health and safety of the public and promote ecologically sensitive
approaches.
l. Bicycle racks are strongly encouraged and may be required by the Commission in an appropriate
location.
m. Electric car charging stations are encouraged and may be required by the Commission in an
appropriate location.
n. Parking spaces should generally be located to the side and rear of buildings in order to enhance the
desired pedestrian-friendly character and streetscape. Parking spaces located between buildings
and the street are discouraged unless they enhance the desired pedestrian-friendly character and
streetscape (i.e., shared on-street spaces, etc.).
PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019 Section 8800
PROCEDURES
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
129
4. Signage
a. Applicants shall integrate any existing and/or proposed signage into the overall design insuring that it
complements its surroundings.
b. Applicants shall avoid visual competition with other signs in the area and repetitious signage
information on the same building frontage.
c. Signage should reflect the character of the architecture, site, and neighborhood without occurring at
the expense of individual expression and creativity.
d. Signage should be integrated with the ground plane by using complimentary plant materials as part
of the overall planting plan.
e. Sign lighting should be used judiciously and specifically to illuminate useful information.
8893 Procedures
1. The Commission shall utilize one or more Village District consultants and such Village District consultants
shall be:
a. A registered architect or an architectural firm,
b. A licensed landscape architect,
c. A planner who is a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners, or
d. A design review board provided the members shall include at least one (1) architect, landscape
architect or planner who is a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners.
2. All applications shall be subject to review and recommendation by the Village District consultant
designated by the Commission as the Village District consultant for such application.
3. The Village District consultant shall review an application and report to the Commission within thirty-five
(35) days of receipt of the application.
4. Such report and recommendation shall be entered into the public hearing record and considered by the
Commission in making its decision.
5. Failure of the Village District consultant to report within the specified time shall not alter or delay any
other time limit imposed by these Regulations.
6. The Commission may seek the recommendations of any Town or regional agency or outside specialist
including, but not limited to, the regional planning agency, the Connecticut Trust for Historic
Preservation, the Office of the State Archeologist, and/or The University of Connecticut College of
Agriculture and Natural Resources.
7. Any reports or recommendations from such agencies or organizations shall be entered into the public
hearing record.
Section 8800 PROPOSED REGULATIONS– April 11, 2019
PROCEDURES
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
130
(this page intentionally left blank)
NOTES
Technical Assistance in the Preparation of these Regulations Provided By

Chapter 13
ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF
§ 13-1. Membership. [Amended 9-15-2014]
There shall continue to be a Board of Assessment Appeals consisting of
three members. Each such member shall be elected for a term of four years.
Not more than two members of said Board shall be members of the same
political party.
§ 13-2. Powers and duties.
The Board shall have all the powers and duties set forth in the General
Statutes.
Chapter 18
BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 252.
§ 18-1. Membership. [Amended 9-15-2014]
There shall continue to be a Building Board of Appeals consisting of five
members. Each such member shall be appointed in accordance with
§ 29-266 of the General Statutes for a term of five years. Not more than four
members of said Board shall be members of the same political party.
§ 18-2. Powers and duties. [Amended 9-15-2014]
The Board shall have all the powers and duties designated to boards of
building appeals as set forth in § 29-266 of the General Statutes.
Chapter 86
INCENTIVE PLANS
13:1

ARTICLE I
Volunteer Firefighters and Emergency Medical Service Personnel
[Adopted 4-28-2003; amended 3-19-2012]
§ 86-1. Purpose.
The Town of Easton adopts this article establishing incentive plans for
volunteer firefighters and volunteer emergency medical service personnel
for the purpose of encouraging volunteerism in the Easton Volunteer Fire
Department and the Easton Volunteer Emergency Medical Service and
to provide an honorarium for those volunteers who give of their time to
provide public safety services.
§ 86-2. Honorarium. [Amended 9-15-2014]
Any volunteer firefighter or EMS volunteer is entitled to an honorarium
up to the amount of $1,000 per fiscal year, provided that such volunteer
satisfies the requirements set forth in the incentive plan of the respective
organization. "Incentive plan" shall mean the plan developed and approved
by the Board of Fire Commissioners (hereinafter referred to as the
"Commission") for volunteer firefighters and the plan developed and
approved by the EMS Commission for volunteer EMS personnel, as both
such plans are also approved by the Board of Finance. Each plan shall
detail the requirements to be met in order for a volunteer to be eligible to
receive all or a portion of the honorarium. Eligibility will be based upon
certification, participation and training. A volunteer in both organizations
may receive an honorarium from each organization to a maximum of $2,000
if the volunteer qualifies under each organization's incentive plan.
Qualification shall, however, be independent for each organization, in that
attendance at a single incident shall not count both as a volunteer for the
Fire Department and as a volunteer for the EMS. The honorarium will be
prorated for a volunteer who serves for less than a full calendar year.
§ 86-3. Additional honorarium.
In addition to the amount stipulated in the above section, each of the
Commissions is authorized to offer an additional $500 to volunteers who
earn the maximum honorarium as defined in § 86-2 and who work a
substantial portion of their hours during difficult to cover time periods. The
incentive plan developed by each of the Commissions will stipulate those
time periods that are considered difficult to cover and the number of hours
or calls which must be worked in order to earn the additional honorarium.
The stipulations of § 86-2 applying to volunteers who serve both the EMS
and fire services shall also apply to this additional honorarium.
§ 86-4. Participation; appropriation. [Amended 9-15-2014]
Participation shall be measured on a calendar year basis. A request for
an appropriation in the amount sufficient to fund the program for each
calendar year for each organization shall be made to the Board of Finance
§ 86-1 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 86-4
13:3
so that payment for the preceding calendar year may be made by August 1
of the succeeding fiscal year.
§ 86-5. Incentive plans.
The initial incentive plan for each organization is on file with the Town
Clerk. The incentive plan of each organization may be amended by the
organization's Commission with the approval of the Board of Finance,
provided that no amendment shall affect any provision of this article, and
in the event of any conflict between any amended plan and this article, this
article shall control.
§ 86-6. Disputes.
Any dispute concerning the application of a plan to a volunteer shall be
submitted to and determined by the organization's Commission with the
right of appeal to the Board of Selectmen, whose decision shall be final.
§ 86-7. Review by committee.
No later than September 15 of every third year commencing 2007, or
more frequently at the discretion of the Board of Selectmen, the Board
of Selectmen shall appoint a committee of not fewer than five resident
taxpayers of the Town which will undertake and complete, within 60 days
following such appointment, or such longer time as the Board of Selectmen
shall authorize, a study and investigation with respect to honoraria for
volunteer firefighters and volunteer EMS personnel, and the committee
shall prepare a report to the Board of Selectmen which report shall include
the following:
§ 86-8. Action on committee report.
After receiving the report from the committee, the Board of Selectmen shall
provide such comments on the recommendations as it deems appropriate.
The committee shall consider the comments of the Board of Selectmen and
shall, to the extent deemed necessary and appropriate by the committee,
present revised recommendations to the Board of Selectmen. At its
discretion, the Board of Selectmen may forward the committee report to
the Board of Finance. After receiving the report from the committee, the
Board of Finance shall provide such comments on the recommendations as
it deems appropriate. The committee shall consider the comments of the
Board of Finance and shall, to the extent deemed necessary and appropriate
by the committee, present revised recommendations to the Board of
Finance. When the Board of Finance is satisfied with the recommendations
With respect to the previous three years, the fiscal effect of the
program; and
A.
Recommendations with respect to the form and extent of the program
for the following three years, including estimates of the annual
economic impact.
B.
§ 86-4 EASTON CODE § 86-8
13:4
of the committee, the Board of Finance shall recommend the ordinance for
adoption by the Town at a Town Meeting to be scheduled by the Board of
Selectmen. The Town Meeting shall, by a majority vote, approve or reject,
but not amend, the recommended ordinance. If approved, the ordinance
shall remain in effect until such time as a new recommended ordinance is
approved by the Town Meeting. If rejected, a new committee, which may but
need not contain members of the preceding committee, shall be convened.
Until such time as a new ordinance shall be adopted by the Town Meeting,
the then current ordinance will remain in effect.
§ 86-9. Amendments.
This article may, but need not, be amended and restated in its entirety in
the future. It shall be sufficient to submit as an amendment to this article
the provisions of the recommended ordinance.
§ 86-10. Exemption from taxation.
The honoraria provided pursuant to this article shall be free from federal
and state taxation to the extent permitted by law.
§ 86-11. Form of honorarium.
The recipient of an honorarium under this article may choose to receive up
to $1,000 of it in the form of a tax abatement. Any remaining amount of the
honorarium will be issued in the form of a cash stipend.
§ 86-12. When effective
In accordance with § 7-157 of the Connecticut General Statutes, this article,
upon its adoption, shall become effective 30 days after publication and shall
provide for a payment commencing in fiscal year 2012-2013 for services
during calendar year 2011 and for subsequent years in accordance with this
article.
§ 86-8 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 86-12
13:5
Chapter 105
LAND ACQUISITION AND PRESERVATION
§ 105-1. Land Acquisition and Development Authority.
§ 105-2. Guidelines for acquisition of land or development rights.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Land Acquisition and
Development Authority consisting of five members and two alternates
to serve terms of three years with terms ending on January 2; provided,
however, that at the time of the first appointment, two members and
one alternate shall be appointed for a period of two years only or until
January 2, 2008, whichever is earlier. No more than three members and
one alternate shall be members of the same political party.
A.
The Authority shall evaluate land for possible acquisition in fee by
the Town or for the possible acquisition by the Town of development
rights to such land. The Authority shall make recommendations to
the Board of Selectmen as appropriate. Land will be evaluated for
acquisition based upon its potential use for open space, recreation or
housing. Before making any recommendation, the Commission shall
consult with other Town boards and officials, including the Board of
Selectmen, Town Planner, the Conservation Commission, the Planning
and Zoning Commission and the Park and Recreation Commission.
For purposes of this chapter, "land" shall mean real property with
or without improvements thereon located within the Town of Easton.
"Development rights" shall mean the rights or combination of rights
of owners of land to construct on, sell, lease or otherwise develop or
improve such land and shall include any easement, interest or rights
in land and any covenants and agreements with owners of land or
interests therein to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future
use of or otherwise conserve such land.
B.
The types of land to be considered for acquisition by the Town must be:
Land that has unique features and/or significant scenic,
topographic, conservation or wilderness value based on the
characteristics of the land.
(1)
Land that has significant historical or archaeological value based
on the character of the land or improvements thereon.
(2)
Land that has recreational value as outlined in the Town Plan of
Conservation and Development.
(3)
(4) Land that has potential value for housing development.
Land that has potential value because its acquisition will provide
other strategic opportunities for the Town consistent with the
(5)
A.
§ 86-12 EASTON CODE § 105-2
13:6
§ 105-3. Procedure.
§ 105-4. Land Acquisition Fund.
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 7-131r and Public Act No.
05-228, the Town hereby establishes a Land Acquisition Fund to be used
for the purpose of acquiring and maintaining land and development rights
within the Town of Easton. Such fund shall not lapse at the close of the
municipal fiscal year. Such fund shall be held in a separate, interest-bearing
account with all interest and income derived from the assets of the fund
purpose of this chapter and the Town Plan of Conservation and
Development.
The types of development rights to be considered for purchase by the
Town must be consistent with the general purpose of this chapter and
may include one or more of the following:
Development rights which will tend to maintain and enhance the
conservation of natural or scenic resources.
(1)
Development rights which will tend to protect natural topography,
streams or water supply.
(2)
Development rights which will tend to protect historical or
archaeological sites.
(3)
Development rights which will tend to promote conservation of
agricultural soils, particularly prime farmland soil.
(4)
Development rights which will tend to contribute towards the
preservation of agriculture in the Town.
(5)
Development rights which will tend to promote certain publicly
desirable uses of the land, at the present time expected to include
agricultural, forest and natural uses.
(6)
Development rights which provide other strategic advantage to the
Town consistent with the purpose of this chapter and the Town Plan
of Conservation and Development.
(7)
B.
The Authority shall forward recommendations to the Board of
Selectmen for consideration. Upon gaining the support of the Board,
the Authority will then present a request for appropriation to the Board
of Finance.
A.
Upon approval of the Board of Selectmen and the Board of Finance,
the decision to acquire the land shall be put to a vote before the Town
Meeting.
B.
At the Town Meeting, the Authority shall provide information about
the parcel, the proposed purpose for its purchase and the method and
sources of funding.
C.
§ 105-2 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 105-4
13:7
paid into the fund and added to the assets of the fund. The Land Acquisition
Fund may:
Chapter 147
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
§ 147-1. Membership; term of office.
There shall continue to be a Planning and Zoning Commission consisting of
five members who are electors of the Town of Easton holding no salaried
municipal office. The members of said Commission shall be appointed for
terms of five years.
§ 147-2. Rules, meetings and records.
The Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, hold
regular meetings and keep public records of its activities. The Commission
shall hold a public information meeting at least once during each year.
§ 147-3. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have all the powers and duties given to zoning
commissions and to planning commissions by the General Statutes. The
Commission shall also have the power and duty to prepare, adopt and
amend a master plan for the development of the Town or to amend a master
plan previously adopted and shall have control over the subdivision of land.
The Commission shall also have the power and duty to make studies and
Accept donations from the public and private entities and from
individuals.
A.
Accept contributions required by the Town Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Conservation Commission as a condition for the
approval of applications before such Commissions. Such required
contributions may be in place of or in addition to any contribution
to the Fee in Lieu of Open Space Fund. This chapter is intended to
supplement, and not to replace, the Fee in Lieu of Open Space Fund.
B.
Receive funds through an appropriation in the annual budget as
allowed by Connecticut General Statutes § 7-131r.
C.
Be used alone or in combination with other public or private funds to
acquire and maintain land and development rights.
D.
Be used for the purpose of investigating, testing, appraising, and
analyzing the suitability and value of a potential parcel of land for
acquisition.
E.
Be used for the purpose of providing for the general maintenance, but
not improvement, of such acquired parcels.
F.
§ 105-4 EASTON CODE § 147-3
13:8
recommendations on matters affecting health, recreation, traffic and other
needs of the Town.
§ 147-4. Adoption or amendment of master plan.
Before adopting or amending a master plan, or any portion thereof, the
Commission shall hold at least one public hearing, notice of the time, place
and purpose of which hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Town in accordance with the General Statutes.
The adoption of a master plan or of any part or amendment thereof shall be
by resolution of the Commission carried by the affirmative vote of not fewer
than three members. The plan shall be a public record, a copy of which shall
be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 147-5. Alternate members.
Chapter 215
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 215-1. Membership; term of office.
There shall continue to be a Zoning Board of Appeals consisting of five
members who are electors of the Town of Easton and are not members of
the Planning and Zoning Commission. Said Board shall be elected for a term
of five consecutive years, and the terms of office shall be arranged so that
the terms of not more than three members shall expire in any one year
and so that not more than four members are members of the same political
party.
There shall continue to be three alternate members of the Planning
and Zoning Commission who shall not be members of the Zoning Board
of Appeals. Each alternate shall be appointed for a period of three
consecutive years. Not more than two alternate members shall be
members of the same political party.
A.
Alternate members may attend all meetings and executive sessions
of the Commission, and if a regular member of the Commission is
absent or is disqualified, the Chair of the Commission shall designate
an alternate to so act, choosing alternates in rotation so that they shall
act as nearly equal a number of times as possible. If any alternate is not
available in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded
in the minutes of the meeting.
B.
The Commission, including any alternate member, when seated as
herein provided, shall have all the powers and duties set forth in the
General Statutes for such Commission and its members.
C.
§ 147-3 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 215-2
13:9
§ 215-2. Officers; meetings.
The Board by vote of its regular members shall elect a Chair from among its
members. Meetings of such Board shall be held at the call of the Chair and
at such other times as the Board determines and shall be open to the public.
§ 215-3. Alternate members.
§ 215-4. Powers and duties.
The Board, including any alternate member, when seated, shall have all the
powers and duties as set forth in the General Statutes for such Board and
its members.
Chapter 252
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Board of Appeals — See Ch. 18.
§ 252-1. Enforcement of State Building Code.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision
of the State Building Code as adopted by the Town and as amended from
time to time or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of any approved plan or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of the State Building Code, shall
be served with a stop order by the Building Official, and thereafter any
person, firm or corporation who or which shall continue to work in or about
a building, except such work as he or it is directed to perform to remove
a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than
$100 for the first day of any such violation and $25 for each day that such
violation continues in addition to all other penalties imposed by the State
Building Code.
There shall also continue to be a panel of alternates consisting of
three members who shall not be members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Each alternate shall be appointed for a term of three
consecutive years. Appointments shall be made so that not more than
two members of the panel shall be members of the same political party.
A.
If a regular member of the Board is absent or is disqualified, the Chair
of the Board shall designate an alternate from the panel, choosing
alternates in rotation so that they shall act as nearly equal a number of
times as possible. If any alternate is not available in accordance with
such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
B.
§ 215-2 EASTON CODE § 252-1
13:10
Chapter 257
BUILDINGS AND LOTS, NUMBERING OF
§ 252-1 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 252-1
13:11

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 257-1. Purpose.
§ 257-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply for the purpose of this chapter only:
BUILDING — A structure on a lot intended for human occupancy.
LOT — All contiguous land in one ownership, as evidenced by a deed or
deeds recorded in the land records of the Town of Easton. For the purposes
of this chapter, "lot" shall also mean parcel.
UNIT — A self-contained area of occupancy within a building. A unit may
be used for any permitted purpose and may consist of either an owned or
leased area.
Assignment of numbers. This chapter establishes a formal program
of assignment of street numbers (the "program") as authorized by
§ 7-148(c)(6)(C)(i) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The purpose of
the program is to:
Devise a systematic method of assigning numbers to real property
in the Town of Easton; and
(1)
Devise, administer, implement and enforce a program of visual
identification of assigned street numbers in order to facilitate and
ensure the response of emergency and other public services to
such real properties.
(2)
A.
Other regulations. This chapter shall not supersede any other
ordinance or regulations, including, without limitation, planning and
zoning regulations, and this chapter shall not create by implication any
use not otherwise permitted.
B.
§ 257-1 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 257-2
13:13

ARTICLE II
Numbering Policy
§ 257-3. Authority.
The Assessor shall devise, administer, implement and enforce the program
and shall have the authority to assign street numbers for all lots, buildings
and units within the Town. The Assessor may consult with the Planning and
Zoning Department and the Fire Marshal and the Building Official and such
other Town officials as may be appropriate in carrying out such assignment.
§ 257-4. Numbering records.
§ 257-5. Policy.
The Assessor, within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter, shall
issue a written policy for the assignment of street numbers. The policy shall
take into account consecutive numbering for single building and single lot
development and special numbering needs necessitated by multi-unit or
unique development patterns. The Assessor shall periodically review the
policy for revision necessitated by community needs or changing methods
of development.
Records. The Assessor shall maintain and be the office of record of all
street numbers assigned pursuant to the program.
A.
Issuance of numbers. Any person applying for a building permit for
new construction on a lot or parcel of land must first obtain from the
Assessor a street number for each lot or parcel of land for which a
permit has been applied, which assigned street number (or numbers as
the case may be) shall appear on all applications and documentation
relating to such construction.
B.
Existing numbers. Street numbers existing in the records of the
Assessor or in other Town records upon the date of enactment of this
chapter shall continue to be the street number of record for each such
lot, building or unit unless otherwise revised by the Assessor for good
cause.
C.
§ 257-3 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 257-5
13:15

ARTICLE III
Identification and Enforcement
§ 257-6. Identification and display required.
The owner of each lot upon which a building or unit is located shall
permanently affix and display the street number which has been assigned
by the Assessor, in the manner specified below.
§ 257-7. Specifications.
Design. The assigned street number shall be displayed by numerals no
less than three inches in height. Written, printed or scripted words shall
not be used as the required display.
A.
Color. The color of the numerals shall be in sharp contrast to their
background, so as to be plainly visible and legible from the center line
of the street at all times.
B.
Location of number display. The assigned street number shall be
displayed on or near the front entrance of the building or each unit.
The front of the building or unit shall be that side facing the street
for which a number has been assigned to that building or unit. Where
a building or unit is set back more than 60 feet from the edge of
the street or the assigned street number or numbers are not clearly
visible from the center line of the street, the number shall be displayed
on a freestanding sign or other device or mailbox. Such display shall
be located and shall comply with all specifications enumerated in this
section, where applicable, and shall be near the main entrance of the
property on one of the following:
(1) The front entrance of the building or each unit;
A freestanding sign or other device set back no more than 25 feet
from the edge of the street; or
(2)
A mailbox located at the edge of the street. The number display
shall appear on both sides of the mailbox unless the mailbox is one
of a group serving multiple buildings or units, in which case the
number display shall appear on the front of each mailbox.
(3)
C.
Obstruction. The assigned street number shall be displayed so that its
view from the street is not wholly or significantly obstructed by the
mailbox, flag, trees, shrubbery, porches, building architecture or other
physical impediments.
D.
Multiple lots off the same drive. Where there are multiple lots off the
same drive, each branch in the drive shall be clearly marked to show
the direction to take for each assigned number, and in such cases, each
building or unit shall also have the assigned number displayed on it or
at the edge of the property in accordance with this section.
E.
§ 257-6 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 257-8
13:17
§ 257-8. Display of unassigned numbers.
The display of any street number other than that assigned by the Assessor
is expressly prohibited.
§ 257-9. Maintenance.
It shall be the responsibility of the lot, building or unit owner (or the lessee,
where applicable) to maintain at all times the number display as required
by and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 257-10. Building inspection; certifications.
§ 257-11. Noncompliance; enforcement.
§ 257-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine of $50 per violation. The amount of such fine shall be payable to the
Town of Easton.
New construction. All lots for which new construction has been
approved (as evidenced by issuance of a building permit) shall display
their assigned street numbers (in accordance with the provisions of
§ 257-7 of this article) prior to the performance of any construction
inspection.
A.
Completed construction. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
until the assigned street number is permanently displayed in
accordance with the provisions of § 257-7 of this article.
B.
Noncompliance deemed a violation. The owner (or owners jointly and
severally) of each lot, building or unit failing to display an assigned
street number as prescribed under the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed to be in violation of this chapter.
A.
Determination and warning. Upon the determination of any such
violation, the Board of Selectmen or its designee shall issue a warning
of violation, which warning shall provide a thirty-day period from the
date of issuance in which to correct such violation.
B.
Summons. Upon failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter
within the thirty-day warning period, the Board of Selectmen or its
designee shall issue a citation for violation of this chapter.
C.
Continuing violation. Each day beyond the thirty-day warning shall be
deemed a separate violation subject to the issuance of a new summons.
D.
§ 257-8 EASTON CODE § 257-13
13:18
§ 257-13. Exemption.
The owners of all existing lots, buildings or units in the Town of Easton shall
be exempt from any violation of the provisions of this chapter until 30 days
after the Assessor issues a written policy and publishes notice of it.
§ 257-14. Appeals and variances.
Any appeal or request for a variance shall be taken to the Board of
Selectmen, the majority decision of which shall be final.
§ 257-13 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 257-14
13:19
Chapter 273
DRIVEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 421.
§ 273-1. Permit required. [Amended 9-15-2014]
No owner of land shall construct or reconstruct a driveway in or
permanently surface any area between the paved portion of any road and
the abutting property line without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
Town Engineer. The Town Engineer shall be empowered to grant a waiver
of such permit upon recommendation by the Road Commission.
§ 273-2. Application for permit.
Applications shall set forth the name and address of the owner of the land,
location and layout of the driveway, together with contours at two-foot
intervals, and a drainage plan.
§ 273-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation failing to comply with the provisions of
this chapter or applicable road regulations shall, for each such offense, be
subject to a fine of not more than $100.
§ 273-4. Work done by Town.
In addition to the penalty provided for in § 273-3 of this chapter, if the
owner shall, after written notice, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter for a period of 60 days, the Town may cause such
work to be done as it deems necessary in order to comply with this chapter
and collect the actual costs thereof from the owner of the land upon which
the work was done.
Chapter 421
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Road Commission — See Ch. 179.
Numbering of buildings and lots — See Ch.
257.
Driveways — See Ch. 273.
Parking — See Ch. 373.
§ 257-14 EASTON CODE § 273-4
13:20
ARTICLE I
Construction and Maintenance
[Adopted 3-25-1980 as Title VIB of the 1980 Code of Ordinances]
§ 421-1. Supervision by Board of Selectmen.
The layout, widening, construction, reconstruction and repair of all roads,
bridges, sidewalks, curbs, storm drainage systems, and all other
construction necessary or appropriate to the foregoing shall be within the
control and supervision of the Board of Selectmen under Chapter 238 of the
General Statutes.
§ 421-2. Road Regulations.
No activity with respect to the construction or reconstruction referred to
in § 421-1 shall take place except in conformity with the currently effective
Easton Road Regulations promulgated by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 421-3. Acceptance of deed by Town.
No request for the acceptance by the Town of a deed to a road shall be
submitted to a Town Meeting unless said deed is a warranty deed conveying
clear title to the road together with necessary drainage easements and a
covenant guaranteeing, for a five-year period, the construction of roads in
accordance with the Easton Road Regulations, then currently effective. Said
deed shall be in a form satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen and to Town
Counsel.
§ 421-1 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 421-3
13:21

ARTICLE II
Excavations
[Adopted 3-25-1980 as Title VIC of the 1980 Code of Ordinances]
§ 421-4. Permit required. [Amended 9-15-2014]
No person, firm or corporation shall disturb the surface of any road within
the Town unless a permit has been obtained from the Town Engineer. A fee
of $25 shall be charged for each permit.
§ 421-5. Application for permit.
Applications for permits shall set forth the location of the intended
excavation, the size thereof, the purpose thereof, and the name and address
of the person, firm or corporation doing the actual excavating work, the
name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whom the work
is being done, and an agreement that the applicant will comply with all
ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done.
§ 421-6. Bond and insurance. [Amended 9-15-2014]
No such permit shall be granted until the applicant/owner shall file with the
Town Engineer:
§ 421-7. Restoration of damaged roads. [Amended 9-15-2014]
In the event that any person, firm or corporation accidentally disturbs
the surface of any road or excavates or otherwise performs work on a
road without a permit, such damage shall be restored at once, and the
repairs, paving or patching shall be done in accordance with the Easton
Road Regulations. If said repairs are not made within 10 days, after notice,
in writing, by the Town Engineer, the Town shall cause the necessary
restoration to be done and collect the total cost thereof, together with
reasonable legal fees, in a civil action against the party causing the damage
or the party for whose benefit the work was done.
§ 421-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation failing to comply with this article shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $100, in addition to the costs provided for
in § 421-7 hereof.
A cash or surety company bond in the amount of $15 for each square
yard of road surface to be disturbed, as determined by the Town, to
ensure the restoration of the roadway to its original condition; and
A.
Evidence of insurance coverage or financial responsibility sufficient
to indemnify and hold the Town harmless from any loss, liability or
damage which may arise out of the existence or manner of guarding or
constructing any such excavation.
B.
§ 421-4 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 421-8
13:23

ARTICLE III
Street Monuments
[Adopted 3-25-1980 as Title VIE of the 1980 Code of Ordinances]
§ 421-9. Replacement of destroyed monuments.
The cost of replacing a street monument destroyed or displaced either in
the course of constructing a building upon or landscaping property abutting
the monument shall be borne by the owner of the property abutting the
monument. If the property owner fails to replace a destroyed or displaced
monument within three months after notice, in writing, the Town may
replace the monument at the expense of the property owner.
§ 421-10. Penalties for offenses.
A property owner who violates the provisions of this article by failing to
replace a destroyed or displaced monument within three months after it is
destroyed or displaced shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100.
§ 421-9 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 421-10
13:25

ARTICLE IV
Snow Emergencies
[Adopted 3-25-1980 as Title IVC of the 1980 Code of Ordinances]
§ 421-11. Vehicles interfering with snow removal.
No person, firm or corporation shall allow any vehicle used or owned by him
or it or registered in his or its name to remain on a public street during
or after a snowstorm in such a manner as to interfere with the work of
removing or plowing snow or removing ice or in such a manner as to create
a traffic hazard.
§ 421-12. Removal of vehicles.
Any vehicle remaining on a street in violation of § 421-11 may be removed,
towed or conveyed by or at the direction of any member of the Police
Department by means of towing the same or otherwise to any Town
property or outdoor parking area or to a commercial place.
§ 421-13. Impoundment and recovery of vehicles. [Amended
9-15-2014]
The Board of Police Commissioners is authorized to designate one or more
suitable places for the impounding of motor vehicles. Impounded motor
vehicles may be repossessed only upon payment of a towing charge and
a storage charge. Said charges shall be set by the Board of Police
Commissioners from time to time. Preference will be given by the Board
of Police Commissioners to garages and towing facilities located within the
Town of Easton.
§ 421-14. Deposit of snow on streets prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation, including those owning, leasing, occupying
or having charge of any premises, shall cause or allow the removal or
deposit of snow from said premises onto the traveled portion of any public
street.
§ 421-15. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates the provisions of §§ 421-11 and 421-14 shall be
fined not more than $25. The fine shall be an addition to any towing and
storage charges paid under the provisions of § 421-13.
§ 421-11 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 421-15
13:27

ARTICLE V
Scenic Roads
[Adopted 9-20-1989]
§ 421-16. Findings and purpose.
§ 421-17. Authority of Planning and Zoning Commission.
The authority to designate a highway or any portion of any highway as a
scenic road is hereby delegated to the Planning and Zoning Commission of
the Town of Easton.
§ 421-18. Designation criteria.
The scenic and rural roads of the Town of Easton are an irreplaceable
resource.
A.
The scenic values of some rural roads in Easton have been destroyed
or are in danger of destruction because of past or potential alterations
to their rights-of-way. Such alterations have had, and could continue
to have, a significant adverse impact on the quality of the Town's
environment in general and, in particular, on aesthetic and historic
values that are of great but immeasurable benefit to residents and
visitors alike.
B.
As explicitly expressed by Public Act 81-401,1 the preservation and
protection of the scenic or historic values of rural roads is essential to
the welfare of the people of Connecticut. It is the purpose of this article
to balance that need in Easton with the traditional need to provide, in
transportation matters, for common convenience and public safety.
C.
Therefore be it ordained by the Town of Easton that, pursuant to the
authority granted by Public Act 81-401, the Town of Easton provide
for the designation of Town roads ("highways") or portions thereof
as scenic roads, and further in order to maintain the scenic nature
of highways so designated or portions thereof, the Town of Easton
is authorized to regulate, in accordance with this article, the future
alteration or improvement of roads so designated, including but not
limited to widening of the right-of-way or of the travelled portion of
the highway, paving, changes in grade, straightening, removal of stone
walls and removal of mature trees.
D.
No highway or portion of a highway shall be designated as a scenic road
if the abutting property contains intensive commercial development or
if the highway itself has intensive vehicular traffic. Prior to designating
a highway or portion thereof as a scenic road, the Planning and Zoning
Commission must first specifically find that at least one of the following
criteria is met:
A.
1. Editor's Note: See § 7-149a of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 421-16 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 421-18
13:29
§ 421-19. Procedure.
(1) The highway is unpaved;
(2) The highway is bordered by mature trees or stone walls;
The travelled portion of the highway is no more than 20 feet in
width;
(3)
(4) The highway offers scenic views;
(5) The highway blends naturally into the surrounding terrain; or
The highway parallels or crosses over brooks, streams, lakes, or
ponds.
(6)
No highway or portion thereof may be designated as a scenic road by
the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to this article unless
the owners of the majority of the lot frontage abutting the highway or
portion thereof agree to the designation of the highway as a scenic road
by filing a written statement of approval with the Town Clerk of the
Town of Easton.
B.
The Planning and Zoning Commission on its own initiative may consider
a highway or portion thereof for scenic road designation. Property
owners may petition the Planning and Zoning Commission for a
designation of a highway or portion thereof as a scenic road. The
petition shall state what road or portion of road is requested to be
designated as a scenic road and describe those characteristics of the
road which qualify it for scenic road status, as well as other
characteristics which enhance the scenic character of the road. The
petition shall be signed by the owners of a majority of lot frontage
abutting the road or portion of road in question (such ownership shall
be verified by the Town Assessor), stating that they approve of
designating the road or portion of road a scenic road and indicating,
to the best of their knowledge, their lot frontage along the road or
portion of the road in question. Each signer of the petition shall indicate
his or her address. The petition should also include the names and
addresses of owners of lot frontage abutting the road or portion of road
in question who did not sign the petition. The petition must contain the
name, address and signature of the circulator of the petition, who must
be a resident of Easton. Said petition shall also have a signed statement
by the circulator that the circulator either knows each individual who
signed the petition or that the signer satisfactorily identified himself or
herself to the circulator. An original and one copy of the petition shall
be filed with the Town Clerk, who shall retain the copy and forward the
original to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
A.
In order to designate a highway or portion thereof a scenic road,
the Planning and Zoning Commission shall first hold a public hearing
regarding the designation of such road as a scenic road. Notice of the
public hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general
B.
§ 421-18 EASTON CODE § 421-19
13:30
§ 421-20. Rescission and appeal.
§ 421-21. Application for alterations.
circulation in the Town of Easton at least twice in intervals of not less
than two days, the first not more than 15 days nor less than 10 days
and the last not less than two days prior to the date of such hearing,
and by sending a copy thereof by registered or certified mail to the
owners of lots fronting the highway or the portion of the highway to
be designated as a scenic road. The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall act upon the designation within the period of time permitted
under § 8-26d of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. Notice
of the decision of the Commission shall be published in a newspaper
having a substantial circulation in the Town of Easton and addressed by
certified mail to the owners of lots fronting on that highway or portion
thereof designated as a scenic road, by its Secretary or Clerk, under his
signature in any written, printed, typewritten or stamped forms, within
15 days after such decision has been rendered. Such notice shall be a
simple statement that the highway or a portion thereof was or was not
designated as a scenic road by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
together with the date of such action. The grounds for the designation
or nondesignation shall be stated in the records of the Commission and
shall include in as much detail as possible the special features which
make the highway so designated scenic, or the reasons for denying
designation.
The designation of a highway or a portion thereof as a scenic road
may be rescinded by the Planning and Zoning Commission using the
above procedures and provided that the owners of the majority of the
lot frontage abutting the highway or a portion of the highway concur
with such rescission as set forth in this article.
A.
Any person aggrieved by a designation or refusal to designate a
highway or portion of a highway as a scenic road pursuant to this article
or by any alteration or improvement of such highway may appeal such
designation in the manner and utilizing the same standards of review
provided for appeals from the decisions of the Planning and Zoning
Commission under Connecticut General Statutes § 8-28.
B.
Preservation objective. Routine maintenance and the regulation of
future alterations and improvements of designated highways shall be
carried out so as to preserve to the highest degree possible the scenic
characteristics of the highway which are indicated in the records of the
Planning and Zoning Commission as the basis for the designation.
A.
Hearing and decision responsibility. The alteration or improvement of a
designated scenic road shall be determined by the Board of Selectmen.
Any proposal for alteration or improvement, whether by public or
private applicant, shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, which shall hold a public hearing and submit findings of
B.
§ 421-19 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 421-21
13:31
fact and a recommendation to the Board of Selectmen. After a vote by
the Planning and Zoning Commission to maintain a designated highway
without change, the Board of Selectmen may overturn that vote only
by a unanimous vote of its own. The determination by the Board of
Selectmen shall be based on the findings of fact of the Planning and
Zoning Commission and shall give important weight to the
Commission's recommendation.
Routine road maintenance. Such maintenance shall include removal of
dead and seriously diseased or damaged trees and branches of trees;
trimming of the tree branches that encroach on the travelled portion
of the highway below the height needed to allow school buses and
emergency vehicles to pass; trimming or removal of brush and removal
of boulders or other obstacles that encroach on the travelled portion
of the road; necessary trimming for utility lines; trimming of brush to
enhance and protect scenic views, stone walls, mature trees and other
characteristics of the scenic road set forth in the decision designating
it a scenic road; correction of drainage problems without damage to
existing stone walls and mature trees; and graveling, retreatment and
repair of existing roadway surfaces.
C.
Natural disasters. In the case of a natural disaster in which a road
becomes impassable or unsafe for public travel and access must be
provided, emergency repairs may be made as needed.
D.
Standards for alterations. When contemplating alterations to a scenic
road for common convenience and necessity, including, without
limitation, safety reasons for fire and police considerations, the
following procedures shall be followed:
Review of a suitable map and, where deemed necessary by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, of a technical report
documenting the cited hazards and offering alternative solutions.
(1)
(2) Public hearing to allow full public participation.
A decision-making process that not only reviews the specific safety
features but also takes into account the overall impact of the
possible change in a scenic road as well as the public response.
(3)
The final decision shall reflect the least damages to the character of
the scenic road. If stone walls or portions thereof must be removed,
they shall be rebuilt along the untraveled portion of the scenic
road.
(4)
If alterations to a scenic road are required, then they shall be
planned with due regard to the following parameters:
Speed limits. Scenic values are correlated with lower speeds.
The lower speed shall be posted and suitably enforced.
(a)
(5)
E.
§ 421-21 EASTON CODE § 421-21
13:32
Curves. Scenic values are correlated with the existence of
curves, which allow a constant unfolding of new and changing
views. Curves shall not be eliminated until they are found to be
a definite hazard within the concept of the specific road.
(b)
Grades. Hills and valleys are correlated with scenic values.
They shall not be destroyed by cuts and fills unless absolutely
essential for road safety.
(c)
Widths. A narrow road is correlated with high scenic beauty.
Designated highways should not be widened unless the amount
of traffic, as determined by a professionally based factual
study, demands it. For some rural roads, the amount of traffic
that can be handled can be greatly increased by wide bypasses
and turnouts, constructed at intervals where they do least
damage to scenic and other values.
(d)
Side slopes. Existing steepness of side slopes is preferable to
reduction of gradient by extensive removal of soil and rock.
This is especially true where the slope is fully stabilized and
where it is rich with existing ground cover, shrubs and trees.
(e)
Vistas. Vistas of distant landscapes shall be preserved by
suitable vegetation management techniques.
(f)
Utility lines. Wherever possible, utility lines should be put
underground. Where they are overhead the utility corporations
should cooperate by implementing suitable vegetation
management techniques which preserve the wildflowers and
the shrubs.
(g)
Vegetation. Vegetation on the side of the road shall be
managed in such a way as to preserve wildflowers, shrubs of
ornamental wildlife values, larger trees overarching smaller,
isolated trees, as well as closed forest canopies, all of which
have extremely high scenic values. [Amended 9-15-2014]
(h)
Billboards, sand, gravel and salt piles, refuse disposal, and
other unsightly structures or situations shall be forbidden.
Where possible, scenic and preservation easements should be
acquired from adjacent owners to ensure the continuance of
natural relief, desirable features, and scenic and historic
values in the public interest.
(i)
Any action under Subsections A, B, C and D shall be taken in
a manner which will avoid or reduce adverse effects on the
characteristics of the designated highway specified in the decision
designating it a scenic road. Any reconstruction of a designated
highway shall be done in similar manner with a view to restoring
the road to the extent possible to its scenic character at the time of
designation.
(6)
§ 421-21 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 421-21
13:33
§ 421-22. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
Paving criteria. Paving of the unpaved travelled portion of a scenic road
shall be permitted only if the owners of a majority of lot frontage along
the unpaved portion of the road indicate their approval of the paving by
signing a written statement agreeing to the paving and filing it with the
Town Clerk.
F.
Rights of landowners.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit a person owning
or occupying land abutting the highway or portion thereof
designated as a scenic road by the Planning and Zoning
Commission from:
Maintaining and repairing the land which abuts the road so
designated if the maintenance occurs on land not within the
right-of-way, paved or unpaved, of the scenic road; or
(a)
Having access to his property by driveway or subdivision road
encroachment within the rights-of-way, provided that such
encroachment is constructed so as to safeguard the highway's
scenic features as recorded by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(b)
(1)
Nothing herein shall prohibit a landowner from permanently
removing a portion of a stone wall in order to construct or improve
a driveway or, in the case of a subdivision, to connect a subdivision
road with a designated scenic road.
(2)
G.
This article shall be enforced by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
acting through its designated enforcement official(s).
A.
Violation of this article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $100 per
day for each day the violation continues and such other legal remedies
as may be available to the Commission.
B.
§ 421-21 EASTON CODE § 421-22
13:34
ARTICLE VI
Acceptance of Conveyance of Streets
[Adopted 5-12-1997]
§ 421-23. Delegation of power to Selectmen.
The power under § 13a-48 of the Connecticut General Statutes to accept
proposed public highways and streets is delegated to the Board of
Selectmen according to the procedures set forth in this article as they may
be amended from time to time.
§ 421-24. Procedure.
The following procedure shall be used when the owner of a street proposes
to convey it to the Town:
The owner shall request the Town Engineer in writing to inspect the
street and all other improvements installed or made in connection
with it for the purpose of the Town Engineer's recommending to the
Planning and Zoning Commission that the street and improvements
have been constructed and completed according to the Town's road
ordinances and Subdivision Regulations and the decision of said
Commission approving the subdivision where the street is located. The
owner's request shall include the owner's certification that the street
and improvements have been constructed and completed as described
herein. The owner shall provide the Planning and Zoning Commission
with a copy of the owner's request and certification.
A.
If the Town Engineer shall so recommend, he shall also advise the
Commission:
That all required as-built drawings have been received by him and
approved by him as complying with the Subdivision Regulations;
(1)
Of the amount of the proposed maintenance bond to be filed by the
owner under Section VIId(3) of the Subdivision Regulations; and
(2)
Of such recommendations as the Town Engineer may deem
appropriate regarding acceptance of the street and/or its
maintenance.
(3)
B.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet to consider the Town
Engineer's recommendation within 30 days after its receipt.
C.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall decide within 30 days after
the conclusion of its meeting whether to recommend to the Board
of Selectmen as to the items listed in Subsection B and notify the
owner of its decision. If the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
so recommend, it shall accordingly advise the Board of Selectmen,
including the amount of the proposed maintenance bond and such other
recommendations as the Commission may deem appropriate regarding
the acceptance of the street and/or its maintenance.
D.
§ 421-23 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 421-24
13:35
§ 421-25. Conveyance of easements.
The acceptance and recording of conveyances to the Town of easements
other than for open spaces and rights-of-way (exclusive of public streets),
Within 30 days after the Planning and Zoning Commission's decision
to recommend to the Board of Selectmen, the owner shall request the
Board of Selectmen to accept the street as a public street. The owner's
request shall include a list of the names and addresses of the owners of
all lots abutting the street. The owner's request shall also include the
following documents:
(1) Form of proposed maintenance bond.
(2) Proposed warranty deed for street.
Certificate of title to the Town to be signed by a Connecticut
attorney, certifying that title to the street is free and clear of all
encumbrances except those imposed by law.
(3)
Evidence that all real property taxes on the street have been paid
to the date of conveyance.
(4)
(5) Proposed Connecticut conveyance tax returns.
(6) Form of notice to be given abutting lot owners.
E.
After the Board of Selectmen has completed its review of the
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Town
Counsel has completed his or her review of the documents enumerated
in Subsection E, the Board of Selectmen shall place the owner's request
on an agenda of a Selectmen's meeting to be held not sooner than 10
days before such meeting or more than 30 days after it.
F.
The Board of Selectmen shall cause notice of its meeting at which the
owner's request shall be heard to be published in a newspaper having
a circulation in the Town. In addition, the owner shall give notice by
registered or certified mail of the date, time and place of the meeting
to all owners of lots abutting the street and shall certify to the Board
of Selectmen that such notice has been given. The Board of Selectmen
shall not act upon the owner's request until the owner can so certify.
G.
The Board of Selectmen shall notify the owner of its decision regarding
the owner's request within 30 days after the completion of the meeting
at which it was heard. If the owner's request is granted, the owner
shall cause the owner's attorney to complete the recording of the deed
for the street and the certification of title with respect thereto, all
at the owner's expense. The owner shall also deliver to the Planning
and Zoning Commission the completed subdivision maintenance bond
for action by the Commission, including release of the subdivision
improvements bond pursuant to the Commission's Subdivision
Regulations.
H.
§ 421-24 EASTON CODE § 421-25
13:36
as required by the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to its
regulations or as part of its approval of a subdivision, shall be administered
by the Planning and Zoning Commission according to its regulations, rules
and procedures.
§ 421-26. Inconsistencies with other ordinances.
In the event of an inconsistency between this article and any other
ordinance, the provisions of this article shall govern.
§ 421-27. Purposes.
The purposes of this article are to simplify the procedure for accepting
streets and to designate which Town board shall have the power to do so.
§ 421-25 ASSESSMENT APPEALS, BOARD OF § 421-27
13:37

T 0 W N 0 f ~-A ST 0 N
S U B D I V I S I 0 N H S G U L A T I 0 N S
Effective Date: Fe1irua~y ~4. 1989
,·-.·-.,:· ...
I
:•.;,. -
·.:.· \ ..
; . .. . "'·. ~-::' ·,
·. REGULATIONS COVERING THE SUBDIVISION
OF LAND WITHIN THE TOWN OF EASTON
•·
Section
I
II
III
IV
v
VI
VII
VIII
TABLE OF CONTENTS
GENERAL PU!:lPOSE
DEFINITIONS
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
STREET AND HIGHWAY REQUIREMENTS
SUBDIVISION PLAN (Description of
Plan and Plan-Profile Drawings)
PROCEDURE
ADMINISTRATION
!:·AMPLE FORMS
FOREWORD
Page
1-2
3-6
7-17
18-27
28-35
.36-42
43-47
48-58
The Town of Easton at a dulv warned Town Meeting held October 6,
1947, did, pursuant to Section 4 of Public Act No. '.us as ~nacted
by the 1947 General Assembly, by ordinance designat~ its Zoning
Commission as the Planning and Zoning Commission for the To.wn of
Easton.
Pursuant to Public Act No. 516, as enacted by the 1947 General
A~~embly, th~ P!anni~g a~d z~~i~g C0~~iszion adopted regul~tions
covering the subdivision of land within the Town of EastonJ
effective March 6, 1948.
The 1953 General Assembly by special act validated the subdivision
regulations as amended. There have been subsequent
amendments to the regulations from time to time ..
...
. SECTION I
.. -.· -
GENERAL PURPOSE
The purpose of these regulations is to coordinate the growth of
the Town of Easton by guiding the devel6pment of land within the
town in such a manner as to:
a. Insure that population expansion does not outstrip the
growth of Town services;
b. Insure that land not suitable for development remains
Llnde1-•e loped;
c. Promote the ~~blic health, safety and welfare of the Town
and the Region;
d. Protect the water supply for the Greater Bridgeport region;
e. ·Conserve the nature! beauty of the Town in keepi~g with its
rural agricultural nature, for the benefit of the citizens
of both the Town and the Region;
f. Protect the rights of current and future landowners,
including owners of the proposed subdivisions and
neighboring landowners;
g. Insure that proper provision is 1r1ade for water,
and sewerage, and that proper provision is ma~e
for protective flood control r~eaeures; \
a' re.1..r -'c .g·e
for
h. In~ure that pr6per provision is made for sedimentation and
erosion control;
, Insure that prop~sed stre~ts conform to gen~~aJ!y accept~d
safety and engineering guidelines, are in harmony with
existing or pro~iosed princiiial thor9ughfares shown in the
plan of developmeni, and provide an adequate and convenient
systern for present and future traffic needs;
j. F'rc1vide fc.1r c1f,er1 S);'.1.;-.ces, 1,ar}:s e.nd :playgr·c.1.ir1ds loc2.ted so
as t0 adequately and prop~rly serve the nebd~ of the Town·s
~~8sider~ts.
:-: . ·"-"·" '·1-·. .•·. r
~~)~•rov~d sutdi;·isi0n I'l~n are c0m~·l~ted ~~ the ~x~·ense 0f
t.~·!~ ~ 1;bdivid~~ ~~1 1 ~i~~!i~ ~ r~~~0r~~~)!e ti!~~-
..... ,, .. _.
' . -·; .~:··
•· )
-- - --:---- ----- --.--.--~-
':'i''· SECTION. I · ·.·~ .... · . .
'\
.'i-
' GENERAL PURPOSE (cont. d)
1. Insure clear access by emergency vehicles to all
residences, and to other structures designated by the
Commission.
m. Encourage energy-efficient development.
2
.,~: -· SECTION II
. ; ~-.
DEFINITION~.
All terms used in the Subdivision Regulations, unless otherwise
specifically defined therein, shall have the same meaning as
such terms have in the Zoning Regulations.
a. "Approach" shall mean that segment of a street representing
the approach to an intersection, beginning at a point
seventy-five (75) feet from the centerline of the
intersecting street as measured along the centerline
of said segment.
b. "Average Daily Traffic" on any street shall mean the
traffic expressed as vehicles per day (vpd).
Projections of Average Daily Traffic shall take into
account the existing traffic load, the additional load
generated by the new residences within the proposed
development, and the load projected assuming
development of undeveloped acreage in the
vicinity and/or construction of a street shown on an
adopted plan of development.
c. "Board of Selectmen" shall mean the Board of Selectmen
d.
of the Town of Easton, Connecticut. or its duly auth~rized
representative.
"Commission" shall mean the Planning and
Zoning Commission of the Town of Easton, Connecticut, or
its duly authorized representative .
.::... "He.:-,1 t.l-1 (iffice!'.'" 2h.:i.ll rr!-=·=.r1 -t:~·:.=::- !-1e.:i.l ·t-h officer c~:f th~
Town of Easton, Connecticut, or his duly authorized
represer1t,a t.i vB.
....
. 1"··. \}SECTION II
f. "Historic Trail" shall mean a parcel of land situated on
one or more lots of an approved or proposed subdivision
plan which can be shown to have been used custom~rily as
a travelway by persons on foot or on horseback prior to
the adoption of zoning regulations in the Town of Easton
(6/25/41).
g. "Minimum Approach Tangent" shall mean the safe minimum
uncurved segment of a street extending from its point of
intersection with another street to the point where
curvature having a radius of less than 500 feet begins.
h. "Minimum Curve Radius·· shall mean the radius of curv.;,ture
of a street assuming a norrnal crown with adverse slo~e of
0.015 ft/ft .;,nd a design speed of 30-mph, measured from the
inside curbline or streetline.
i. "Minimum Intersection Sight Distance" shall mean the sight
distance necessary to provide a stopped driver at an
intersection safe entrance into the intersection.
j. "Minimum Tangent" shall mean the safe minimum uncurved
segment of a street situated between two oppositely curved
segments wherein the radius of curvature is less thaP 500
feet.
k. "Neighborhood Association" shall mean e.n association
comprised of all the lot owners within a subdivision,
each owning an undivided percentage interest in an
open space area including a neighborhood playground,
park, recreation area or facility, as defined in an
approved s11bdi.vision plan. The owner of ea~h lot i~
the subdivision shall automatically become a member of
such association. Neighborhood associations shall ba
entirely responsible for the cost of maintaining such
open space areas and facilities.
1. "Open Space" shall mean a parcel of land reserved from
intensive development and dedicated to a p0blic or private
organization for appropriate care and maintenance
consistent Nith ~ither (1) its use for recreatj.or:. ~c~nic
i~ a n~tur~l stat~.
n:. ''F'r:.:·f~s5ic-!·1.:-.l Er1&.':i:·le-::-:::.' ()!.' L.:i.r~i:l ~31J:::.~ve~l(1 :::.··· si-~.:-.11 uie.:i.!·1 ,:i_r1y
~i?rty ~ir~D2~d l~y th~ St~~~ (1f ~·=·~~~~tic•1t B·)~rd 0f
E°<3g:i::;t1',:,,i.. . lC·(~ ~!~'!.' r'r(,fo::;.:,.=;,i.·. . ·!1.:-: . .:. ~n.~."~r:~-:-r.7: ,:-,t,,.l ~-:1.f1 1 :i ::d.l!.''/~y1:i!.'S.
'
·-·:
''Resubdivision'' shall mean a change in a map of an appro~ed
or recorded subdivision or resubdivision if such change {a)
affects any street layout shown on such map; (b) affects
any area reserved thereon for public use: or (c) diminishes
the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional
building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been
conveyed after the approval or recording of such map as
defined in Section 8-18 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as they may be amended from time to time.
o. "Right-of-Way" shall mean, in the case of a propos"'d
subdivision, all of that land included between street lines
as shown on the subdivision plan to be dedicated by deed to
the Town of Easton for use of the general public as a
street or highw2.y, and, in the case of a previol1sly
existing street or highway, all of that land between the
recognized street lines, or all that land included
as part of one or more lots, as shown on an
approved or proposed subdivision plan, and identified as an
historic trail to be used by persons on foot or horseback.
p. "Roadway" shall mean that portion of a street or highway
developed and paved for the accommodation
of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
q. "Simple Division" shall mean the first division of a parcel
or tract of land into not more than two parts or lots'
subsequent to March 6,,1948.
r. "Street" or "Highway" shall mean the entire right-of-way,
either existing or proposed by the subdivider, to te
dedicated or used or presently in use for the purpose of
J;11.1blic tra.vel.
s. . "Su.bdi vider" s liall !i1ear1 tf1e ir1di 'lirlt1.:tl .. partr1er.:.;fJ.i:f) J c'r
cor~oration which will be responsible for tlle construction
of all improvements and subsequent sale of lots and/o~
dwelling units.
t. "2·ubdivision" shall mean the division of a tract or parcel
of land into thre~ (3) or mo~e·parts or lots mad~
subsequent to March 6, 1948 for the purpose, whether
im~edi~te or future: af sale o~ buildi~g devel·Jf>m~~t.
expressly excluding developrner1t for rnunicipal, conservation
er ~gri~ultur~l purpos~s and incl1;dtng ~csubdivision. as
defined in the Connecticut General Statutei. Sec~iort 8-18,
)
' '
u. "Subdivision Bond" shall mean funds dt>posited with or
committed to the Town to guarantee completion·of
subdivision improvements, including any tha.t. may be
required for roads; drainage .. control, setting of monuments
and iron pins, specified improvements in open space.
control of soil erosion and sedimentation during
development activities, and cornrl~tion of satisfactory asbuil
t drawings where specified. · · ·
v. ''Subdivision Map'' shall mean that part of a subdivision (or·
resubdivision) plan which is recorded or filed in the
w.
office of the Town Clerk as the record map. It shall show
the title and boundaries of the subdivision, the layout of
lots and streets, easements, right-of-ways, open space
areas, wetlands, required notations, and other details
specified by the Commission.
"Subdivision Plan" shall mean that final drawing or set of
drawings and documents on which the subdivider·s complete
plan is shown in accordance with the requirements of these'
Subdivision Regulations. These items shall always include
a Subdivision Map.
x. "Subdivision Regulations" shali'mean that set of
requirements lawfully adopted by the Commission governing
subdivision of land within the Town, as may be amended from
time to time.
y. "Town" shall mean the Town of Easton, Connect.icut, acting
at a town meeting or through the Board of Sel"lctmen or
other duly authorized representative:
z. "Town Line" shall mean the line on a map which correctly
shows and locates at all points on the boundary or any part
thereof where the Town of Easton abuts any of the adjacent
towns.
aa. "Vertical Alignment" shall mean the grade expressed as
percentage along the centerline of a roadway either at the
point where one street intersects with another or in the
approach to an intersection (see "Approach").
bb. "Watercourse" shall mean any river, stream, brook,
waterway, lake, por1d, marsh, swamp, bog, and any other
body of water, natural or artificial, vernal or
intermittent, public or private, which is contained within,
flows through, or borders upon the Town or any portion ·
thereof.
wat.er d.:::.~.::.ir1s i.~·1tc\ c\r !)!11:.(i .~1.lc!·~ \·L3."':~::..~ ·:.·,)1Jrse •.:•:•_· ~),::i.v·::cl rc.::~cl.
B
. '
.. - - - ---------~· ---
SECTION III
.. '!• ...
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
a. Unless otherwise indicated herein, the term subdivision
shall include any resubdivision.
b. Approved Plan Required
No subdivision of land shall be made until a plan for such
subdivision has been approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Subdivision Map duly filed and recorded
in the office of the Town Clerk.
c. Conditions for Sale of Lots
No building lots delineated on a Subdivision Plan shall be
sold until: (1) The Subdivision Map approved by the
Commission has been filed or recorded by the Town Clerk, and
(2) All of the subdivision improvements specified in the
Subdivision Plan approved by the Commission have been
completed.in a manner satisfactory to the Commission, or a
bond in form and content satisfactory to the Commission and
in accordance with Section VI-k and VII-d of these
regulations has been posted with the Commission.
d. Compliance with Regulations and Codes
-----------------------~-------------
Plans for the subdivision of land shall conform to these
Regulations, the Easton Zoning Regulations, all applicable
State Statutes and Codes, and all other applicable
regulations and ordinances of·the Town of Easto~, including
adopted elements of the plan of development. Sewage
disposal and water supply installations shall be made l~
accordance with th~ standards and requirements of the
Connecticut Public Health Code.
e. Suitability of Land
The land to be subdivided shall be of such ~haracter that it
can be us~d for building purposes without damage to health
or the public 5afety, 6nd without adverse effects on the
environm~nt and the qu~lity of both surfa~~ wat~re and
gro11ndwater r,reser1t in any underlying aquifers. Land
subjec~ to periodic flooding or land having poor drainag~,
st~~p slopes or oth~r unsui~able conditions shall not be
:::1.tt1di v ·~(l~c2.
' "
"
' ' f. Lot Size and Arrangement
Lot sizes and shapes shall be as required in the Zoning
Regulations of the Town of Easton. The Commission may
require lots larger than prescribed by the Zoning
Regulations in the event that it determines the existence of
difficult site conditions such as steep slopes, poor
drainage, wetlands, or periodic flooding which would
adversely affect the supply of water, disposal df sewage, or
health and safety of residents. Layout of lots shall
conform to engineering practice and sl1all
the character and topography of the land.
shall be at right angles to the street or
practical.
be appropriate for
Lines of lots
highway wherever
Lots within the proposed subdivision bounded by more than
one street are not permitted except for corner lots and
situations of unusual topography or property lines. No
parcels, strips or other remnants of land or blocking strips
of a size unsuited for a minimum building lot in the zoning
district in which such parcel, strip or other remn.?,nt is
located shall be left in any subdivision except where such
parcels are deemed desirable for purposes of open space,
conservation or the future construction of, extension, or
widening of streets.
g. Public and Private Open Space
Where reasonably necessary for the advancement of the public
health, safety, and welfare or where conditions particularly
applicable to the proposed subdivision require, the
subdivision plan shall provide for area(s) dedicated to open
space use· in the form of brook and stream protection, parks,
pls.yg1·cJur1ds, 1:i1· ar1 .:i.·i·ea 1:leci.ic.:tted to th0: cor1sei..·vati,:;r1 of c~
scenic feature, historic landmark, trail, or other natural
resource. The Commission may require up to 15% of the total
area of the subdivision to be dedicated.for this purpose.
In addition, the Commission may upon receipt of a
recornrnendation fr1)f!J tt1e ConservatirJr1 <~ornrnissior1, reqL1ire one
or more easements restricting the use, alteration or
disturbance of one or more natural areas for the purpose of
~stablishing or preserving a corridor conn~cting t~o open
5~12ce areas. ;)~eserving a buffer strip adja~~nt t0 a farrn.
f·reserving scenic vie~ing ~•i)ints or views, and Iir~serving
&.rL f1isto1~ic t.14 .~il s~1 .::t.err:. :3.:i.iC. 8-?..-:::-:-.:;i~r1t.5 sl-1.:tll l='r(1Vir1e f 1:i14
~~~~ss by Town c:)ffic~~ls or Coramissi•)n~r~ f0r the p11rp0s~s
of inspection and marking boundari~s: and by citi=~ns for
a~)pr0~1riate us~ 0f t-he his~ori~ ~rail sys~ern 0r c0rrid0r.
1. The Commission may require that th~ dedi~ated area b~
located at a suitable place on the boundary of the
Sl.l bdi vis ior1 so tl-1.:t t a cc-r1 tig1.lrJ1J.s 2.r~!.:t c•f c1i:1er~ s:pace
may be added at such time as the adjoining land is
subdivided.
8
2.
3.
4.
, I.·
The Commission may specify the location of any proposed
or required open space area.
Any subdivision application which provides for public
or private open space under the terms of this article
shall contain an open space site improvement and
maintenance plan if required by the Commission. This
open space plan shall be prepared by a licensed
landscape architect or a registered professional
engineer, and is subject to the approval of the
Comrnission.
The applicant may determine the future ownership of
the open space area, and shall prepare the
necessary documents providing for conveyance of title
and future access and maintenance obligations for
review and approval by the Commission. Ownership
alternatives which may be considered by the applicant
are as follows:
A. Convey to the Town of Easton;
B. Convey to a Non-Profit Land Conservation
Trust or Corporation;
C. Convey to a Neighborhood Association.
D. Grant easement to the Town for open space
purpose;s.
Where land is to be conveyed to a neighborhood
association, the applicant shall ~ubmit to the
Commission for prior approval a form of deed to each
lot conveying an undivided percentage interest in such
0;ie~ space tog~the~ ~ith proposed declaration o~
r~st~ictions a?Pli·:able to all 10ts in the Subdivision
which specifically provides for an obligation in the
association to maintain such open space area.
6. Except as otherwise permitted in writing by the
Commission~ th~re shall be no depositing 1 dumping, r·~
st.i)rage i:if w,:tste (ll" other r1.:i.t1J.ra.l c.•r rr.i.:tr1-rr1,':\de
materials. supplies. or equipment on any subdivision
land designated_as op~n space. No work, nor sail
rer~ov~l: nor fillj.ng s11all be done. nc1r shall t~~
~xisting natural ch~racteristics of op~n spac~ land b~
.:-.1 te:c-::d. exce:pt ir1 ,:t•.~·.::ord.:rrH::t:: wi t.t~ .=i. si t.e irrri:;rove!ner1t
F;~a~ appro~e~ by ~h~ r:01rl~nissi0n.
_,' _ - --------------- - --. -
-·,-::,-" .. t•, .:-.... ~,-.;.:_·
. .
•'
SECTION III
7 . A copy of each application for subdivision
shall be furnished by applicant to the
Conservation Commission no later than the same day
it is submitted to the Commission.
h. Monuments and Lot Pins
Street lines shall be marked with concrete monuments as
specified in Section IV of these Regulations. Lot corners
and intermediate angle points marking major changes in
direction (as specified by the Town Engineer) shall be
marked with iron pins at least three-quarters inch (3/4'') in
diameter by thirty-six "36" inches long where not otherwise
marked by monuments. 2·imilar iron pins shall be used to
mark the boundaries of easements and open space areas. The
subdivider shall keep these markers in full view during
development of the subdivision.
i. Test Pits
The subdivider shall dig one test pit in both the primary
and reserve areas on each proposed lot, to a depth of seven
feet or refusal. The required tests shall be performed in
the presence of a representative of the Town Health Officer,
and the test report certified by a professional engineer
licensed in Connecticut. One or more additional test pits
shall be dug on any lot( s) designated by the C\·rnmission in
order to more fully determine the suitability of soil
conditions in both the primary and reserve areas.
Locations of test pits shall be staked and numbered at the
site, and identified by number on Drawing No. 3 of
the Subdivision Plan.
If a pro~>osed subdivision includes a lo~
having an existing residence or habitabl~ str1;cture.
applicant must submit evidence that the existing disposal
system is adequate for the use and occupancy, and that there
is a reserve area having sufficient area and suitable soil
conditions.
j. Unauthorized Site Work
Ex~~~)t 2s requir~d fer ~e2t ~iits ~nd ~~yv~y 1J0rk, n0 laTI~
clearing, regrading, exc~v~tion. or construction activity
that raay affect the arr~ngernent of streets er lots on a
proposed subdivi~i0n site shall tak~ pl~·:e after s1lbmissi0r~·
of a subdivision application until the fin~l Subdivision
?lan has b~~n ~p~r(iv~d h~· ~.!·:~ ~~·m~i~~i0n.
' ~ \
\. - ' Ar~y iJ.r~.~1J.tt1.:~ri2e::t ::~it.-:: '-1•.:.--1·!: cc·nnrier!ced .. :i.fte1· ;:.1.1l:iH1i::;sic·~·i
of a subdivision application rnay be considered cause
ic·:~: irrirr:-::di.;..te der1i.:i.l c.1.f tf1e s1J( .. :li \ri~·iC·rt ·:t:t=1r1lii:.:i.tic,r1 2.r1d.
forfeiture of the application fee.
10
~~ .·~!:,~f~t?.>:-.>,-- . ·'··:·····
·.~:;t,,,, ECTION. I I I
. ;-•: ~~~ ·-~- , ' 'r,i:~-.4~;;;-~:.,:;~_:.,~- •.' ' -
, k. Drainage and Sewage -Disposal
Subdivision Plans shall make provision for water supply,
storm water drainage and sanitary sewage disposal for 211
lots in accordance with the Connecticut Public Health Code.
In areas contiguous to brooks, rivers, swamps or other
bodies of water, adequate flood control measures w~st be·
incorporated in the plan, in accordance with Article X of
the Zoning Regulations.
(1) The subdivision storm drainage system shall be
designed to accommodate a 50-year-frequency, 24-hourduration
storm, assuming full development of the site.
Under these conditions there shall be zero (0) increase
in the rate of runoff from the site unless the
Commission shall allow a specific maximum percentage
increase after consideration of the number of lots
involved and the characteristics of both upstream and
downstream drainage systems. Pertinent design
calculations shall be submitted for review by the
(~()rrnnissic)r1.
( 2) Discharge of storm water frc•rn dri vew.3_ys, basements
and/or roof drains onto Town streets is prohibited.
Discharge of such water to road drainage systems is
allowed only with approval of the Commission, un~~r the
conditions that:
a. The owner assumes responsibility ~nd agrees
to hold the Town harmless for failure of
performance of any portion of said private
systems that may affect the rate at w~ich such
water is accepted by th~ Town·s road drainage
syst~ms, aud for the maintenanc~ or repair of
any private drain lines or appurtenances which
conduct such water to the Town·s systems.
A note to this effect shall be placed on the
Subdivision Map, and the proposed method of disposing
of this water for each lot shall be shciwn on Drawing
No. 3 of the.Subdivision Plan.
2.1
,.
' , 1. .Percolation Tests
Where onsite sewage disposal systems are to be installed,
the applicant shall present evidence of satisfactory
percolation teets in both the primary and reserve areas for
each proposed lot in accordance with the pertinent
requirements of the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut effective August 16, 1982, as the same has been,
or rn.;,y be, amended frorn time to time. The adequacy of e.:tch
lot to accommodate the necessary primary and reserve systems
must be derfionstrated to the satisfaction of the Commission.
Each such percolation test shall be made in the presence of
the Town Health Officer or his representative.
Alternatively, the results thereof shall be certified by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut.
A percolation test may not be accepted if it has been
performed on a day immediately following a period of thirty
days in ~hich there has been less than two inches of
precipitation as recorded at the Bridgeport Station of the
U.S. Weather Service.
m. Gravity Systems Required
Building lots shall be of such size, shape, and arrangement,
and proposed houses shall be so loc."ited in both pl2.n and
elevation, so that sanitary sewage will flow by gravity to
l 1ot11 tl"ie i;1i.~irnary .=ir1d reserve se\.iag;e dis:posal s:fsterns. ' ~/jnotation
to this effect shall be made on the Sdbdivision Map
and Drawing No. 3, Proposed Grading, Drainage, and Disposal
Map. Under unusual site circumstances, a p~mped sewage
disposal system may be permitted if all of the following
conditions can be satisfied:
lil Any line conducting sewage from a pump to leaching
· field shall comply as to location and construction
with the Public Health Code of the State of
Cc,nnecticut.
( 2) To c-.ssure maximum dependability of operation,
duplicating alternating purnps are required along:
with a 1,000 gallon pump chamber to provide
emergency storage capa1:ity.
by ~ licensed professiorlal er1gineer. l1p0n CC•!8I)letio~
~i t~l~ i~s~2llati0n. 2 c~rtifi~tl ~ngine~rihg drawing
shoqing all l!)Ceti0!1s, distanG~s, elevati0ns
~~~ ~~1J~P!~~nt ~;·e~ification~ 0f ~1=~ install~d
~yst~~ ~h~ll b~ s1l~mitt~d to th~ C0r~r~issi0~.
12
~-:, ''
. ;: , (4) In the event the Commission approves a pumped system
on request of applicant the approved plan shall so
indicate.
n. Public Water Supply
In subdivisions where public water is to be
furnished, all necessary mains, laterals to the street line
of each lot, and fire hydrants shall be installed at the
expense of the subdivider to the satisfaction of the
Cornr!J is s i c1r1.
(1) If the proposed subdivision lies partly or entirely
within District A, the distribution line(s) of a
supplier of public water, if capable of supplying the
necessary water, shall be extended to the subdivision,
and a water distribution system shall be installed to
provide a sufficient ~uantity and quality of water to
the residents of said subdivision, and to assure the
availability of water from fire hydrants at appropriate
locatior1s.
(2) If a proposed subdivision lies entirely within District
B, the Commission may require extension of the line(s)
of a supplier of public water to the subdivision,.
and/or installation of a water distribution system
within the said subdivision, in the event that the
public water supplier's line(s) are within a rea~onable
distance and capable of supplying· the necessary·water.
(3) A public water line would not be considered capable of
supplying the necessary water if there is written
evid~n~e pr~sented by ap~)licant showing ins1Jfficient
capacity or pressure.
(4) The water distribution system within the proposed
subdivision shall include mains on all streets, said
mains to be capped at the terminal points and available
·for future connections. Any necessary_easem~nts from
the terminal points to the property lines shall be
granted to the apf1r0r1riate utility cc1mpany.
(~. I~ ~~~~s where u~d~vel0ped a~re2g~ 2but~ t.~~
~i)bdivisiorr and a subdivision street terminates at the
bou~dary thereof. the water main in that street st1all
be extend~d to the f&rthest edge 0f th~ rirop0~e~
'f1.';',verr!.::-r1"t.
o. Utility Lines . :-:.' ·~
Electric power and communications utility lines shall be
installed underground. However, the Commission may allow
above-ground installations in the event that it determines
that the Subdivision Plan does not propose a new street,. or
that site conditions including wetlands and ledge rock
impose a substantial cost and maintenance burden. If the
installation is underground it shall satisfy the following
requirements:
(1) Except for power lines located within the
boundaries of individual lots and serving
residences or other structures located on said
lots, all power distribution lines shall be
located within easements abutting the street
right-of-W·"<Y .
. (2) All underground power, telephone and cable TV
utility lines shall be installed in separat~
conduits.
(3) The horizontal and vertical locations of utility lines
installed as part of the subdivision improvements shall
be shown on one or more as-built drawing(s). (See
Section V c of th~se Regulations)
p. Water for Fire Protection
The Subdivision Plan shall include provision for Wc.ter for
fire protection purposes. In those cases where ~ublic water
is piped into the subdivision, fire hydrants shall be
lo~~ted ~t i~te~vals approved by the Commission. In cases
where public water is not available, the installation of a
±:.i!:e ::;·~)~1'.'.:1 c~e1:~~~r~~~r:ec.~ "t1j.P 1:h~ i~C·r7!~r!~S:'3iC,rl tc· be c.);'.;o.1"Jle of
providing fire-fighting protection, along with any necessary
dry hydrants and access easements, shall be required, except
where adverse soil conditions and a low water table preclude
a fire pond and/or a supply of off~site.surface water in
close proximity to the subdivision is available and
suffici~nt to provide fire protection.
.. . • q . Erosion and Sedimentation Control
The subdivider shall ensure that construction work will not
create silting or otherwise affect downstream watercourses
within or beycnd the subdivision. The Commission may
require the construction of temporary silting basins and
restoration of original conditions upon completion of the .
development. The Commission shall require a bond to cover
the cost of any necessary installations. These regulations
incorporate by reference the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control (SESC) Regulations of the Town of Easton .. In the
event of any inconsistency between th~ SESC Regulations and
the Subdivision Regulations. the SESC Regulations shall
f)re~.rail.
r. Preservation of Natural Features
Due regard shall be given to the preservation and I)otential
enhancement of existing natural features, large trees,
scenic points, historic trails, and other assets of a
community nature. The Commission may require tree planting
along streets and tree and shrub !ilanting where needed for
screening purposes, such plantings to be detailed on Drawing
No. 5 of the Subdivision Plan (see Section V). Removal of
stripped topsoil or surplus earth materials from the
subdivision area shall not be permitted other than in accord
witl1 t!1e Eastc•J1 Z1:.r1iri.g Reg1.1.let.ti(.)r1s.
( l) Ar1jt c1f t1·1e r1e~1 . trees .?.rid sl1l'tJ.t)s plar1ted f1)'il:.' sc1.. eer1ir1g
pur:poses ar1d shc)Y1r1 c1r1 I1raw ing: Nc.1. 5, arid ar1y of the
new trees shown along the streets on Drawing No. 5
shall all be replaced with new trees and/or shrubs
equivale~t to those J.isted on the drawj_ng if t~!ey di~
within on~ (1) year following completion of all
subdivision improvements or acceptance of roads.
whichever comes later. The subdivider shall bear all
replacement costs. including removal of dead trees,
and an allowance for such costs shall be included in
the maintenance bond posted for the subdivision.
( '~" _, The Commission may require the planting of ne~ ~rees
within a t~~~~y~foot strip ab11ttirtg the str~~t(s) in
1)rdeY to 2~hiev~ ~n att~a~~tiv~ cor~~iY!ati0r1 cf singl0
tl~e~s and ~ll15t~rs of tr~es 2l0ng both sides of n~w
str~ets ~Dd th~ subdivisi011 side of ab1Jtting ~xisting
streets. E~isting trees within these strips having
diam~ters of six (6) inches or more may be includ~d
along with a number of new nursery tre~s not to exce~~
one tre~ for every 25 feet of new styeets ?lus one tree
for every 50 f~et of ab~tting existing streets.
In no case shall trees be planted or preserv~d in
locations that would impair sight !ine ~~quirernents.
!3) Special consideration sh~!! b~ giv~n by ~pplicant to
the.preservation of trees having diamet~r~ of 24 inch~z
or larger locat~d within tw~nty (20) feet of any str~~t
right-of-way. Proposed driveways shall be located with
the objective 0£ preserving said large trees,
( .1-. \ ;
and a note to this effect shall be placed en Drawing
N!'"J. 5.
Y.ll1ere t.:r.·ee 3.l".?.d . .=il'".?.r1).1:1 :;•l-:-:c1"t.irl.g i:c., ;'r'.')\Ti•:le sc!'-=-::.r:.i.r1.g i.:.·
:t:1r0posed by tt1e ap:Ftlic~.r1~ cir re~t1ired 'r.1y t!1e
Commission, the applicant shall include the ~umb~r.
l-?~j1 011t, s:pecies c.r1d si::.~ c)f :c:il.~r1ti:1g,<:; C'll"l Ilr.~·wi.r!.g Ne,.
= Interior and Flag Lots
(1) No int~rior or flag l•Jt sh~ll ~e ~)~rmitted if the
Commission determines that physic~! conditions of
terrain and topography allow a layo11t permitting a
frontage of two hundred C200) feet on a public stree~
or highway for a11· lots in s~id proposed subdivision
without violating other p~ovisions of these
Regulations.
( :2) If physical conditions of terrain ."nd tc'P<'.'gr?.phy .ocre
s1.1ci"1 thc.t. t!J.e Commissi1:1r1 c3.nnot r;i3ke t-1'1e det-=rroir1:-.t.io~~
~tated in subpar~graph (1) ab0vs, the roaxim~ro number 0~
interior or flag lots shall b~ limited as f0~l0ws:
N1.lrntier rJf Lc)ts
ir1 ;:'.ubdi visi0r1
fev1e:r tl!.·:tr1 15·
15 c\r rr1~)re
16
~-'.:!.X r11J.rot,er c1 f
Interior or ~lag Lots
1
•',
This table of limitations shall apply to the entire
tract being subdivided regardless of whether or not
the subdivision is accomplished under one application,
or in sections under more than one application.
(3) The location, dimensions, and construction of any
driveway serving any permitted interior or flag
lot shall conform with the requirements
of Section IV g of these Regulations.
A note to this effect shall be placed on the
Subdivision Map if the plan calls for one or more
interior or flag lots.
t. Utilization of Solar Energy
Applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Commission that due consideration has been given in
designing the subdivision to maximizing the utilization of
solar energy, as evidenced by the layout of the subdivision
and by a written Statement on Utilization of Solar Energy on
a form provided by the Commission (see sample, Section
VIII).
u. Access to Site
Following its acceptance of an application) the Commi5sion
and its representative(s) shall have the right to access the
site, and to conduct inspections and measurements as
required for consideration of the application. Following
its approval of a subdivision, the Commission and its
representative(s) shall have access rights in order to
observe and inspect the progress of work as may.be required
to i ns1Jre c-c,rn1)li.:i.r1c.-e i..1i t-h t!"1e :pl::-.r1 .~s
approved. (See Section VII fJ.
17
'•'
,.
SECTION IV
STREET AND HIGHWAY REQUIREMENTS
a. Access to Existing Streets
No Plan for Subdivision shall be approved unless the
propo5ed streets and highways are in harmony with existing
public streets or highways within the Town of Easton
especially in regard to safe intersections with such streets
or highways and are properly designed to provide an adequate
and convenient system for present and prospective traffic
needs. At least one of the proposed streets or highways
within the plan of subdivision shall have direct access to
and from an existing public street or highway located within
'-the Town of Easton.
b. Existing Streets
(1) All streets and highways shall be continuous or in
alignment with existing streets or highways of
adjoining plots or subdivisions and of the same or
different width as the Commission may require. Where
such street or highway continuations are not practical,
such continuation may be adjusted, upon approval of the
Commission. In no case will intersecting streets be
approved if the angle included between the adjoinlng
street lines is less than 60 degrees. Street lines at
ir1tersectic)r1s shali be Ct~nr1ect8d by a n)inj mt1m r.:.dit.1s of
25 feet.
(2) Any existing street to which a proposed subdivision
street connects, or which provides frontage to proposed
lots, shall be of sufficient width and havd a suitable
r0adway, grade and alignmertt to provide adequate access
ior fire protection, otheY 2m~rgency, and utility a~d
highway maintenanc~ services to the ~ubdivision, and
shall be sufficient to accept and carry the traffic
generated by the proposed subdivision street without
undue hazards to vehicles and pedestrians.
-:-'"-;- .. -
(3) When a proposed subdivision abuts an
existing street, the Plan shall show a street right-ofway
extending at least 25 feet from the centerline of
th~ stre~t m~as1Jred at right angles to said centerline
at all points along the abutment. Unless there is
physic;;,l evidence of a limit to the right-of-w.;,y, such
as a well-defined stone wall, the centerline of the
existing traveled portion of the street shall be
presumed to be the centerline of the street right-ofway.
However, in all cases where land on the op~>osite
side of the existing street from the proposed
subdivision has been subdivided, the 25 foot
measurement shall be taken from the same centerline as
used by the prior subdivider so that the resulting
width of the existing street right-of-way will be at
least 50 feet.
c. New Streets
(1) Any and all new streets and roadways required to
provide access and frontage for new lots within a
proposed subdivision must be laid out, and the
rrJadways designed and const:r'tlcted so as to cor1forrn
with all applicable provisions of these regulations,
the Street Design Guidelines shown in Table IV-1
and with Easton·s Road Regulations.
(2) Each proposed street right-of-way must have at least
one intersection with another existing or proposed Town
street or State highway.
( 3) Tt1e· 1.:-;.3,P·.)1.\t of st!:~~t.,-:.: sl-1.:i.ll t·~ cle::.igr.!.ed ~. .1 !1er1evBr
possible to discourage perrnanent dead-end streets in
favor of closed loops which are more compatible with
the Town·s rural atmosphere, enhance the circulation of
traffic, and facilitate road maintenance.
Taking into account the total acreage of the tract and
its toi;:1c1gra:pf1y, t.he (!t)mmiss ior1 rn-3.y disai;:ii;:1rc.1ve a lay(.>1-lt_,
calling for permanent dead-end streets:
..
·, .. _;
(4) Layout of streets shall be designed to avoid long
straight segments which encourage speeding or detract
from the general appearance of the subdivision. After
consideration of the projected traffic load, the
topography and other site conditions, the Commission
may disapprove a street layout showing straight ·
segments exceeding BOO feet in length.
(5) If a permanent dead-end street is ·allowed, it shall
Pl'C\vide e;-:clusive street frc>r1tage to a H1ir1iu1u.rt1 c\f twc~
and a maximum of ten existing and/or proposed building
lots, and shall terminate in a turn-around 120 feet
in a diameter having a paved area 100 feet in diameter.
(6) Orientation of streets affects the degree to which
solar energy car1 be lJ.tilized
subdivision. Applicant must
solar energy utilization has
preparing the street layout.
VIII.)
by the residences in any
present evidence that
been considered in
(See Sections III t and
(7) If two streets intersect a third street from the same
side, there must be an interval of no less than 450
feet between their centerlines at the points of
intersection. If two streets intersect a third street
from opposite sides, and at different points, there
must be an interval of no less than 200 feet between
their centerlines when projected to the centerline of
the third street. No more than two streets shall
intersect at a given point.
(8) Street layo1Jts 2hall be made tc avoid or m~nim~=~ th~
following:
a) cuts and fills which will cause soil erosion and
tree rernoval;
b) encroachment upon or relocation of natural watercc11Jrses;
2U
' . (9) Whenever a roadway is constructed on a filled
embankment or where there is a vertic.:.l drop-off
adjacent to the street right-of-way, the need for
guide rails must be addressed in the design and
construction of the roadway in accordance with the
State of Connecticut Department of Transportation
publicatic•n, "Manual for Selecting, Locating and
Designing Gui derailing and Tr.0iffic B.:.rriers."
d. Street Connections and Extensions
(1) In the event that a proposed subdivision adjoins
undeveloped acreage deemed suitable by the
Commission for future subdivision
development, the Commission may require
that one or more street rights-of-way within the
proposed subdivision be extended or connected to a
boundary line of the tract and dedicated in and by the
plan for street and/or highway purposes only. No
privately owned reserve strips shall be left at the end
or side of such a street where it abuts the adjoining
:i;:iro:i;:1erty.
(2) Regardless of whether or not roadways are constructed
on tf1e street exter1sions or cc1nnections described ir1
paragraph 1 above, the streets involved shall be '
classed as temporary dead-end streets. Each shall
provide exclusive street frontage for not ~ore than
a total of ten (10) existing and/or propos~d lots.
Roadways shall be constructed wherever the streets
provide frontage for building lots shown in the
subdivision plan, and shall terminate in turn-arounds
having ~ di~meter of 120 feet and a pavement diamete~
of 1 O(i feet.
(3) In all instances where such turn-arounds are shown,
easements in favor of the Town are required for
segments of the turn-arounds lying outside the normal
right-of-way. Easements to such segments shall
provide for termination when the roadway is extended.
At the time of roadway extension past a turn-around.
th~ subdivider ~xtendi~g the rc2dway must r~~ove the
r1aveme~t and c~~bing i~ the tttr~-arc~;~d which ~xtencls
outsi(e of the ~ormal c11rb line. in~tall fill ~s
needed, aI•f1ly tof'scil. seed these s~gments. and install
:21
·'·
- - -- ·--·-----------.--·--
(4) If subdivider does not construct a roadway on a
required street extension or connection to the boundary
of the tract, that portion of the street lying between
the boundary and the finished roadwo.y shall be rc•ugh
graded for the future roadway, and the slopes prepared
and stabilized by application of topsoil and seed. · ·
Said portion shall be deeded to the Town as undeveloped
acreage.
(5) No street extension shall contribute to the fron~age of
any abutting lot until such time as a
Subdivision Plan providing for construction of a
rc,adway 1-1.3..i:i bee11 c.i:):p1~c1 ved 'by tt1e C1:irnrnissior1 fc)r filir1g:
in the office of the Town Clerk.
e. Width of Ro.,,dway and Parking
(1) The paved width, or width of roadway, on each street
within a subdivision shall be that which is necessary
to safely carry the projected traffic load expressed
as average daily traffic, as defined in Section II.
(2) Safe roadway widths in relation to street
classification and traffic load are given in
Table IV-1.
(3) Off-street parking for at least two cars
shall be required on each residential lot, and so noted
on the Subdivision Plan.
,.,
(4) When an existing roadway is extended, and its pavement
width does not comply with Table IV-1, the existing
width shall be continued on the extension except when
tt1e Cornrnissior1 deterroir1es c1tf1erwise. Ir1 rna¥.ir1g its
determination, the Commission shall consider:
a) the risk of vehicular accidents associated
with changes in roadway width;
b) the length of the proposed extension;
c) the projected fu~ure classification of the
street; and
d) layout and topography.
f. Work on Adjoining Unimproved Streets
(1) Wherever a proposed subdivision street connects to an
existing street of 4n adjoining subdivision, the plan
of the proposed subdivision must show and include all
work necessary to construct a finished roadway meeting
the requirements of Section IV-c not only within the
proposed subdivision but also extending beyond the
boundary to the point where the new roadway connects
smoothly and harmoniously with the intersecting
existing roadway. The extension shall provide for the
installation of utility lines and provision of s~orm
drainage structures and appurtenances in harmony with
similar provision in the proposed and adjoining
subdivisions and in accordance with good engineering
practices.
( 2) Any turn-arounds made 1)nnecessary by such a roadway
conn~cti0n 2hall be modified as describ~d i~ ~)aragrap~~
IV-d(3) above, and the easements granted to the Town
outside the norm~l right-of-way Midth shall reve~t to
the adjacent property owners.
~ - - - - ---,.--· ·----· - -
Driveways
All provi~ions of Article V of the Zoning Regulations which
apply to driveways are incorporated herein by reference. In
addition;
(1) Driveways must be designed and constructed in a manner
that will not discharge storm water onto a Town street
(see Section III-k and Town Ordinances).
(2) Driveways shall be located with the objective of
preserving and protecting existing trees {See
Section III-r).
(3) Driveways serving two or more lots shall not
be permitted except in cases of unusual topography
or site conditions; provided, however, that in no
event shall a common driveway serve more than two
lots.
h. ~lonuments
( 1) All proposed streets are· t<) be shown with monuments at
angle points, points of curvature.• points of compound
curve, and points of tangency as required by the
Corr!rr1issi~)r1. t1t)l1.l.l!!!er1t8 .~l:'e tc) corrii:1l:l v1i t.t1 Tcl~1r1
standards.
(2) All monuments are to be set in proper position by the
subdivider immediately after finished road construction
and grading.
i. Stree~ Names
Proposed highway and st~eet n~mes a~e subject to th~
approval of the Commission. Street and traffic signs,
complying with Town standards, shall be purchased and
installed at the expense of the subdivider. First names,
proper names(both first and last), names that duplicate
names of existing streets~ and names that have a phonetic
resemblance t6 existing stre~t nam~s are not permissible.
~lli,ttilf~~f:.:X~g~:, IV
j. Storm Drainage
(1) Storm drainage structures and appurtenances on both
existing and new streets within or bordering the
subdivision shall be detailed on the subdivision !ilan,
and shall be demonstrated to be adequate for the
disposal of storm water originating from the entire
watershed or tributary watershed in which the propose.ct
subdivision is located, assuming full develof~ent of
the lands within the watershed area excluding those
expressly designated as open space. Supporting
calculations are subject to review and approval by
( 2)
( 3)
the Commission.
The adequacy of existing storm drainage structures and
appurtenances in existing streets adjacent to the
subdivision shall be evaluated by the subdivider for
review by the Commission. The Subdivision Plan shall
include modifications and/or additions to said
structures and appurtenances necessary to handle
satisfactorily the increase in flow resulting from the
completed subdivision.
All storm drainage systems shall be designed and
constructed so as to conduct the storm water to an
existing watercourse. If such drainage crosses
land riot owr1ed b:<l aI:):Plicarit., :proposed
easements permitting such drainage and access for
maintenance purposes shall be provided to the
Commission with the application.
(4) Where proposed streets and storm drainage systems are
to be connected in any manner with a State highway or
l1igl-~w.:i.:i d.rc.it1.?.g:c 2.yst-:::rri .. ~pprc·v;:;.l 1)f tt1c st1bdi · .. Tisior1
is contingent upon the issuance of all permits
In no cas6 will the
record map be approved for filing and recording in the
absence of said written permits.
(5) Drainage should be designed in accordance with the
Connecticut DOT"s Drainage Manual. Generally, drainage
should b~ designed so that no flooding or damage will
occur from a storm having a ten-year frequency.
Special attention should be given to low points al6ni
the streets. Watercour~e crossings require & minimum
25-year design; however. where necessary to maintain
traffic or prevent isolation, a 50-year design is
recc1rnrner1(led.
k.. t!aintemmce Responsibility
Until such time as any street in a new subdivision has been
formally accepted by the Town, it shall be retained in
ownership by the subdivider, and all required maintenanc~ of
the right-of-way, roadway, and storm drainage structures
shall be performed by the subdivider at subdivider"s
exper1se.
-~
TABLE IV-1
STREET DESIGN GUIDELINES
DE'.:"IGN ELEMENT
Averc.ge dc.ily
LIGHT
RESIDENTIAL
traffic (Vpd) <500
Right-of-way width
(ft) 50
( 1 )
Pavement width(ft)
Design speed (mph)
Stopping sight
2'-1
3 0
200
4
RESIDENTIAL
~>00-1:,00
50
')Q
~\-'
30
2~10
4
RESIDENTIAL
COLLECTOR
1:,00-3000
50
30
~, ,)._1
300
4
distance (ft)
Grade (%)
Desirable
Maximum
Drainage
Minim~1m Ctlrve
10 10 10
See Article IVj(5)-----------------
radius(2) (ft)
Min. intersection
sight dist.(ft)
Verticle Align(%)
Inters1=:ctic1ns
Approaches
Minimum curb radius
(ft) at intersections
with:
Light residential
Residential
Reside:r.tial
ColleCtrJr
Min. ,3_ppro.?,ch
G8,:C1g6rl t (ft)
Min. tangent(ft)
20 0
3
35
.35
DNA
30
50
DNA = Does not apply
300 450
200 285
2 2
3 3
35 35
.35 35
DNA '; ' •J:J
30 f,O
50 100
(1) = add six feet if on-street parking is permitted.
(2) = based ·on norm.:il crown.
Note: See Section II foi definitions of reost terras. ~or
addition.~! explanatory information. see the Conn~cticut
!)r:: :p.:', ::: t rn~ :·1 •.:, 1.:·· ~ 'I' 1:.' C.n. S f'C· r "'t.· ·='· t.. i ci !'t }:il) 'r:; l i c· .;;. t. i 1:1"(;. '' (~·,:l i r].r:,: l i "::it:"::; f ;:; !:'
Subdi~~si•)n Streets."
.-,7
. '
SECTION V
SUBDIVISION PLAN
a. GENERAL
Prior to submitting a Subdivision Plan, as required by the
General Statutes and these regulations, the subdivider shall
familiarize himself with these regulations, the plan of
development of the Town, and the requirements of other Town and
State agencies affecting the area to be subdivided.
The Subdivision Plan shall cover all contiguous land under one
ow6ership on March .6 , 1948, the effective date of Easton's
Subdivision Regulations. If a simple division or subdivision of
such tract has been made subsequent to the effective date, all
parcels shall be shown and included in the proposed plan.
Applicant may propose to subdivide only one section of contiguous
land; however, in cases where the undeveloped section exceeds 15
acres, the Commission may require a preliminary scheme for the
entire tract drawn to scale, including the Section proposed for
development, showing for the remainder of the tract: (1) the
contemplated layout of building lots and streets, (2) the
approximate area and frontage of each building lot, (3) the
location of watercourses, ponds, and wetlands, (4) exist~ng
strt1ctu.1·es, ar1d ( 5), cr_:.n.tern:platt::d c;:t;ier1 sp.:;.ce.
Prior to the submission of a formal application for subdivision
of land, the applicant may request one informal conference with
the Commission, at which time he may present preliminary drawings
sufficiently detailed and accurate to show the proposed roads;
bodies of water; wetlands: main topographical features; existing
structures; number, size, and arrangement of proposed building
lots; location and size of proposed open space: and other
important features. This informal conference
shall be a.dvisory only, and shall not commit the Commission with
respect t~ future decisions on subsequent formal applications.
An additional conference may be held at the discretion of the
':omrriissior1.
·--:·.
..
. ;.· ·' . -····· ..
b. DRAWINGS
No application shall .b e considere. .d complete u~less accompanied by the following drawings, which together with
supporting documents comprise ihe Subdivision Plan. Each
drawing shall show the name of the subdivision, names and
addresses of owner of record and <lf>plicant, names and
addresses of adjoining property owners, and date.
Ten paper prints e.~ch of Drawings No. 1 through No. 6 .•
meast1ring 24 inches b}· 36 i1icl1e5 3}·J.all b6 s1.lbrui tt.r:::d wi ti"1
the application. Upon approval of the proposed subdivision,
applicant shall subrnit Drawings No. i· thl·ough No. 6 prepared
using waterproof ink on Mylar or equivalent, showing any
and all changes or additions required by the decision
of approval.
.,1. Drawing No. 1 Subdivision Map (becomes map of record when
filed by Town Clerk)
Drawing No. 1 shall satisfy the requirements for
a Class A-1 Transit Survey, with certificatior. under seal by
a land·surveyor licensed in Connecticut.
In large subdivisions requiring more than one sheet, an index
map having a scale not larger than one inch equals 400 feet
shall be included on the first sheet.of the Subdivisi6n Map.
The Subdivision Map shall conform with the req1.1.irements of
the laws of the State of Connecticut pertaining to the filing
of maps of surveys and plots with the Town Clerk.
Drawing No. 1 shall show:
a. Title and boundaries of the proposed subdivision, total
acreage, scale of map, date and north point.
A key map at a scale of 1000 feet to the inch showing the
existing Town streets and proposed new streets .
c. Names of adjoining property owners, with attachment
referencing the drawing listing both names and current
addresses; names of adjoining subdivisions; existing
structures, landmarks and watercourses.
28
' ' d. All lots, numbered and showing area in both acres and
square feet, with all metes and bounds data noted, and
square feet of wetlands on each lot.
e. Layout of existing and proposed streets.
street and highway names.
Suggested
f, Building set-back lines, in accordance with the zoning
regulations of the Town.
g. A notation as follows: ''Issuance of a building permit
for any lot delineated on this map is contingent upon
satisfactory soil percolation tests in accordance with
pertinent requirements of Sections 19-13b-103a to 19-13b-
103f, inclusive, of The Public Health Code of the State
of Connecticut as the same may hereafter be
amended from time to time, and each such
percolation test shall be made in the presence of
either the town Health Officer or his representative and
the results thereof shall be certified in writing to the
Commission by a professional engineer registered in the
State of Connecticut.
h. Notations as required under III-k(2); III-rn and III-s(3)
regarding discharge of storm water onto Town streets, the
required use of gravity flow septic systems. and
regulations governing driveways.
i. Any other nr,tations required by these Regulations.
j. All easements, open space areas, survey monuments, iron
pins, rights-of-way, watercourses and ponds.
k. Applicant·s name and addr~ss.
l. Parcel located in Zone District
m. The owner of each lot in this subdivision shall be
respo~sible for diverting or otherwise preventing
the flow of surface water from the lot orito any
public road shown en this map.
I1 rawi~g N·~. 2 s])all sh•)W existing contoi>rs, s;)•)t el~v~tions,
utility p0les. l~rf~ tr~e~. existing water b0~i.~s. l~ndrn~~k:.
rnonuments. existing buildings. and all other existing sit~
nam~ and addr~ss.
Ail~r consideration of the size, C•)mpl~xity and site
c~,~di~i~~! r~la~ing to ~ partic11lar subdivisic'n or
reeubdivisicn, the Commission may allow the omission of
this drawing provided that the required information is
shown clearly on Drawing No. 3.
30
,.
Drawing No. 2 shall show:
a. Existing contour elevations as follows: One map on a
scale selected to show the entire subdivision on a single
sheet. Additional maps as needed on a scale of one inch
equals forty feet showing contours at two-foot intervals,
Elevations slHtll be based on .5-ctual NGVD mean .5e·" level
datum. A benchmark sh."11 be shown on the m.!\p.
b. Areas adjacent to a proposed subdivision shall be mapped
within 200 feet of the boundaries of a site smaller than
10 acres, within 300 feet of a site between 10 and 25
acres, and within 500 feet of a larger site. The map
shall show ponds, wetlands, floodplains, streams,
wells, septic areas, roads, driveways, and
constructed drainage systems (noting pipe sizes).
Data for these areas may be taken from other
available maps and need not be compiled from direct
survey, but in the former case the maps referred to
shall be referenced on the drawing.
c. Notations of existing watercourses to include contours
of banks along streams and ponds, presence of culverts
and bridges.
d- Any and all 100-year flood lines sh~ll be shown.
3. Drawing No. 3
Disposal Map
Proposed Grading, Drainage & Sewage
Ilr.:i.wir1g Nr_,. 3 5f1all st1r.>w :prc1p()sed gradir1g cr-'ntotl.l"'-S .. all
changes to features sh1)4D in Drawing No. 2. drainage data,
p1"oposed weli lcic.?~tic.r1s, prciposed lc.yo1;i.t c~f se~·72.ge
sewage disposal areas (both primary and reserve), test pit
and percolation test locations and data. Disposal system
layouts shall be made assuming a house having no fewer than
ft)11r bedrc.11:irr1s.
Drawing No. 3 shall also show:
a. Name, address, sign~ture and seal ot the licens~d
p~0fesei1~n2l enfin~er res~ionsitle f0r design 0~ ~~Y
~it~ grading plan, drainage sys~~r~. s~nit6~Y
seYer s~·ste~. s~Hage dispos~Ll syst~re 0r water su~i~ily
~~d distribution system shown on ~he m~p ..
t. All easemen~s necessary for th~ installation and
maintenance o~ storm sewers.
31
c. The proposed method of disposal of .storm water from
driveways, basements and/or roof drains, in accordance
with Section III-k(2).
d. If any contours are to be changed, both existing and
proposed grades shall be shown and the map shall carry
notation that grades exceeding 5 percent or subject to
erosion shall be stabilized by appropriate planting.
e. ::.pot elev.;,tions at low and high points, and at critical
locations.
f. Any and all proposed changes to existing watercourses
and water bodies, including but not limited to widening,
change of depth, change of direction, change of land
contours along the edges, installation of culverts and
rip-rap, and installation of bridges.
g. Details on proposed fire ponds and drainage retention
basins.
h. The Commission may require a supplemental drainage
analysis map showing the tributary watershed
area and downstream area affected by run-off.
Drainage computations shall accompany the mc..p and 5r1all
consider the entire watershed area; criteria and
computations used in determining pipe sizes shall be
submitted on 8-1/2 x 11 inch sheets-cross-referenced
with the map.
i. The boundaries and classification codes of s6il types
iJr1rler th'e t~c.t.ic\~1al Cc\c~r>erc.ti ,,e ::.oils 2.1J1'vey of t-1·!e
Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Depart~oent cf
Agriculture.·
j. A note stating the requirement for gravity flow septic
systems in accordance with Section II!-m of these
Regulations.
4. Drawing No. 4 Map of Proposed Streets. Site Details1
Sections & Profiles
Dra~ing No. 4 j_s reg1Ji~ed in all c~ses ~l:~r~ a ne'~ stree~
is propos~d. or ~h~r~ changes may be required to existing
·=-~b1Jttir1g ~t.reets or st1:1:ern clr.:tir1ag:e syst.8tr~::. t•i=:.:;e.t1~e c\f t}1-=
proposed subdivision. In cases where this
drawing is n!)t required, plan-profile renditions for
appli~able items ·listed below under (c) shall. be shown on one
of the other drawings, but not on Drawing No. 1.
3·;
~,~~;~~.~~:~;:'.:.;: . ' • . . . . . . .
-~~~i.'.'!!"'·'•''c•'./'H'otcPlan-pro£ile drawings 0£ all proposed streets and highways·
· · · · .shall be submitted as part of the Subdivision Plan. Plan-
...
profiles shall be at a scale of 1"-40' in plan, and 1"-40'
horizontal and 1 "-4 · vertical in profile. Elevations shall
refer to NGVD mean sea level datum. Drawing No. 4 shall
include the following:
a. Layout of proposed streets and highways in both plan ..
and profile indicating right-of-way dimensions as shown
on the Subdivision Plan, widths of right-of-way and
roadway. Kxisting and proposed centerline grade lines
with stations every 50 feet, vertical curve data, and
percent of grade.
b. Typical cross-section of the streets with paving, gravel,
shoulders, curbs and ditches in detail.
c. Plan-profile maps shall show all easements -for
lltili ties, drainage, slc)::pes ~ · arid otf1er :i::1L1rposes
with location, size and inverts of
existing and new culverts, and the entire drainage
s~ystem.
(1) An as-built drawing shall show the location of
all underground utility lines.
(See Section III-o).
d. Tl1e (!f)HHnissic1r1 rnay reqt1ire st-reet ir!t-~i~s"=ct .. i•::1ns t.•:)
be developed at a larger scale, showing cat~h basins,
gutter, road centerline, and curb .
e. Names, addresses, signatures and seals of licensed
profession~l engineers responsible for the design
of any street1 drainage system. or other installation
5. Drawing No. o f' l.?.r1T.ir!g M.::-.:p
Drawing No. 5 shall show existing trees along
existing and proposed streets bordering and
within the subdivision. and proposed new
trees and shrubs, and also shows utility pol~s. str~~ms.
-. ,-~"':!tC~~(;~,,,.r~4~.f . ~--:.. -------.
..
-~
This Drawing is required if there is a proposed new street.
It may be required if the proposed subdivision
abuts an existing street. or if plantings
are required for screening pur~>oses, and the plantings
cannot be shown adequately on Drawing No. 2 or No. 3, as
deterrnined l:1y the <:orrHnissic)r1.
Drawing No. 5 shall show:
a. If existing trees six inches in diameter and larger
located within the proI>osed subdivision as per
Article III-r(2) are to be preserved as provided in
said article, they shall be shown on this drawing.
All trees so located and having diameters exce~ding
twenty-four (24) inches shall be given a unique
identification.
b. New nursery trees to be planted as required under
Section III-r of these Regulations.
c. ~he locations of all proposed new driveways.
d. The location and arrangement of any plantings made for
screening purpos~s.
e. Listings of all new trees and shrubs to be planted
keyed to the drawing, showing location, num~er and size
according to specie~.
f. Notation required under Section III~r(3)_
g, Type of planting for stabilization of slopes·
~xceeding 3:1 (hor/v~r).
B. Drawing No. 6
Drawing No. 6 is required except where there are four
or fewer lots in the subdivision or resubdivision, in
which case the required information may be incori,orated
in Drawing No. 3.
I)r~wing No. 6 shall show all fea~11res. det~ils 1 ~nd not~~
necess~ry to describ~ in full the I)roposed soil erosion and
sediroentat.ion control activiti~s o~ the site during th~
~ours~ of =~~v~l0;)!nent, 21·!d sh~ll be cross-ref~renced with
w~itten Soil Erosi0n & Sedimentation '~on~rol Plan. and
. ~-}·:.:-.~.°: .:-.ls•:• :! . .':.!Cl'.t·~-'=' ;_!·~-::- ·~·!?.:'~!~:, :-.'.~.<:~!"'~SS.
engi~~~~ 0~ !2n~~~~;·~ ~r~~it~·:t.
"
- - - ~ I
·.-·.
A complete set of "as-built" Drawings NO. 1 and No. 4
prepared using waterproof ink on Mylar or equivalent
shall be furnished on completion of all proposed and required
improvements prior to release of bond. A certified
monumentation plan shall be shown on Drawing No. 1.
plan shall be shown on Drawing No. 1.
d. PHOTOGBAPH2·
The Commission may require photographs showing the
topographical and other features of the site, to be
included and made a part of the application.
35
- -- --·-- - ~ -- ---·--·----------. -
SECTION VI
PROCEDURE
a. Applications
Applications for the subdivision of land into lots. streets,
open space and drainage courses shall be submitted in
writing to the Commission on forms prescribed
and provided by the Commission. The application shall show
the date thereof and the name and address of the applicant
and record owner of the land to be subdivided. (See sample
form, Section VIIIJ.
b. Inspection
The Commission may appoint an inspector who .shall inspect
subdivisions and Subdivision Plans and issue notices of
violation and/or report all violations df Subdivision
Regulations or orders or approvals granted by the Commission
·thereunder to the Commission.
c. Application Requirements
Any application submitted to the Commission shall not be
considered unless and until the Commission determines that
such application is complete. No application shall be
deemed complete unless ~nd until it includes t~e
following in sufficient detail and form as determined by
the Commission:
(1) A written application on the form provided by the
Commission (see Section VIII).
(2) Apfilication fe2 in the form of ~ certified o~ teller
check payable to the Town of Ea~ton. The fee shall not
exceed the maxi~lm fee allowed by the Connecticut
General Statutes.
(3) The Subdivisio~ Plan as described in Section V of
these Regulations.
(5) A S0il Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan, as
req1iired by the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
B~gulati0ns ~0r th~ T0~~ 0f Easton_
..
SECTION VJ
c. (cont'd)
(6) Written statements concerning:
a) applicability of Flood Plain Management
Regulations.
bl jurisdiction of Army Corps of Engineers
and Connecticut Department of Environmental
Protection regarding certain waterways and
water bodies.
ci applicability of the Inland Wetlands
Regulations.
(7) Statement on Consideration of Solar Energy Techniques.
(See sample form in Section VIII).
(8) Articles of association establishing a proposed
neighborhood association. if applicable.
(9) For all applications a list of the names and
addresses of all current owners of record of
ad,iacent properties and properties across the
street(s) with stamped. addressed envelopes.
(101 Written authorization granting the Commission and/or
its agents access to the property for the purposes of
inspection.
flll A detailed cost es~imate prepared by the applicant's
engineer in a form prescribed by the Town En~ineer (See
sample form. Section VIII) for all construction work
and subdivision improvements including:
roads. bridges. culverts. weirs. retaining
walls and fences. storm drainage installations, Iire
ponds. retention ponds. community water supply and
communi ti-· sewage disposal systems to be used solely
for service within the subdivision. pins and monuments.
preParation of as-built drawinRs. SESC work and other
i terns.
d. Acceptance of an Application
At its n6xt regularly scheduled roee~1ng followi11~ the dav or
submission of an apolication. the Commission shall determine·
whether or not the application is complete. If it is
compiei:.e. the date of the meeting s.hall be the dat·e of
receipt and acceptance of the application. If it is not
complete. the Commission shall not accept it. and so notify
the applicant. stating on the recbrd its reasons for nonacceptance.
and refunding the application fee.
37
·~:J~Jfffl~~ 1iff.f!l?J:'~~!fi~ti ~-I ....
'' .?-tiit..." . ".:.Ai. fl'j .... . . .·· .., . ·'-. "!·~.., •. -<'~::~ .. ~-~~;...·,.~.:)~,:-.:.: .. ~·-,,.····--.
··'·'-··'·~···fr. ..... ~'·'"'"""·' If. applicant proposes any activity regulated'''by the Town· s
Inland. Wetlands Agency, no application for subdivision
shall be accepted by the Commission without
evidence that the same application has been filed
with the Town·s Inland Wetland Agency, the Conservation
Commission. ;See Se~tion VI-c(6).
e. Regional Planning Agency and Abutting Towns
If the Subdivision Plan involves land,
any portion of which lies within five hundred (500) feet
of the boundary of an adjoining town; or if a significant
part of the traffic generated by the proposed project will
use streets within the adjoining town for entry or exit;
or if a significant part of the water drainage from the
proposed project will flow through and significantly
irru;:iact the di·c.ir1ag:e systern c)f t-f1e adJi:1ir1ir1g tc1 wr1_; or
if water runoff from the improved site will impact
streets or other rnunicipal or i>rivate property within
the adjoining town.at the time said plan is submitted
to the Cornmiss ion, .?. copy of the plan shall be forwarded
by the Commission to the appropriate Regional Planning
P.ger1cy cJ1· Agen.cies fc1r review arid cornment, a.rid the a.djc1ir1ir1g:
town shall be notified.
f. Public Hearings
g;.
The Commission may hold a P>J.blic hearing regarding a
Subdivision Plan in the event that specific
circumstances require such action; however no plan of
resubdivision shall be acted upon without a pu~lic hearing.
Public Hearing 5chedule
Where a public hearing is requir!'ld, such hearing shall
commence within sixty-five (65) days of the date of receipt
and acceptance of an application, The. public hearing must
be completed within thirty (30) days of the.date of
commencement. The Applicant roay cons~nt ~o one or more
~xtensions of eitl1er- ~1 eriod provid~d ~he total ~xtension of
a~y 0~~ f•~ri0d shall not b~ f0r longer than the oyigi~al
; 1eriod as Sfiecified. Public hearings rnust b~ duly warned in
acccrd~nc~ witl1 Section 8-26 of the Connecticut Gen~ral
·.· ,;..
• . .''-'
·-'·.
r h. Failure to Provide All Information Prior
to Conclusion of Public Hearing
Where a public hearing is required, the Commission may
disapprove any application promptly after a public hearing
in the event all req1Jired information is not submitted tG
the Com1nission prior to the conclusion of the public
hearing.
i. Decision Schedule
(ll The Commission shall approve, modify and approve,
or disapprove any subdivision or resubdivision
application within the time periods set forth herein.
(2) If no public hearing is held, the Commission shall
render its decision on any formally accepted
application for a subdivision that has not been
withdrawn by the applicant within sixty-five (65)
days of the date of receipt and acceptance thereof by
the Commission, except that applicant m.ay consent to
one or more extensions of said period provided that the
total period of extension shall not exceed sixty-five
(65) days. Failure to render a decision within said
unextended or extended time period shall be consi'dered
as an approval of th~ applic~tion, and a ~ertifi~ate to
that effect shall be issued by the Commission on'
demand, except as provided in Section VI DC4l below.
(3) If a public hearing is held, the Commission shall
render a decision on any formally accepted'application
£or a subdivision or ~~s~bdivision that has not been
withdrawn within sixty-five (65) days after the
completion of the public hearing, except th<t.t. the
applicant may consent to one or more extensions of said
period provided that the total period of extension
shall not exceed sixty-five (65) days. Failure to
render a decision within said unextended or extended
time period shall be considered as an ~pproval of the
application. and a certificate to that ~ffect eh~ll b~
is.sued by the C0rnmissi0n on demand, exser)t as provided
in Section VI i~4l belcw.
(4) In any case wh~re the propos~d s11bdivision or
resubdivisi0n invc)lves a~~iviti~s regul~ted by th~
Towrt·e Inland Wetl~nds Agency. the (~ommission sh~ll ~~0t
~~~ti~~ ~~s d~~isio~ ?~~.~~ ~0 its r~~~ipt and
co~~~(~~~~l0~ cf ~ ~~i~~~~ r~po~t frorn said ag~nsy of
its final d~cision r~l~tive to the proposed subdivj_sion
o~ r~subdivision. If the time period for a decision by
the Commissio~ would e~pire pr~or to the thirty-fifth
day after a decieion by the Inland Wetlands Agency. the
time period for the Commission's decision shall be
automatically extended to thirty-five (35) days after
the d~~i~i~n··of said Agency.
I -- -
Recording and Publication of Decision
The decision of the Commission shall be recorded in the
minutes of the meeting at which such decision is mad~. In
case of apprcival subject to specified conditions, such
conditions shall also be recorded in the minutes. In case
of disapproval, the reason(s) therefore shall also be
recorded. In all instances, notice of the decision shall be
delivered to the applicant and published in accordance with
the Conn~cticut General Statutes.
k.. Endorsement
After his determination that items (1), (2), (3) apd (4)
enumerated below have been accomplished .. the Chairman
or Secretary of the Commission shall endorse the Subdivision
Map for filing o~ recording, and deliver said Map to the
subdivider.
(1) Approval of the application.
(2) Modification of the drawings comprising The
Subdivision or Resubdivision Plan, as required by
the decision aiiproving such plani if applicable.
(3) Either the compl~tion of all required su~divisi~n or
resubdivision improvements, or written etidence' to
the effect that a bond in amount and fon~
satisfactory to the Commission h~s been posted with
the Town. (See Section VII-d).
(4) Acc~~itance and re~~ording of de~ds ~ov~ring rights-ofway
and easements for all utilities; de~ds cov~ring
land to be used for public purposes; easements. slope
rights, and rights-of-way over property to remain in
private ownership; and rights-to-drain onto or across
privat.e i:1roperty l ir1 a ft)rrn satisfpctciry trJ t!-1e
Commission. All recording fees shall be borne by the
subdivider. ALL DEEDS, EASEMENTS AND· OTHER
INSTRUMENTS REQUIRED BY THE COMMISSION SHALL BE
SUBMITTEii FOR BEV!EW ANii APPROVAL BY THE COHMISSIO~
PRIOR T!) RE1:1)RI1IN:~.
·~-.-.-·--~---- ---·- - -·---·- - -
·~~~[~};.i,~:£,~i~~i~~~=-~~~~=~===~~-~~~
Delivery of an endorsed Subdivision Map to the applicant
shall be made promptly after the time for taking an appeal
from the action of the Commission has expired, and in the
event of an appeal, promptly up011 t11e termination of suc}1
appeal by dismissal, withdrawal, or judgment 111 favor of
applicant, provided also that delivery shall not be made
until all the conditions of approval, inclllding
modifications of drawings, and posting of bond, have been
satisfied.
(1) The Subdivision Map when delivered shall show th~ date
of the Commission's approval, the date by which all
subdivision improvements must be completed pursuant
to Section B-26c of the Connecticut General Statutes,
the date of completion of all subdivision improvements
required by the Commission in its final approval,
and the Commission Chairman's or Secretary's signed
er1dc1rsement ...
(2) If the Commission approves an application not subject
to the condition that applicant post a bond, all work
in connection with such subdivision shall be completed
within five (5) years after the approval of the plan of
such subdivision.
(3) If the Commission approves an application subject to
the condition that applicant post a bond. the ti~e
period for completion of all improvements shown in the
approved subdivision plan may be establisr~ed
for a period of less than five (5) years
but in no case less than fifteen (15) months.
(4) Approval of th~ Commission sh~ll be endorsed by the
comprise the Subdivision Plan, modified as
necessary to conform with the decision,
and these drawings (or bona fide copies thereof)
shall be filed by the Commission as a record of all
subdivision improvements to be accomplished by the.
subdivider. and all elernents of the Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Plan.
41
...
· ... ~ ::_: ;'_.::.. · ..
~- Filing or Recording of Subdivision Map
Sale of any building lots delineated in the Subidivision
Plar1 shall not occur until the Subdivision Map has been
filed or recorded in the office of the Town Clerk. All
recording fees shall be borne by the subdivider. Any
Subdivision Map not so filed or recorded within ninety (90)
days following its delivery to the applicant shall become
null and void except that the Commission may, upon request,
extend the time for such filing for two additional periods
of ninety (90) days each and the plan shall remain valid
until the expiration of such extended time.
n. Release of Bond
The bond shall not be released until: (1) the Town Engineer
has certified completion of the p11blic utilities and all
iioprc;veroer1ts ir1 ac·cc;rdar1ce \.li tl-1 tl-1e reqtlirerner1ts sl1<:iwn in
the approved Subdivision Plan to the First Selectman, (2)
the street or streets have been legally accepted by the
Town, and (3) all required as-built drawings have been
received and found satisfactory by the Commission.
o. Extension of Time for Completion
P.. p plic2.r1t me~y· req1J.est .:i.r1 e~{t'=nei0r1 r)f t.he tirr1e \s~1ecifi1ed fc;1~
completion of all requiied site work. Approval1of th~
extension requires written consent of the g1.1araritor of the
~ond, a demonstration of substantial piogress, and a
determination by the Commission that completion within the
tirne extension is probable. In no event shall the time for
completion be extended beyond five (5) years from the date
cf a?proval of the Subdivision P~a~.
p. Acceptance of Roads
Requirements and procedure.s for the acceptar1ce of streets,
roads and rights-of-way or other highways and related
improvements shall be in accordance with the Easton Road
(J1.·dir1.:;,.r1ces.
I, ,~_. ·-=,;..
---- --·--'--··-~---~--·-·--·-·-'-·'-- - ·-.
SECTION.VII
ADMINISTRATION
a. Writte11 Approval Required
Any person. firm or corporation making any subdivision
of land without the written approval of the Commission shall
be subject to monetary fine as provided in the Connecticut
General Statutes, Section 8-25, as amended.
b. Validity of Regulation
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or
portion of these regulations is for any reason held invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions hereof.
c. Repeal, Change or Amendment
d.
These Regulations may be repealed, changed or amended from
time to time by the Commission after public hearing, duly
warned, and held as provided by the Connecticut General
Stati.1tes.
Bonding PYocedure
(1) Subdivision Bonds
I
\
In lieu of completion of all or part of the required
improvements prior to final approval of th6 Subdivision
Plan and endorseme~t of the subdivision mep, th~
Cornmissicn ru~y apf1 rov~ a Subdivision Plan subject t0
43
·._----,,.-
.,; .;. ~,,~,;,~.~,~,~,J.~ ..·.~..§ ,t ..~ .,~ .:..·.. ,· ·.· ~ SE. -C. TION VI I
·i~~~%~f~!~~~~f!·\: "~':::~~·~·:···-· _. ·-· .' ':
surety with the Town. Such bond shall be in a form
acceptable to the Town Counsel and in such amount as
the Commission ehall deem sufficient to insure the
sati~f~·~t0ry corn~il~ti0n of all r~quired improve~ent~ irl
accordance with the approved Subdivi5ion Plan. Said
bond shall be posted with the Town and shall insure the
completion of such improvements in accordanc~ with .t~e
approved Subdivision Plan within such period as
determined by the Commission, provided that such period
shall in no event be less than fifteen (15) months.
The Comrnission may extend the period for completion of
improvements by a maximurn of two (2) years upon receipt
of evidence of need of such extension and upon receipt
of assurance from the applicantps b&nk or insurance or
surety company that the bond obligation will cover the
extension period; provided that all work in connection
with any subdivision shall be completed within five (5)
years after final approval of the Subdivision Plan.
Within fourteen (14) days after conditional approval of
the Subdivision Plan, the applicant shall submit to the
Town· engineer an itemized estimate (See Sample Form,
Section VIII) of the cost of all required improvements
including both those required as conditions of
approval and a separate inflation factor for the
estimated construction period. Within 60 days after
receipt of applic~nt·s cost estimate, th~ 1 commisSio~,
after consul tatiori with the Tc»m Engineer .1 shall'
d.eterrnine and notify the applicant of the \amount of the
bond. Within sixty (60) days aft~r notification of the
amo>.mt of the bond, applicant shall file the bond with
the Commission. The Commission may grant a total of
two extensions of the period for filing provided such
original or extended period and that in no event shall
the to~al of such extensions exceed ninety (90) days.
After approval as to form by Town Counsel, the
Commission shall vote on accepting the bond, and if
accepted 1 the Commission shall endorse.its final
apf1roval on the record m~p and note thereon th~ dat~ 0f
e:-::pi14 .::.tic,~·~ c1f .s_ucr~ -=tF>Pl4 (•v.:tl. Th-::- reco:!:d rr.:2;-1 s!:.211 ther!
be ~el~~2~d t•) the 2;iplic2nt £0~ !~~i]~g ~ith the Town
Cle~t. Appli·:an~ shall pay all fees ~nd ccstE
conn~ct~d Hit~: ~uch fili~g.
- _; ___ . ..:· ____ : ·-··~ ..:__..:_ __ ,,_,. __
2) Reductions of Subdivision Bonds
In the case of subdivisions requiring the installation
of streets, drainage facilities or other substantial
improvements. the subdivider may request the Commission
to reduce the amount of the subdivision bond. After
completion of cutting and filling, sub-base, gravel
base, drainage, pavement, curbing and installation of
all utilities, the subdivider shall submit to the Town
Engineer with such request. a calculation of the
estimated cost of all remaining improvements. The
Commission may reduce the amount of the bond to no less
than 15% of the original bond amount or $5,000,
whichever is greater, and the subdivider shall be
notified of the new bond amount. If the subdivider
elects to file a substituted bond, the time for filing
the substituted bond and the approval of its form shall
be the same as in the case of the original bond.
3) Maintenance Bonds
After the subdivider has completed all of the work
required as a condition to the approval of the
subdivision, and prior to the release of the
s1.ll"Jdivision bor1d, the <~ornrnissir)n rr1ay require tl1e ;
subdivider to post a maintenance bond insyring the
proper performance and seasoning of such ~ork fo~ a
period not to exceed one ( 1) year. <'.fter th'e cc;mpletion
of such work. The Commission shall notify the
subdivider c;f the amount of such maintenance bond, and
such bond shall be filed within 10 days after the
road(s) in the subdivision have been accepted by the
Town. After ~pproval ~s to form ~Y Town Cc,uns~l, the
. Commission shall vote on acceptance of the bond. The
aI!!OUr1t Of 5l1Cl-1 bor1d Ifl·:t~~l be llP t() 5% ()f tt1e c)rigir1al
amount of the subdivision bond but not less than
$1,000.00.
"·
Bonds may be in the form of cash, a certified or
teller's check payable to the Town of Easton, a savings
passbook with an authorization letter and signed
wi thdr.:twal .slip for a joint account in the name of the
Town and the applicant, or an irrevocable letter of .
credit from a bank authorized to do business in the
c•tate of Connecticut. In ad di ti on.• the applicant sh.:..11
execute and submit to the Commission an Agreement to
Complete Subdivision Improvements, acceptable in form
and Sl1bstar1ce ti) tt1e Ccirnrnissior1. ( ~·ee Sarr1f>le Forrn .•
Section VIII). A performance or maintenance bond
written by an insurance or surety company authorized
to write such bonds in the State of Connecticut may be
accepted, but such bonds must provide that the
security shall automatically become available to the
Town on certification by the BQard of Selectmen that
the subdivider has failed to comply with
any condition of the subdivision approval.
5) Miscellaneous
a.
b.
cl.
The surety shall be payable on demand t~· the Town
after the required or extended completion date or
for the purpose of completing or correcting ·any
required wor~ found to be u~satisfa~tory. 1
I
During the period in which s.uch bond '1is in effect,
the applicant shall maintain all roads, drainage
facilities and appurtenances serving occupied
dwellings free of ice, snow and debris.
Tt0 b0nd shall r~m~~n in full !orce a~d e~fect
1J.r1t.il :celec.secl tiy tl1e C(i!f1Ii1is.sicir1, at wt1ic~r! tin1e
the unused portion of such bon~ shall be returned
to the surety or applicant, as appropriate.
In the event that the Subdivider fails to maintain
any required bond for the period req~ired by the
C<)rt!?!!is:sic1n. ~ t!·1e <~(1 Iri!11ist.\i('r1 rn.~.:/ t.er!rlir1.;t.t.e trie fir1.:::.l
~ubdivision approval, in t~hich e~eut th~
lo~s 2h~ll b~ s0l1i ~~ c0nv~yed by th~ Su~~ivider
with0~t sub~i~si0~. a~~~Fta~~~ and ar~r:)v~l of ~
~0~ subdivisiort applic~ti(•ft.
The 1~0mmis2i0n I~~Y irom tim~ to tim~ fix ~~d charg~
f~~s for th~ ~)roce~sin~ of subdivlsio~
~P?li·~~~i0~s, ~nd f0r the ir1sFetti0~ .c·f
subdivision improvem~nts.
d ·' -"
f. Authorization For Accese.
In all cases where applicant is the owner of record,
submission of an application for subdivision shall
constitute the granting of authority to the Commission
and its agents to enter the property proposed for
subdivision for the purposes of inspecting, measuring,
sampling and testing as may be necessary to evaluate
the proposal and to assure completion of all site work
in accordance with any ~)lan that may be approved by th~
Commission. In all cases where applicant is not the
owner of record~ both applicant and owner of record
shall sign the application thereby granting said
authority.
g. Effective Date
The within and foregoing amendments to the Regulations
covering the Subdivision of Land Within the Town of
Easton shall become effective on February 24, 1989.
\
47
··~=
--.--;-,;,":-~-.- -.·
'. •.· . ~ -;~ ~ --· ~-
SECTION VIII
SAMPLE FORME·
The following sample forms are contained in this section ..
Copies may be obtained from the Planning and Zoning
Commission's Office:
Application for Subdivision or Res11bdivisi0n;
Staternent on Utilization of Solar Energy;
Agreement to Complete Subdivision Improvements;
Form of Cost Estimate for Bond Calculation.
48
I
\
~ ~~:i~~~~~}:s.-L-~:0;~:: •• ·~,:~:,- ._-._:-'.:~-0~0~&.f{#t::~~-r-~~i·>:~:-~ :-~~:::~-=:~~_.- --------- ---------·- -- -- -- --- - -- -·- --------- -
i·. 1•·•\i'''"'.:c'''':·SECTION VIII : ··· ·
·~,q;,;;~R'.ti:~"'~~flr·'l:"'':'"'r'" '':APPL'ICATION FOR SUBDIVISION OR· RESUBDIVISION.
.. . PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION page 1 of 3
Eastor1J CT
Title of Subdivisio~ (Resubdivision)
File No.
The undersigned requests approval by the Planning and Zoning ..
Commission of Easton, Connecticut, of the s11bdivision or
resubdivision described below, in accordance with Section 8-26,
as amended, of the General Statutes of Connecticut, and the
Subdivision Regulations of the said Commission in effect on thi~
date. The attached checklist will be used by the Commission to
dE>tei·mine if application is complete, Applicant to supply all
information indicated below,
Title of Subdivision
LocF.<.tion
Owner of Record: Name
Address
Name
Address
Narne -·-------Address
Proposed Subciivider(s)*: Name
Address
Name
Address
Narne.
*All parties having 10% or larger interest to be listed. If
more space needed, attach a separate sheet and check here.
------------------------------------------------~---------------
A. DRAWINGS SUBMITTED
'I"i tl-::
·------- ---·--·-· -----·---
49
(cont'd)
B. LAND & LOT DATA
Total land area this tract (acres):
Is this tract the result of a
subdivision made subsequ~nt to:
March 6 , 1948
Number of proposed lots:
Are there wetlands on this tract?
Is there a proposal for open space'?
(attach if applicable)
Is ihere a I,roposed new Town Road?
If so, number of linear feet:
page 2 of 3
Proposed time period for completion:-------------C.
OTHER DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED
Identification Date Shown
' ---------------------------------------------------1------~----
---------------------------------------------------~-----------
I
The applicant understands that this application is to be
considered complete only when a subdivision plan and all other
documents and information required by Sections V and-·VI of the
Subdivision Regulations have been submitted.
Applicant and owner authorize the Planning & Zoning Commission to
enter the property proposed for subdivision or resubdivision in
accordance with the provisions of Section VII-g of the
f:,ubdi vision Regulations.
Applicant warrants the truth of all statements contained herein
and in all ~~FFO~ting docum~nts ~~c~rdi~g to the b~st of hi~
k~o~ledge ~nd b~li~f.
P.(1dress
Iiat.e
Telephone
...
--------------------------- ------·-··--. - --------·-------'----·----·--'--~-
SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION
(cont·d) page 3 of 3
Submission of the following ackno~ledged;
I I
I I
/ I
I I
I I
I I
I /
I I
I I
I I
I I
I I
I I
I I
I I
I I
I I
I I
This application, completed as required.
All drawings listed by Applicant, with copies as
required.
Test pit and percolation test data.
Statement on Utilization of Solar Energy,
Drainage easements as per IV-j(3),if applicable.
Statement on Applicability of Flood Plain Management
Regulations.
Articles of Association for Neighborhood
Association, if applicable.
Statement on Jurisdiction of State DEP or Army Corps
c•f Engineers.
Storm drainage calculations as per III k(l).
Drainage analysis map ."tnd computations if required.
SESC Plan.
Nam~s, addresses, envelopes
Open Space Site Improvement
Authorization for Access.
Detailed cost estimate.
All other documents listed
as per VI c(9).
Plan, if required.
by Applicant, with copies
~;~~i~:~ion fee in amount of $ _____ ----',\ ____ _
Statement on applicability of Inland Wet:i\and
Regulations. ·
______ Date:----------
£0~ th~ P&Z Commissio~
Date Apf)licatir.Jr1 1-ecei ved by <:c.11nrnissirJr1: -------------
By=---·---·-----·----
Ti ·tle: -------·------------
c: .. ~
. '.:. ~ ~· ~: .
~--~~·~'.; . ;<;.=·:·~:'._·>~:·=.
'.,
SECTION VIII
STATEMENT ON UTILIZATION OF SOLAR ENERGY
Planning & Zoning Commission
Easton, CT
S11bdivision (Resubdivision) Title:
File No.: Location:
Please state in what way applicant has facilitated or considered
the facilitation of passive solar energy techniques which wo1;ld
not significantly increase the cost of ho11sing to the house
buyer, after tax credits, subsidies and exemptions. For the
pu~poses of this statement, passive solar energy techniques mean
those site design techniques which during the h~ating season
maximize solar heat gain and the storage of heat within a
building. During the warmer months, these techniques minimize
heat gain and provide for natural ventilation. Site techniques
shall include but not be limited to:
(1)
( 2 )
( 3)
( 4)
( 5)
( 6)
Alignment of streets along an east-west axis;
Alignment of lot lines along a north-south axis;
Orientation of structures so that the longest side faces
south;
Location of septic systems on the south side of structure
to help insure an area free of accessory structures _and
rn.~j or vegetatiort;
Maintenance of a "solar setback" zone keyed to the percent
grade and orientation of the slope, and \
Location of·required open space and parking a\.eas on the
south side of structure.
Favorable action on the application of which this statement is a
part r~quir~s demonstrati0n t~ t~e 1~0rnmi~sion th~t c0n~id~~ati0n
has been given to the various techniques listed above, using the
attachment to this statement. For each technique considered,
show the approach or alternate approaches studied, the specific
site limitations, and cost.considerations. Attach additional
sheets as necessary.
1. ~.treets:
2. Lot Lines:
3. Orientation:
4. Septic Systems:
'·
5. Solar Setback:
Dati::: Sigr1att1re:
AGREEMENT TO COMPLETE
SUBDMSION IMPROVEMENTS
\VHEREAS, on the day of 19 _ , the Planning and Zoning
Commission (the "Commission") of the Town of Easton, Connecticut (the "Town"),
approved a plan for the subdivision or resubdivision of land in said Town (the "Apprond
Subdivision Plan"), which land is shown on a map entitled
dated , last revised
----------' Scale 1" = ___ prepared by -------------
subject to the conditions that the person or persons subdividing or resubdividing sucb land
(the "Subdivider"): (1) file with the Commission, for the benefit of the Town, a cash bond,
(the "Bond") in form and substance satisfactory to the Commission, in the amount of
S securing to the Town the actual completion of certain work,
installations and improvements required by the Commission, as shown in the Approved
Subdivision Plan, within years from the date of endorsement of the Subdivision
Plan (the "Effective Date"), or such longer period as the Commission may approve in
writing; (2) enter into this Agreement; and (3) dedicate to the Town all proposed streets
within said subdivision upon completion thereof.
\VHEREAS, ____________ ~of ____________ _
_______________ .is the Subdivider of said premises; and
\VHEREAS, the Subdivider has filed with the Commission a Cash Bond in the' form of a
check, Check# (s) from in the
amount of $ and on the day of 19 . the
Commission endorsed the Subdivision Plan.
NO\V THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing and the promises and covenants
herein contained the Subdivider for itself, its successors and assigns and the Commission
agree as follows:
1. The Subdivider hereby agrees to complete within years from the Effective
Date, or such longer period as the Commission may approve in writing, certain
work, installations and improvements required by the Commission as shown in the
Approved Subdivision Plan all in accordance with said Plan, the subdivision
regulations, zoning regulations, road regulations and ordinances of the Town to the
satisfaction of the Commission. ·
2. No alteration, change or variation to such required work, installations or
impro_vements shall be made without the prior written consent of the Commission.
54
3. The Subdivider agrees to pay promptly for all materials furnished and labor
supplied or performed in connection with the aforesaid work, installations and
improvements.
4. The Subdivider agrees to guarantee all new streets, together with all appurtenances
thereto, located within said subdivision for a period of five (5) years after acceptance
thereof by the Town, which guarantee shall be included in and made a part of the
deeds of conveyance from the Subdivider to the Town of said streets by the
incorporation of the following language:
The said granter does for itself, its successors and assigns, covenants
with the said grantee, its successors and assigns, for the period of
five (5) years from the date of this deed that the aforesaid streets are
free from all defects in workmanship and materials and have been
constructed in accordance with the provisions of the pertinent
ordinance(s) of the Town of Easton relating to the construction of
such streets. This covenant shall expire five (5) years from the date
of this deed.
5. The consent of the Commission to any alteration, change or variation in any
required work, installations or improvements, or any extension of time for the
completion thereof granted by the Commission, or any forbearance on the part of
the Commission to the Subdivider, shall not in any way release the Subdivider,
its successors or assigns from any obligations hereunder.
6. The Subdivider hereby agrees that each and every failure to comply with all terms of
this Agreement, and any notice to the Commission that it does not intend to or
cannot comply with all terms of this Agreement shall constitute a default hereunder.
In the event of any default hereunder, the Town may declare the said Bond forfeited
by written notice to the Subdivider by certified or registered mail return receipt
requested. In the event that the Subdivider fails to remedy such default within ten
(10) days after delivery of such notice, the Town may (1) collect ·and deposit the
proceeds of the Bond in its accounts, and (2) provide for such work, installations
and improvements out of the proceeds of such Bond and the Commission may
declare the Approved Subdivision Plan terminated and record a Notice of
Termination on the Town's Land Records. If such default is caused by notice to the
Commission that the Subdivider does not intend to or cannot comply with the terms
of this Agreement,_!he Subdivider may remedy the same only by posting additional
security with the Commission within such ten (10) day period. In no event shall the
Town be required to perform any such work or incur any expense therefore before
collecting, depositing and applying the proceeds of the Bond as aforesaid.
55
7. The Commission agrees that upon the satisfactory completion of said work,
installations and improvements as required by this Agreement and the submission
of all deeds, easements and other instruments required by the Approved
Subdivision Plan in form and substance satisfactory to the Commission, it shall
recommend to the Board of Selectmen that the streets within said subdivision be
accepted by the Town of Easton, provided, however, that the Bond shall not be
released until: (1) the Town Engineer has certified completion of the public utilities
and all improvements in accordance with the requirements shown in the record
' subdivision plan to the First Selectman, (2) the street or streets have been legally
accepted by the Town, and (3) all required as-built drawings have been received and
found satisfactory by the Commission.
8. In the event that the Subdivider sells, transfers, or otherwise conveys all of the land
being subdivided prior to completion of said work, installations and improvements,
the Subdivider shall not be released from its obligations hereunder nor shall the
Subdivider's bond be released unless and until all such required work, installations
and improvements are completed or a new bond is posted.
9. This agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties hereto
an'd their respective heirs, successors, representatives and assigns.
IN \VITNESS \VHEREOF, the parties have hereunto caused to be set their hands and
seals this ______ day of __________ _
Signed, Sealed and Delivered
in the Presence of:
56
By: _____________ L.S.
Duly Authorized
PLA.1'/NING AND ZONING
COMJYIISSION OF THE TO\VN
OF EASTON
By: ___________ _
Its: -------------
FORM FOR COST ESTIMATE OF BOND CALCULATION
Project: Plan•
La at Rev. Data -----
Location:
Road Length: L.F. Road Name:.
------"-----------~ ----------~
Item Unit Unit Price Quantltv Total Coat
:•earlna .... 2100.00 -
Stumolna SY 0.36 - Strip TOD Soll CY 3.00 -
Rock excavation - M111 CY 11.00 -
Roc ...... cavatlon - Trench CY 26.00 -
Excavation - Cut/Fiii CY 5.00 -
excavation - Cut and Remove from Site CY 6.50 .
llxgavatlon • Fill • Brina Into Sitt CY 7.110 .
Stake Out structurta EA 176.00 -
"take Out ROid 12 tlmHI LF 3.30 .
15" RCI' Solld lnatalltcl LF 22.00 -
18" RCP Saiki lnetallllD Lt' 24.oo .
24" RCP Solld lnetalled LF 33.00 .
0tnar Pine: LF .
8" Curtain Drain LF 17.00 .
15" RCP Flared Ende EA 450.00 -
" RCP Flared Ends EA -
Catch Bulna • Slnals. lnetalled EA 1.200.00 -
Catch Baalns • Double, lnllUlllad EA 2.AU0.00 -
Catch Bulne • Reconat. l!!A 1.000.00 -
anhola end Covar EA 1,400.00 -
Ht8dwella Concrete In P11ge CY 350.00 .
RIP Rap CY 50.00 .
Box Subarede SY D.80 -
1114" ProceH 8" Thick CY 20.00 .
314" Proc- "'on• 4" thick CY 23.00 -
Pavement 4" com-ctad SY 10.00 .
Curbing 8" Bltumlnoue LF 2.10 -
Snould•r - loem + eHd LF 4.00 -
Slo-- loam+ •Hd SY 3.00 -
Guld• ... mna Anchore EA 900.00 -
Guida Ralllna• LF 1&.00 -
Antl-Tracklna Pede SY e.oo .
E!roelon Control Hav Bal•• LP 4.00 .
111v Bein around CBa 14/unltJ EA 10.00 -
Slit Fence LF ;,.oo .
Pege '57
FORM FOR COST ESTIMATE OF BOND CALCULATION
Prolect:
Item Unit
Monuments EA
Lot Pina EA
Drlvewav Anrone EA
Street Sillne EA
Traffic Control llnns EA
StrettTre• ET
Al•BUllt LF
uu111u Coet LF
s-clallzed Items:
PRl!PARED BY: DATE:
Page!8
Unit Price Quantltu
300.00
126.00
2-600.00
150.00
100.00
150.00
2.00
Subtotal: $
16% Contingency: $
Total: $
% Inflation 2nd YHr:
3rd Year:
4'th Year:
5th Year.
Grand Total:
Call It:
Total Coat
"
" .
." . .
--
."
" --
. .
-.
Amendment to
Easton Subdivision Regulations
Regarding Permanent Dead-End Street
Amend section IV c.(5) as follows.
(a) All permanent dead end streets shall terminate in a tum-around 120 feet in a diameter,
.having a paved area 100 ft in diameter.
(b) Dead end streets shall provide exclusive access to a minimum of two and a maximum
of ten existing and/or proposed building lots, except
(i) when it is proposed to extend an existing dead end street as a through street to
another public road, or it is proposed to create a new subdivision including a
through street to another public road, and when the construction of the proposed
street would, in the opinion of the Commission, cause major environmental
damage, the Commission may permit a total of up to sixteen existing and/or
proposed building lots having exclusive access from a permanent dead end
street instead of requiring an extension to create a through street, provided
(ii) that the Commission shall determine that said increase in the number of lots is in
the interest of sound land use planning subject to compliance with all of the
following conditions:
( a) The topography of the land requires cutting or filling which would
not be conducive to the preservation of the natural environment.
( b ) Efficient traffic circulation is not impacted by the loss of a new
through street.
( c) Land up to a maximum of 18% of total subdivision plan area may be
required by the Commission to be dedicated to open space (notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in Section III g.). Eff.7/18/97
The language in Section ffi.g of the current Easton Subdivision Regulations is hereby
deleted and the following language substituted: " Reserved for future use."
New Section Xis added:
SECTION X (CORRECTED TO l l/23/1998)(EFFECTIVE 12/18/1998)
OPEN SPACE, PRESERVATION AND RECREATION AREAS
X.t DEFINIDONS
For the purposes of this Section X, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
1) Open Space: Land left in its natural, undisturbed state; agricultural land for
which development rights have been assigned or otherwise alienated in
perpetuity; land areas and facilities for noncommercial, non-profit recreation;
and similar land areas for wildlife habitat, passive and active recreation,
groundwater recharge, scenic preservation, and the like.
2) Improvement or Public Improvement: Any change or alteration to the existing
conditions of the subdivision site:
a) for the purpose of complying with these Regulations, or any approval
granted hereunder, or
b) depicted on any Final Subdivision Plan approved hereunder, or
c) rendering the site more suitable for development and/or habitation.
d) As used in these Regulations, Improvements include but are not limited to
construction and installation of roadways, paved streets, curbs, gutters,
utilities, street signs, monuments, shade trees and drainage facilities;
erosion and sedimentation control measures; buildings; earth filling or
removal, seeding and grading; the establishment or construction of parks,
playgrounds, recreational buildings, equipment, structures, fields, and
similar facilities; and facilities designed to detain, redirect, store, or treat
storm water discharge
3) Land: Real property including Improvements thereof and thereon, and all
estates, interests, and rights therein of any kind or description, including, but
not limited to, easements, rights-of-way and water and riparian rights,
provided that these interests run in perpetuity with the subject real property
4) Inland Wetland: Those areas designated and defined as inland wetlands by
the Easton Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency, pursuant to its
Regulations and the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
5) Watercourse: Those areas designated and defined as watercourses by the
Easton Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency, pursuant to its
Regulations and the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
X. 2 DISPOSITION FACTORS
I) For any subdivision of land under these Regulations, the Commission may require
of the subdivider the disposition and official dedication of appropriately located
and sized Open Space areas. In determining the appropriateness of an Open Space
area disposition, the Commission shall consider the Easton Plan of Development
objectives and map designations and the subject site's characteristics with respect
to the following objectives:
a) The conservation and protection of wildlife and natural or scenic vistas
including lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, streambelts, inland wetlands, aquifers,
significant woodlands, stands of unique or scenic trees, particular trees of
special size or unusual type, ridges, ravines, stone fences and walls, ledge
outcroppings and other unusual physical features; the protection of historic or
archaeological sites; the preservation of existing trail systems, and
b) the expansion of existing Open space and areas; and
c) the meeting of neighborhood and/or community-wide recreational needs.
2) In determining the location of Open space, the Commission may consider potential
for combination with existing or proposed Open Space on adjoining properties
owned by any public or private institution.
X.3 SIZE
1) Where Open Space disposition is deemed appropriate, the size of the required
areas shall be determined by consideration the Commission based on the site's
value and importance in meeting the objectives cited in Section X.2 and the scope
of the subdivision proposal. Required Open space may be up to 15 percent of the
property under consideration, except otherwise noted in these regulations.
2) In determining the total land to be reserved as Open Space, the Commission may
consider not only the tract or tracts of land to be immediately subdivided, but also
any other adjacent tract or tracts owned, controlled or under agreement to buy or
option to buy by the subdivider.
3) Areas to be reserved as Open Space land shall be shown on the subdivision map.
10.4 METHOD AND PROCEDURE OF DISPOSITION
1) The Commission shall determine the most appropriate method of disposition after
considering, among other things, the relationship of the subject area(s) and its
specific characteristics to the Plan of Development and the objectives cited in
Section 10.2, the desirability and suitability of public access and use, and the scope
of the subdivision proposal. The following disposition options may be utilized by
the Commission:
a) Conveyance in fee simple to the Town.
b) Conveyance in fee simple to the state of Connecticut.
c) Conveyance in fee simple to a land trust (with the concurrence of the
applicantlsubdivider).
d) Conveyance in fee simple to a homeowners' association (see Section 10.5).
e) Private ownership with the appropriate severance and conveyance of
development rights.
f) Any combination of the above or any suitable alternative approved by the
Commission.
1) The applicant shall designate in its application which of the foregoing entities is
proposed to own the Open Space, but, as part of the approval of such application,
the Commission may modify such designation to require ownership by one of the
public entities set forth above, provided, however, that the Commission may not
require ownership by any trust described in (c) above, nor any conveyance to a
private entity, unless consented to by the applicant.
2) Furthermore, the Commission may modify any application so as to designate Open
Space in locations other than those proposed. In determining whether the proposed
entity is appropriate to own the proposed Open Space, or whether to require Open
Space in locations different from those proposed, the Commission shall consider
inter alia the following factors:
a) The ownership of any existing Open Space on adjacent properties, or the
proximity to non-adjacent Open Space which might reasonably interconnect
with the Proposed Open Space in the future;
b) The proposed use of the Open Space for active or passive uses, and the extent
of maintenance, supervision, or management required:
10.5 REFERRALS
The Commission may refer for review and comment any subdivision plan and proposal
for the provision of Open Space land to the Easton Conservation Commission, and any
other appropriate agency. The Commission shall refer to the Easton Board of Selectman
any proposal under which the Town would acquire a property interest in the Open
Space.
X. 6 CONDffiON OF OPEN SPACES AND/OR RECREATION LAND
1) Open Space areas shall typically abut or have direct public access to a public street
and, as appropriate, any existing park or public land.
2) \\'hen requested by the Commission all such areas shall include access roadways to
be graded and improved in a manner suitable for safe pedestrian and vehicular
traffic.
3) Land to be provided as Open Space for the purpose of conservation and protection
of wildlife and natural or scenic resources shall typically be left in a natural state
by the applicant/subdivider. Except for Improvement or maintenance as may be
expressly permitted or required by the Commission, Open Space areas shall not be
graded, cleared, or used as a repository for brush, stumps, earth, building materials
or debris.
4) The Commission may require that any land to be dedicated for recreational use
a) Be cleared of brush, trees and debris; be graded to properly dispose of
surface water; be covered with organic topsoil to a depth of four (4")
inches;
b) Be seeded with low maintenance grass seed; and
c) Be otherwise improved so that the land is left in a condition appropriate, in
the sole discretion of the Commission, to the intended use.
5) The ratio of the area of the proposed Open Space classified as Inland Wetlands to
the total area of the Open Space shall not be greater than the ratio of the area of all
Inland Wetlands in the subdivision to the total area of the subdivision, unless the
Commission considers such Inland Wetland areas to have special habitat or other
unique environmental value.
6) When site Improvements are required they shall be clearly shown on the final
subdivision maps or alternatively on a separate site Improvements plan and they
shall be approved by the Commission prior to the filing of the subdivision plan.
X.7 ENFORCEMENT BONDING AND COMPLETION OF ™PROVEMENTS
l) To ensure proper construction of any required Improvements, the Commission
shall require the subdivider to post a performance bond, letter of credit, or
other suitable security in an amount and with terms acceptable to the
Commission.
2) All required Improvements of Open Space land shall be completed prior to the
sale of fifty (50%) percent of the lots within the subdivision.
X.8 PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION
1) The Commission may, upon the request of the subdivider, permit the ownership
and maintenance of the Open Space to be transferred to an association of
property owners.
2) Such transfer shall be in accordance with standards established by the
Commission to include, but not be limited to, the following:
a) Creation of the association or corporation prior to the sale of any lot.
b) Mandatory ownership in the association by all original lot owners and any
subsequent owner; non-amendable bylaws or other restrictions which
require the association to maintain the land reserved for Open Space, park
and playground purposes, with power to assess all members for all
necessary costs.
c) Provisions/restrictions which will be perpetual and binding on all future
property owners, and will not be affected by any change in land use.
d) The association or Corporation shall have the power to assess and collect
from each lot owner a specified share of costs associated with maintenance,
repair, upkeep and insurance of the Open Space and provide for the
reserves for such costs;
e) Any deed of conveyance shall contain language providing the association
with the right to obtain reimbursement for all costs it reasonably incurs,
including attorney fees, in any action to enforce its rights against any lot
owner, in which the association is the prevailing party.
f) Association documents shall provide that if maintenance or preservation of
the dedication no longer complies with the provisions of the document, the
Town ml\)' take all necessary action to assure compliance and assess against
the association all costs incurred by the town for such purposes, including
reasonable attom~y fees.
3) Any conservation easements or other Open Space covenants or restrictions
shall be subject to the approval of the Commission in form and content. After
approval by the Commission, said document shall be filed by the
applicant/subdivider in the office of the Town Clerk.
4) Properly executed legal documents, including warranty deeds for any title
transfers, shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Section
and shall be submitted in triplicate with the final subdivision map to be
endorsed and filed.
5) All warranty deeds shall be accompanied by a certificate of title prepared by an
attorney admitted to the bar of the State of Connecticut, certifying that such
conveyance pa
6) sses good title to the described property or property interest, and that it is free
and clear of any defect or encumbrances, or that any such encumbrance has
been subordinated to the conveyance.
7) All documents must be acceptable to the Commission and its attorney, and
shall refer to the subdivision maps by title.
8) All warranty deeds for dedication of land to the Town shall be held in escrow
by the Commission to be recorded on the Town Land Records upon acceptance
by the Board of Selectmen or other body having the authority to accept
property in the name of the municipality. In the event that acceptance is
rejected the deed shall be returned and the subdivider shall return to the
Commission for determination of an alternative means of preserving the Open
Space. In no case, shall the acceptance of any deed by the Commission or an
employee of the Town be deemed as acceptance of the Open Space by the
Town.
9) All Open Space preserved by means of easements or restrictions shall comply
with the requirements of Connecticut General Statutes §47-42(a) through §47-
42(c).
X.9 DEDICATION FOR OTHER MUNICIPAL PURPOSES
In the event the applicant/subdivider desires to transfer to the Town land for other
municipal purposes such as future schools, fire houses, etc., the dedication
provisions of this Regulation shall be complied with. The Commission may
consider such a municipal dedication as a credit toward any Open Space
. disposition requirements, but may not require such dedication.
X. 10 PAYMENT OF FEE IN LIEU OF OPEN SPACE
In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes §8-25, as amended by Public Act
90-239, Section 1, the Commission may require an applicant/subdivider to pay a fee
and/or transfer land to the Town of Easton in lieu of the disposition of land by one of
the methods set forth in Section X.4 hereinabove. Such authorization may be granted
by the Commission if and when it determines, in its sole discretion, that there are
inadequate areas on the subdivision which merit preservation by one of the methods
set forth in Section X.4, or that there are other areas in the Town of Easton where
preservation would be more beneficial to the public health, safety and welfare. In
the event that such requirement is imposed by the Commission, such payment or
combination of payment and the fair market value of land transferred shall be equal
to not more than ten (10%) percent of the fair market value of the land to be
subdivided prior to the approval of the subdivision. The fair market value shall be
determined by an appraiser jointly selected by the Commission and the applicant. A
fraction of such payment, the numerator of which is one and the denominator of
which is the number of approved lots in the subdivision, shall be made at the time of
the sale of each approved lot in the subdivision and placed in a fund. Such fund shall
be used solely for the purpose of preserving Open Space, including the acquisition of
land for Open Space. The said payment obligation shall be secured by a lien against
each lot in the subdivision, and the lien shall be filed at the time that the final
subdivision plans are filed in the Office of the Town Clerk, in accordance with
Section ID. 3(i) and Section VI(m) of these Regulations. The said lien shall be in a
form approved by the Commission, ltlni shlill be in a form appro • eEI by=the
Camminicm, and shall be unencumbered by any mortgage or encumbrance having
priority over said lien, as evidenced by a Certificate of Title for each lot.
X.11 EXEMPTIONS FROM OPEN SPACE DISPOSITION REQUIREMENTS
In accordance with Public Acf 90-239, section 1, the provisions of this Chapter X
shall not apply if:
a) The transfer of all land in a subdivision of less tjJan five (5) lots is to a ·
parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle, or first cousin
of the property owner for no consideration. Such intended transfer shall be
evidenced by covenants, restrictions, contracts, or other legally binding documents
as the Commission may approve, which documents shall be filed in the land records
in accordance with these regulations. If the Commission determines, based on
events subsequent to the approval of such subdivision, that such transfers were
intended to be temporary, and for the sole purpose of evading the requirements of
this Section X, the Commission may, following a public hearing with notice by
certified mail to the violator, void, in whole or in part, any such subdivision
approval, and may cause notice thereof to be filed in the Easton land records.
b) The subdivision is to contain affordable housing, as defined in section 8-39a
of the Connecticut General Statutes, equal to twenty-live (25%) percent or more of
the total housing to be constructed in such subdivision. Such restrictions for
affordable housing shall be evidenced by such documents as the Commission may
require, and such restrictions shall run with the lots affected thereby in perpetuity.
If, subsequent to approval of the Subdivision, the lots designated for affordable
housing shall not be sold for that purpose, the Commission may, following a public
bearing with notice by certified mail to the violator, Void, in W bole OT in part, any
such subdivision approval, and may cause notice thereof to be filed in the Easton
land records.
X.12 CONSERVATION EASEMENTS
A. The Commission require one or more easements restricting the use , alteration or
disturbance of one or more natural areas for the purpose of establishing or preserving
a corridor connecting two Open Spaces , preserving a buffer strip adjacenl to a farm ,
preserving scenic viewing points or scenic views and preserving an historic trail system.
B. Said Easements shall provide for access by town officials for the purpose of
inspection and marking boundaries ; and by citizens for appropriate use of the historic
trail system. or corridor.
C. Conservation easements shall be on a form approved by the Conservation
Commission of the Town of Easton.
D. Such easements shall not be counted as part of the Op~n Space requirement set
forth above, however the Commission, at its sole discretioR, "'ay consider such
easements as a credit toward any Open Space required under1this section.
"
X.14 GREENBELT PRESERVATION EASEMENT
A. The Commission may require an easement adjacent to roads to protect and preserve
wooded or rural characteristics of the Town of Easton.
B Said easement shall, among other restrictions, restrict the removal of trees or other
natural growth, the placement of structures, fixed or moveable, or any kind of other
appurtenance or equipment, the removal of existing stone walls except for access or
safety purposes, or detract from the characteristics described above.
C. Greenbelt Preservation Easements shall be on a form approved by the Planning &
Zoning commission of the Town of Easton.
D. Such easements shall not be counted as part of the Open Space requirement set
forth above however the Commission, at its sole discretion, may consider such
easements as a credit toward any Open Space required under this section.
AMENDMENTS TO SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS:
ACCESSWAYS, COMMON DRIVEWAYS, FLAG LOTS, INTERIOR LOTS
Effective date December 29, 2000
(Fonnal Note: Except where enclosed in brackets [ ], existing text remains
unchanged. New text appears in boldface type. Bracketed text indicates
text to be deleted. Italicized text indicates revisions to original amendments.)
ACCESS TO LOTS BY COMMON DRIVEWAYS
Amend Sections Ills. And IVg. (3) to delete the present prohibition of driveways serving
two or more lots, for consistency of the Subdivision Regulations with Zoning Regulations
amendments. These amendments support and implement the Zoning amendments on
common driveways.
SECTION III
s. · Interior and Fla• Lots
[(!) No interior or flag Jot shall be pennitted if the Commission determines that physical
conditions of terrain and topography allow a layout permitting a frontage of two
hundred (200) feet on a public street or highway for all lots in said proposed
subdivision without violating other provisions of these Regulations.]
((2) If physical conditions of terrain and topography are such that the Commission
cannot make the detenninations stated in subparagraph (I) above, the maximum
number of interior or flag Jots shall be limited as follows:
Number of Lots
in Subdivision
fewer than 15
15 or more
Max number of
Interior or Flag Lots
I
2]
(1) No interior lot shall be permitted, except as provided ill Zoning Regulations
Section 5.13.1. The Commission may approve 011e or more flag lots Oil a plall of
subdivision or resubdivision, as provided by Zoning Regulations Section 5.13,
iv here it finds that the creation of such lot or lots iv ill significantly reduce the
length of public roadivay required to be constructed, iv ill make adequate provision
for safe access to such lot or lots, and ivi// minimize construction impacts on the
environment of the site or result in preservation of desirable natural features.
(2) The location, dimensions [,]and construction of any driveway serving [any
permitted interior or] a flag lot shall conform with the requirements of Section IV~.
of these Regulations. A note to this effect shall be placed on the Subdivision Map if
the plan [calls for] inc/ndes one or more [interior or] flag Jots
\
'·
' '
AMENDMENTS TO SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: (page 2)
ACCESSWA YS, COMMON DRIVEWAYS, FLAG LOTS, INTERIOR LOTS
\
(Fonnal Note: Except where enclosed in brackets [ ], existing text remains
unchanged. New text appears in boldface type. Bracketed text indicates
text to be deleted.)
SECTION JV
g. Drivewavs
All provisions of Article V of the Zoning Regulations which apply to driveways are
incorporated herein by reference. In addition: ·
(!) Driveways must be designed and constructed in a manner that will not discharge .1
storm water onto a town street (see Section 111-k and Town Ordinances).
(2) Driveways shall be located with the objective of preserving and pro.tecting existing
trees (see Section III-r).
[(3) Driveways serving two or more lots shail not be pennitted except in cases of
unusual topography or site conditions; provided, however, that in no event shall a
common driveway serve more than two lots.]
(3) A common driveway designed to serve not more tha11four (4) single-family
residential lots may be authorized by the Commission in accordance with the
standards of Section 5.15 of the Zoning Regulatio11s.
- • ~:: t.".; -~:: ; . . . ;, • ·-
•'
I
'
AMENDMENTS TO ZONING REGUUTIONS:
ACCESSWA YS, COMMON DRIVEWAYS, FLAG LOTS, lNTERIOR LOTS
Original text Adopted December 29, 2000
Revised text Effective December 22, 2002
(Format Note: Except where enclosed in brackets [ ], existing text remains
unchanged. Bracketed text indicates text to be deleted. Italicized type
indicates new or amended text Effective date follows in parentheses).
ACCESS TO LOTS BY COMMON DR!YEWAYS
Amend Sections 2.1.16 and 5.13 and add new section 5.15 as follows below .
. Purpose of Amendments: to make provision for safely designed, effectively - maintained connnon
driveways built to appropriate standards in order to rednce future Town road maintenance obligations
and to reduce impact on site environment in new residential construction. Adopted text follows.
2.1.16 LOT IFLAGl: A lot having frontage on a pu~lic street or highway by means of an unobstructed
accessway held in the same ownership. Such pccessway shall be not less than twenty-five (25) nor
more than [fifty (50)] sixty five (65) feet wide at all points. [and not less than two hundred (200)
feet from its intersection with the street line to the point where it intersects with the main portion of
the lot] A flag lot shall otherwise meet the requirements of Article 5 pertaining thereto. (new
2124189; amended Dec. 29, 2000)
5.3 ROAD FRONTAGE v
5 .3 .1 Except for interior lots, flag lots and lots on common ownership accessways, a lot shall have
frontage on a public street or highway of not less than two hundred (200) feet See Sections 5.13
and 5.15. (original revision 2124189; amended Dec. 29, 2000)
5.13 !NTERIOR AND FLAG LOTS (new2/24/89, amended Dec. 29, 2000)
[5.13.1 Interior and flag lots shall not be pennitted except under the following conditions.]
5.13.I Interior lots and flag lots are defined in Sections 2.1.15 and 2.1.16 respectively.
Following the effective date of this amendment no interior lot shall be created except as
follows:
where a lot or tract ofland has existed from prior to the effective date of this amendment
(Dec. 29, 2000), without subsequent alteration of its boundaries as clearly shown by
evidence in the Town Land Records, and such lot or tract is capable in all respects of
division or subdivision into one additional lot except thst it lacks suitable area or frontage
or terrain to accommodate a conforming accessway for such additional lot as determined
by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Commission may, in its sole· discretion, ·
authorize not more than one interior lot to ~e created from such tract or lot provided the
access easement to the interior lot shall meet the requirements of Articles 5.13 and 5.14
and be approved by the Commission for safe a.ccess to the lot and for protection of the
environment of the site.
Any lawful interior lot, either created prior to the effective date of this amendment (Dec. 29,
2000) as shown by evidence in the Town Land Records, or as authorized above, which in all
respects conforms to these regu.lations except for its lack of street frontage, shall be deemed
a confomiing lot with respect to these regulations and may be issued permits in the same
manner as a lot which meets the frontage requirements of these regulations.
,,
'
AMENDMENTS TO ZONING REGUUTIONS: (page 2)
ACCESSWA YS, COMMON DRIVEWAYS, FLAG LOTS, INTERJOR LOTS
5.13 !NTERIORANDFLAGLOTS
5.13.I (Continued)
All flag lots and existing ot authorized interior lots shall be governed by the following
conditions: (new, Dec, 29, 2000) '
A. Use of each interior or flag lot shall be limited to one(!) single family residence. (1983; new
1986)
B. Each easement and accessway shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet nor greater than
. (fifty (50)] sixty five (65) feet wide at all points. (amended Dec, 29, 2000)
C. Within the boundaries of each easement and accessway shall be a graveled or paved driveway
which satisfies the requirements of Article 5.14.
D. [Each easement and accessway shall serve no more than one (1) interior lot and one (1) flag lo~ .
· respectively .. AbuttiiJg easements and accessways shall not be pennitted.]
I
Each flag lot shall include an accessway in the same ownership as the lo~ suitable for a
driveway and utilities, which extends to and provides the lot with frontage on a public
street or highway, as provided by Sections 2.1.16 and 2.1.18. No flag lot accessway shall
be located closer to another flag lot accessway than a straight-line distance equal to twice
(two times) the requisite width of lot square or rectangle as specified in Section 5.2, (300
feet), except that the.Commission may permit not more than two (2) flag lot accessways,
in one location, to adjoin for the pwpose of a shared or common driveway as provided in
Section 5.15. (amended Dec. 29, 2000)
E~ Each interior lot and each flag lot and the use thereof shall otherwise comply with all other
requirements of the Zoning Regulations including, but not limited to, lot shape and minimum
fron~ rear, and side yard requirements for the District in which such lot is located
F. If the easement or.accesswayproviding access to an interior or !Jag lot terminates at a location
·where two boundaries of the main portion of the lot interaec~ the angle included by said
boundaries when projected shall be not less than sixty (60) degrees.
' 5. 15 COMMON DRIVEWAYS (new: Dec. 29, 2000)
5.15.J A common driveway designed to serve not more than four (4) single-family
residential lots, or not more than six (6) single-family residential /JJts subject to
compliance with the additional requirements of Subsection K hereof, may be
authorized by the Commission in accordance with the following standards, on a
plan to be approved by the Commission: (amended Dec. 22, 2002)
A. The Common driveway travelway shall be constructed in accordance with the standard
road specifications of the Towa of Easton (for sub-base, base, wearing surface, drainage
and other construction details), except as provided in subsections ''B" through "J"
following.
B. Minimum travelway width shall be sixteen (16) feet plus two (2) feet of graded and
grassed shoulder at each side. Within its sole discretion, however, the Commission may
reduce or waive the requirement for graded shoulders for short distances along the
travel way to .the extent necessary to minimize impact on wetlands, steep slopes, desirable
natural features or to an adjacent residential lot. Curbing shall not ordinarily be required,
except where determined necessary by the Commission on advice of the Town Engineer.
( amend~d Dec. 22, 2002)
AMENDMENTS. TO ZONING REGULA TIO NS: (page 3)
ACCESSWA YS, COMMON DRIVEWAYS, FLAG LOTS, INTERIOR LOTS
5.15 COMMON DRIVEWAYS
5.15.1CContinued)
C. Maximum travelway length shall be as detennined appropriate in each case by ihe
Commisssion.
D. Maxlinum travel way gradient for the first twenty-five (25) feet from the edge of the
travclway shall be five percent (5%), thereafter transitioning to a maximum gradient of
twelve percent (12%).
E. A "hammerhead" or ''T" configuration of turnaround, suitable in design to accommodate
safe turning movements for large service vehicles and tire apparatus, at maximum 4%
gradient, shall be provided at the terminus of any common driveway serving three (3) or more
lots. (amended Dec. 22, 2002)
F. All ~li!ity lines for power and commnnication shall be placed underground at the side of
the travelway. Banksides adjacent to the travelway shall be landscaped to preserve
se'cnic features and provide for shade trees as determined appropriate by the
Commission. Each individual driveway entrance shall be clearly posted at its intersection
with the common· driveway with an address-number sign designed for night-time visibility to
assist in emergency identification and access.
v
G. All other geometric, design and drainage standards shall be as prcscn'bed by Section 5.14.
H. The design plan for the common driveway shall show essential details of property lines,
easement Illies, proposed travelway, existing and adjusted land contours, proposed storm
drainage, inClividual driveway access to the common driveway, general locations of
utilities and other features to be constructed, including curbs, walls and guide rails where
required, proposed planting including appropriate trees and buffer planting, sight-lines at
the driveway intersection with the public road, and shall bear the seal of a Connecticutre~
tered professional engineer.
r
I. A common (lrivcway designed to provide access from a street to not more than two (2) lots
shall be located within a mutually-shared perpetual easement coinCident with any lot
accessways, cir within an accessway held in peipctual undivided comlrion ownership by the
aforesaid two lots. A common driveway designed to provide access from a street to three (3) or
more lots shall be located 2!!b! within an accessway held in perpetual undivided common
ownership appurtenant to the titles of each of the benefiting lots. (amended Dec. 22, 2002)
Every shared easement or common-ownership accessway shall be not less than fifty (50) nor
more than sixty-five ( 65) feet in width, exclusive of any required turnaround at its terminus.
Where the principal means of access to a lot is by an adjoining common ownership
accessway, over a continuous accessway boundary of at least twenty-five (25) fee~ the lot's
frontage requirements shall be deemed to be met in the same manner as for a ''flag Jar'.
(continues . .. )
I
j
AMENDMENTS TO ZONING REGULATIONS: (page 4)
ACCESSW A YS, COMMON DRIVEWAYS, FLAG LOTS, JNTERIOR LOTS
5.15 COMMONDRIVEWAYS
S.15.1
I. (continued)
Every access easement and every common ownership accessway shall be capable in it! layout
and character of terrain of providing for safe access to each benefiting lot without adverse
environmental impac~ and it! layout and design plan shall require the specific approval of
the Planning and Zoning Commission. The plan approved by the Commission shall
reference all pertinent easement and maintenance covenant document!, and shall .be filed,
along with such documents, following Commission approva~ in the Town Land Records.
J. The common driveway plan shall include a perpetual easement and enforceable
maintenance covenant which Incorporates the full extent o/the common driveway and shall
require approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The easement shall grant jllll
rights of access /oral/ legal purposes, Including utll/ty lnsta//lllions, to each of the sharing
lots. The maintenance covenant shall obligate each benefltbig lot owner lo pay a specified pro
rata share of all work required to maintain the common driveway at all times In a safe and
properly functional condl&n, and shall further obligate the owners to contract/or specified
services which at a minimum wUJ guarantee prompt clearance of snow and ice, trimming of
overhanging tree branches, removal of debris and objects tending lo impede safe travel, and
essential periodic repairs (such as repaving, maintenance of drainage systems, guard rail
replacement, mowing, regrading of banks/des, and other necessary work).
The maintenance covenant shall provide appropriate legal remetlfes which may be applied by
any lot owner(s) paying for work required under the covenant against any nonpaying or
delinquent lot owner(s), and shall provide that the Town may take enforcement acdon against
any lot owner jointly and severally In the event that driveway conditions are found by the
Commission or Its agent to constitute a hazard to Town or other emergency services such as
fire, police or medical response.
The following text shall be incorporated within each common driveway maintenance covenant:
" The undersigned parties to this covenant, ownm of lots ••••
as shown on • ••• (title and date of map) . ••• , duly jlled in the Easton Town
Land Records as Map . ..• , their heirs, successors and assigns, hereby
jointly and severally assume full maintenance responsibility and liabUity for
the condition of all improvempnts shown on •••• (dtle of common driveway
plan) •••• , as more pariicu/~ly described In the Long-term Maintenance
Program attached hereto as Exhibit A, and hereby agree to indemnify and to
hold harmless the Town of Easton from all claims whatsoever which may
arise from the condition of said improvements on the said common driveway
irrespective of their cause." (amended Dec. 22, 2002)
K. A common driveway designed to serve five (5) or six (6) single-family residential
lots shall comply with the following standards In addition to the requirements of Subsections
A. thro11gh J. above:
(1) For jive (5) lots served at least one (1) lot shall have the road frontage on a
public street specified by Section 5.3.1. For six (6) flits served at least two (2)
lots shall have the road frontage on a public street specifted by Section 5.3.1.
(2) No single-lot driveway entrance,/ro111 either a common driveway or a public
street, shall be located within 150 feet of the intersection of a commim driveway
and a public street At Its discretion the Commission may limit any lot to access
011/y from tile co111111011 driveway on which it abuts.
(3) The minimum width of the common driveway travelway serving five or sl'c lots
shall be sixteen (16) feet plus two (2) feet of constructed, graded and grassed
travelway base on each side. (amended Dec. 22, 2002)
Adopted Amendments to the
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS OF IBE TOWN OF EASTON
Effective Date: May 30, 2010
Purpose of Amendments: To revise Subdivision Regulations to include FLOOD PLAIN
MANAGEMENT Regulations in accordance with new federal minimum standards and
state requirements for designated flood plains in order that the Town of Easton may
remain eligible to participate in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
(Add to the Town of Easton Subdivision Regulations, Section III General Requirements,
the following new subsection:)
v. Design Standards For Special Flood Hazard Areas
If a proposed subdivision, including the placement of a manufactured home
park or subdivision, is located in a Special Flood Hazard Area the following
requirements shall apply: ·
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such
as sewer,.gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards;
4. The Commission shall require the applicant to provide base flood
elevation (BFE) data for all subdivision proposals, including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions. In all special flood
hazard areas where BFE data is not available, the applicant shall
provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis performed
by a Connecticut registered professional engineer that generates
BFEs for all subdivision proposals and other proposed development,
including manufactured home parks and subdivisions.
N

INLAND WETLANDS
AND
WATERCOURSES
REGULATIONS
OF THE
TOWN OF EASTON
INLAND WETLANDS & WATERCOURSES AGENCY
EASTON CONSERVATION COMMISSION
REVISED August 27, 2013
EFFECTIVE October 22, 2013
Appendix B revised April 22, 2008
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
TOWN OF EASTON
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Title and Authority ........................... Section 1 Page4
Definitions ........................... Section 2 Page 6
Inventory of Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses .................. Section 3 Page 11
Permitted and Non-regulated Uses ......... Section 4 Page 12
Activities Regulated by the State ............ Section 5 Page 15
Regulated Activities to be Licensed . . . . . . . . . Section 6 Page 16
Application Requirements Section 7 Page 17
Application Procedures ............... Section 8 Page 22
Public Hearings ............... Section 9 Page24
Considerations for Decisions .................. Section 10 Page 25
Decision Process and Permit .................. Section 11 Page 29
Action by Duly Authorized Agent ............ Section 12 Page 32
Bond and Insurance .................. Section 13 Page 33
Enforcement .................. Section 14 Page 34
Amendments .................. Section 15 Page 36
Appeals .................. Section 16 Page 39
Conflict and Severance .................. Section 17 Page 40
Other Permits .................. Section 18 Page 41
Application Fees .................. Section 19 Page 42
Effective Date of Regulations ........ . Section 20 Page 43
2
Appendices
A
B
c
Definition of Agriculture
CT General Statute Section 8-7d
Upland Review Guidelines
Page44
Page 45
Page 47
3
Section 1
Title and Authority
I. I The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an
indispensable and irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the
citizens of the state have been endowed. The wetlands and watercourses are an
interrelated web of nature essential to an adequate supply of surface and
underground water; to hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion;
to the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to the existence of many
forms of animal, aquatic and plant life. Many inland wetlands and watercourses
have been destroyed or are in danger of destruction because of unregulated use by
reason of the deposition, filling or removal of material, the diversion or
obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures and other uses, all of which
have despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such
unregulated activity has had, and will continue to have, a significant, adverse
impact on the environment and ecology of the state of Connecticut and has and
will continue to imperil the quality of the environment thus adversely affecting
the ecological, scenic, historic, and recreational values and benefits of the state for
its citizens now and forever more. The preservation and protection of the
wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary, undesirable and
unregulated uses, disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is
essential to the health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of the state. It is,
therefore, the purpose of these regulations to protect the citizens of the state by
making provisions for the protection, preservation, maintenance, and use of the
inland wetlands and watercourses by minimizing their disturbance and pollution;
maintaining and improving water quality in accordance with the highest standards
set by federal, state or local authority; preventing damage from erosion, turbidity
or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other beneficial aquatic organisms,
wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats thereof;
deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; protecting the quality
of wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic, aesthetic,
recreational and other public and private uses and values; and protecting the
state's potable fresh water supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft,
pollution, misuse and mismanagement by providing an orderly process to balance
the need for the economic growth of the state and the use of its land with the need
to protect its environment and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people
of the state, the safety of such natural resources for their benefit and enjoyment
and for the benefit and enjoyment of generations yet unborn.
1.2 These regulations shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations of the Town of Easton, Connecticut."
4
1.3 The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency of the Town of Easton was
established in accordance with an ordinance adopted November 13, 1972, and
shall implement the purposes and provisions of the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Act in the Town of Easton.
1.4 These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in
accordance with the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and
these regulations.
1.5 The Agency shall enforce all provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Act and shall issue, issue with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or
deny permits for all regulated activities in the Town of Easton pursuant to
Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended.
5
2.1 As used in these regulations:
Section 2
Definitions
"Act" means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, Sections 22a-36 through
22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
"Agency" means the Conservation Commission of the Town of Easton, sometimes
referred to in these regulations as the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency,
the Inland Wetland Agency or the Commission.
"Amendment" means a minor modification approved by the Commission to a
previously-approved permit.
"Bogs" are watercourses distinguished by evergreen trees and shrubs underlain by
peat deposits, poor or very poor drainage, and highly acidic conditions.
"Clear-cutting" means the harvest of timber in a fashion which removes all trees
down to a two-inch diameter at breast height.
"Commissioner of Environmental Protection" means the Commissioner of the
State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection,
sometimes referred to in these regulations as the Commissioner.
"Commission member" means a member of the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Agency of the Town of Easton.
"Continual flow" means a flow of water which persists for an extended period of
time; this flow may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low
flow period of the annual hydrological cycle, June through September, but recurs
in prolonged succession.
"Deposit" includes, but shall not be limited to, fill, grade, dump, place, discharge
or emit.
"Designated Agent" with respect to the Agency means a professional staff member
of the Agency given the authority to approve or extend an activity that is not
located in a wetland or watercourse when such agent finds that the conduct of
such activity would result in no greater than a minimal impact on any wetland or
watercourse, provided such agent has completed the comprehensive training
program developed by the Commissioner pursuant to Section 22a.39.
6
"Discharge" means emission of any water, substance, or material into waters of
the state, whether or not such substance causes pollution.
"Essential to the farming operation" means that the proposed activity is necessary
and indispensable to sustain farming activities on the farm.
"Farming" shall be consistent with the definition as noted in Section 1-1 ( q) of the
Connecticut General Statutes. (see Appendix A)
"Feasible" means able to be constructed or implemented, consistent with sound
engineering principles.
"Habitat" means areas or environments in which an organism or biological
population normally lives or occurs.
"Intermittent Watercourse" - see "Watercourses".
"License" means the whole or any part of any permit, certificate of approval or
similar form of permission which may be required of any person by the provisions
of Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive.
"Management practice" means a practice, procedure, activity, structure, or facility
designed to prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage or to
maintain or enhance existing environmental quality. Such management practices
include, but are not limited to, erosion and sedimentation controls, restrictions on
land use or development, construction setbacks from wetlands or watercourses,
proper disposal of waste materials, procedures for equipment maintenance to
prevent fuel spillage, construction methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of
wetlands and watercourses, procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows,
and confining construction that must take place in watercourses to times when
water flows are low and fish and wildlife will not be adversely affected.
"Marshes" are watercourses that are distinguished by the absence of trees and
shrubs and the dominance of soft-stemmed herbaceous plants. The water table in
marshes is at or above the ground surface throughout the year, and areas of open
water six inches or more in depth are common, but seasonal water table
fluctuations are encountered.
7
"Material" means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including,
but not limited to, soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, mud, debris,
sand, refuse, or waste.
"Municipality" means the Town of Easton, Fairfield County, Connecticut.
"Ordinary high water mark" means a mark on the land caused by the presence and
action of water, which presence and action is so common and usual and so long
continued in all ordinary years so as to mark upon the land a distinction between
the abutting upland and the watercourse. Such mark may be found by examining
the bed and bank of any watercourse and ascertaining thereon an abrupt change in
the characteristics of soil or vegetation or slope of the land.
"Permit" -- see license.
"Permittee" means the person to whom a license has been issued.
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, company, organization, or legal entity of any kind, including
municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
"Pollution" means harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering
unclean or impure of any waters of the state by reason of any waste or other
materials discharged or deposited therein by any public or private sewer or
otherwise so as to directly or indirectly come in contact with any waters. This
includes, but is not limited to, erosion and sedimentation resulting from any
filling, land clearing, or excavation activity.
"Prudent" means economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social
benefits to be derived from the proposed regulated activity, provided cost may be
considered in deciding what is prudent, and further provided a mere showing of
expense will not necessarily mean an alternative is imprudent.
"Regulated Activity'' means any operation within or use of a wetland or
watercourse involving removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction,
construction, alteration, or pollution of such wetlands or watercourses, but shall
not include the specified activities in Section 22a-40 of the Connecticut General
Statutes (permitted uses As of Right-see Section 4 of these Regulations).
Furthermore, any clearing, grubbing, filling, grading, paving, excavating,
constructing, depositing, or removing of material and discharging of storm water
on the land within one hundred (100) feet, measured horizontally, from the
boundary of any wetland or watercourse or two hundred (200) feet, measured
horizontally, from the Aspetuck River, Mill River, Saugatuck Reservoir,
Aspetuck Reservoir, Hemlock Reservoir, Easton Lake Reservoir, or Pfeiffer
Pond, or other ponds having an area in excess of three (3) acres, is a regulated
8
act1v1ty. Measurement of a boundary from bodies of water shall be measured
from the ordinary high water mark. The Agency may rule that any other activity
located within such upland review area or in any other non-wetland or nonwatercourse
area is likely to impact or affect wetlands or watercourses and is a
regulated activity.
"Remove" includes, but shall not be limited to, drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge,
suck, bulldoze, dragline, or blast.
"Rendering unclean or impure" means any alteration of the physical, chemical, or
biological properties of any waters of the state, including, but not limited to,
change in odor, color, turbidity, or taste.
"Significant impact" means any activity, including, but not limited to, tl!e
following activities which may have a major effect:
a. Any activity involving deposition or removal of material which will or
may have a substantial effect on the wetland or watercourse or on
wetlands or watercourses outside the area for which the activity is
proposed;
b. Any activity which substantially changes the natural channel or may
inhibit the natural dynamics of a watercourse system;
c. Any activity which substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an
inland wetland or watercourse to: support aquatic, plant or animal life and
habitats; prevent flooding; supply water; assimilate waste; facilitate
drainage; provide recreation or open space; or perform other functions;
d. Any activity which is likely to cause or has tl!e potential to cause
substantial turbidity, siltation, or sedimentation in a wetland or
watercourse;
e. Any activity which causes substantial diminution of flow of a natural
watercourse or groundwaterlevels of the wetland or watercourse;
f. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause pollution
of a wetland or watercourse; or
g. Any activity which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse
areas or such areas having demonstrable scientific or educational value.
"Soil scientist" means an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards
set by the federal Office of Personnel Management.
"Swamps" are watercourses that are distinguished by the dominance of wetland
trees and shrubs.
"Submerged lands" means those lands which are inundated by water on a seasonal
or more frequent basis.
"Town" means the Town of Easton, Fairfield County in the State of Connecticut.
9
"Vernal Pool" means a seasonal watercourse in a defined depression or basin that
lacks a fish population and supports, or is capable of supporting, breeding and
development of amphibian or invertebrate species recognized as obligate to such
watercourses. These species include Spotted Salamander, Jefferson Salamander
Complex, Marbled Salamander, Wood Frog, and Fairy Shrimp.
"Waste" means sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid, or radioactive,
which may pollute or tend to pollute any of the wetlands and watercourses of the
Town.
"Watercourses" means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes,
swamps, bogs, and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or
intermittent, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or
border upon the Town or any portion thereof not regulated as tidal wetlands,
pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General
Statutes. Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent
channel and bank and the occurrence of two or more of the following
characteristics: (a) evidence of scour or deposits ofrecent alluvium or detritus, (b)
the presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer than a particular
storm incident, and ( c) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation.
"Wetlands" means land, including submerged land as defined in this section, not
regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the
Connecticut General Statutes, which consists of any of the soil types designated
as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial, and floodplain by the National
Cooperative Soils Survey, as it may be amended from time to time, of the Natural
Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated sites which possess an aquic
(saturated) soil moisture regime as defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil
Survey.
10
Section 3
Inventory oflnland Wetlands and Watercourses
3.1 Maps entitled "Aerial Photography" delineate the general location and boundaries
of inland wetlands and the general location of watercourses. Copies of these maps
are available for inspection in the Office of the Conservation Commission, Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Agency. In all cases, the precise location of regulated
areas shall be determined by the actual character of the land, the distribution of
wetland soil types, and locations of watercourses. Such determinations shall be
made by field inspection and testing conducted by a soil scientist where soil
classifications are required, or where watercourse determinations are required, by
other qualified individuals. The Agency may use aerial photography, remote
sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils maps, site inspection
observations, or other information in determining the location of the boundaries of
wetlands and watercourses.
3.2 Any person may petition the Agency for an amendment of the
map. All petitions for a map change shall be submitted in writing and shall
include all relevant facts and circumstances which support the change. The
petitioner shall bear the burden of proof regarding the proposed map amendment.
Such proof may include, but not be limited to, aerial photography, remote sensing
imagery, resource mapping, or other available information. The Agency may
require such person to provide an accurate delineation of regulated areas in
accordance with Section 15 of these regulations.
3 .3 The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency or its Designated Agent shall
inventory and maintain current records of all regulated areas within the Town.
The Agency may amend its map from time to time as information becomes
available relative to more accurate delineation of wetlands and watercourses
within the Town.
3.4 All map amendments are subject to the public hearing process outlined in
Section 15 of these regulations.
11
Section 4
Permitted Uses as of Right & Nonregulated Uses
4.1 The following operations and uses shall be permitted in inland wetlands and
watercourses, as of right:
a. Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening, and harvesting of crops and farm
ponds of three acres or less essential to the farming operation, and activities
conducted by, or under the authority of, the Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection for the purposes of wetland or watercourse
restoration or enhancement or mosquito control. The provisions of this
subdivision shall not be construed to include road construction or the erection
of buildings not directly related to the farming operation, relocation of
watercourses with continual flow, filling or reclamation of wetlands or
watercourses with continual flow, clear cutting of timber except for the
expansion of agricultural crop land, the mining of top soil, peat, sand, gravel,
or similar material from wetlands or watercourses for the purposes of sale;
b. A residential home (A) for which a building permit has been issued, or (B) on
a subdivision lot, provided the permit has been issued or the subdivision has
been approved by a municipal planning, zoning, or planning and zoning
commission as of the effective date of promulgation of the municipal
regulations pursuant to Subsection (b) of Section 22a-42a, or as of July 1,
1974, whichever is earlier, and further provided no residential home shall be
permitted as of right pursuant to this subsection unless the building permit was
obtained on or before July 1, 1987. The individual claiming a use of wetlands
permitted as a right under this subsection shall document the validity of said
right by providing a certified copy of the building permit and a site plan
showing proposed and existing topographic contours, house and well
locations, septic system, driveway, approval dates, or other necessary
information to document this entitlement;
c. Boat anchorage or mooring, not to include dredging or dock construction;
d. Uses incidental to the enjoyment or maintenance of residential property, such
property defined as equal to or smaller than the largest minimum residential
lot site permitted anywhere in the municipality and containing a residence.
Such incidental uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and
landscaping, but shall not include removal or deposition of substantial amount
of material from or into a wetland or watercourse, or diversion or alteration or
a watercourse;
e. Construction and operation, by water companies as defined by Section 16-1 of
the Connecticut General Statutes or by municipal water supply systems as
provided for in Chapter 102 of the Connecticut General Statutes, of dams,
reservoirs and other facilities necessary to the impounding, storage, and
withdrawal of water in connection with public water supplies except as
provided in Sections 22a-401and 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes;
12
f. Maintenance relating to any drainage pipe which existed before the effective
date of any municipal regulations adopted pursuant to Section 22a-42a of the
Connecticut General Statutes or July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, provided
such pipe is on property which is zoned as residential but which does not
contain hydrophytic vegetation. For purposes of this subdivision,
"maintenance" means the removal of accumulated leaves, soil, and other
debris, whether by hand or machine, while the pipe remains in place; and
g. Withdrawals of water for fire emergency purposes.
4.2 The following operations and uses shall be permitted, as non-regulated uses in
wetlands and watercourses, provided they do not disturb the natural and
indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse by removal or deposition of
material, alteration or obstruction of water flow or pollution of the wetland or
watercourse:
a. Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish, and wildlife; such
operation or use may include, but is not limited to, minor work, limited to
hand tools, to control erosion, or to encourage proper fish, wildlife and
silviculture management practices;
b. Outdoor recreation including play and sporting areas, cross country skiing,
golf courses, field trials, nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming,
skin and scuba diving, camping, boating, water skiing, trapping, hunting,
fishing and shellfishing, where otherwise legally permitted and regulated; and
c. The installation of a dry hydrant by or under the authority of a municipal fire
department, provided such dry hydrant is only used for firefighting purposes,
and there is no alternative access to a public water supply. For purposes of
this section, "dry hydrant" means a non-pressurized pipe system that: (A) is
readily accessible to fire department apparatus from a proximate public road,
(8) provides for the withdrawal of water by suction to such fire department
apparatus, and (C) is permanently installed into an existing lake, pond or
stream that is a dependable source of water.
4.3 All activities in wetlands or watercourses involving filling, excavating, dredging,
clear cutting, clearing, or grading or any other alteration or use of a wetland or
watercourse not specifically permitted by this section and otherwise defined as a
regulated activity by these regulations shall require a permit from the Agency in
accordance with Section 6 of these regulations, or for certain regulated activities
located outside of wetlands and watercourses from the duly authorized agent in
accordance with Section 12 of these regulations.
13
4.4 To carry out the purposes of this section, any person proposing to carry out a
permitted or non-regulated operation or use of a Wetland, Watercourse or
regulated area which may disturb the natural and indigenous character of the land,
shall, prior to commencement of such operation or use, file a request for
declaratory ruling with the Agency on a form provided by it, and provide the
Agency with sufficient information to enable it to properly determine that the
proposed operation and use is a permitted or non-regulated use of the Wetland,
Watercourse or regulated area. The request for declaratory ruling shall include a
detailed description of the proposed activities with a time table for the
commencement and completion of the activities, a site plan, a sedimentation and
erosion control plan, and such additional information as the Agency deems
necessary to evaluate the request. A person proposing to carry out a permitted or
non-regulated operation or use shall also consent to the inspection of the subject
property for the purpose of evaluating the request and, if necessary, during the
course of the activity for the purpose of evaluating compliance with these
Regulations and applicable state law. The Agency or its Designated Agent shall
rule that the proposed operation and use, or portion of it, is a permitted or a nonregulated
use or operation or that the proposed operation or use is a regulated
activity and requires a permit. Such ruling shall be in writing and shall be made
no later than sixty-five (65) days after the request is received by the Agency. The
date of receipt of the request for declaratory ruling shall be the day of the next
regularly-scheduled meeting of the Agency immediately following the day of
submission to the Agency. The Designated Agent for the Agency may make such
ruling on behalf of the Agency at any time.
14
Section 5
Activities Regulated Exclusively by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection
5.1 The Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection shall have exclusive
jurisdiction over regulated activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses,
undertaken by any department, agency, or instrumentality of the State of
Connecticut, except any local or regional board of education, pursuant to Sections
22a-39 or 22a-45a of the Connecticut General Statues.
5 .2 The Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection shall have exclusive
jurisdiction over tidal wetlands designated and regulated pursuant to Sections
22a-28 through 22a-35 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
5.3 The Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection shall have exclusive
jurisdiction over activities authorized under a dam repair or removal order issued
by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under Section 22a-402 of the
Connecticut General Statutes or a permit issued by the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection under sections 22a-403 of the Connecticut General
Statutes. Any person receiving such dam repair or removal order or permit shall
not be required to obtain a permit from a municipal wetlands agency for any
action necessary to comply with said dam order or to carry out the activities
authorized by said permit.
5.4 The Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection shall have exclusive
jurisdiction over the discharge of fill or dredged materials into the wetlands and
watercourses of the state pursuant to Section 40 I of the Federal Clean Water Act,
as amended, for activities regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under
Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
15
Section 6
Regulated Activities to be Licensed
6.1 No person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first obtaining a
permit for such activity from the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency of
the Town of Easton.
6.2 Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a regulated activity without the
prior authorization of the Agency, or violating any other provision of these
regulations, shall be subject to the enforcement proceedings and penalties
prescribed in Section 14 of these regulations and any other remedies as provided
bylaw.
16
Section 7
Application Requirements
7.1 Any person wishing to undertake a regulated activity shall apply for a permit on a
form supplied by the Town of Easton Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency.
An application shall include an application form and such information as
prescribed by Section 7.5 and, in the case of a significant activity, by Section 7.6
of these regulations. Application forms may be obtained from the office of the
Easton Town Clerk or the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency.
7 .2 If an application to the Town of Easton Planning and Zoning Commission for
subdivision or resubdivision of land involves land containing a wetland or
watercourse, the applicant shall, in accordance with Section 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26,
as applicable, of the Connecticut General Statutes, submit an application for a
permit to the Agency in accordance with this section, no later than the day the
application is filed with such planning and zoning commission.
7.3 The application shall contain such information as is necessary for a fair and
informed determination thereon by the Agency.
7.4 A prospective applicant may request the Agency to determine whether or not a
proposed activity involves a significant impact activity.
7.5 All applications shall include the following information in writing or on maps or
drawings:
a. The applicant's name, home and business mailing addresses and telephone
numbers; if the applicant is a Limited Liability Corporation or a Corporation
the managing member's or responsible corporate officer's name, address, and
telephone number;
b. The owner's name, mailing address and telephone number and written consent
of the land owner if the applicant is not the owner of the land upon which the
subject activity is proposed;
c. The applicant's interest in the land;
d. The geographical location of the land which is the subject of the proposed
activity and a description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification
of the inland wetlands and watercourses, the area(s) (in acres or square feet) of
wetlands or watercourses to be disturbed, soil type(s), and wetland vegetation;
17
e. The purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion
and sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation
measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for the
proposed regulated activity including, but not limited to, measures to (I)
prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or
enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of
priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse
resources;
f. Alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or
watercourses and why the alternative as set forth in the application was
chosen; all such alternatives shall be diagrammed on a site plan or drawing;
g. A site plan showing the proposed activity and existing and proposed
conditions in relation to wetlands and watercourses and identifying any further
activities associated with, or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated
activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and
which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses;
h. Names and mailing addresses of adjacent land owners;
1. Statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the
information provided in the application and is aware of the penalties for
obtaining a permit through deception or through inaccurate or misleading
information;
J. Authorization for the members and agents of the Agency to inspect the subject
land, at reasonable times, during the pendency of an application and for the
life of the permit;
k. A completed DEEP reporting form; the Agency shall revise or correct the
information provided by the applicant and submit the form to the
Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection in accordance with
Section 22a-39- l 4 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
I. Any other information the Agency deems necessary to the understanding of
what the applicant is proposing; and
m. Submission of the appropriate filing fee based on the fee schedule established
in Section 19 of these regulations.
7.6 At the discretion of the Agency or its agent, or when the proposed activity
involves a significant impact, additional information, based on the nature and
anticipated effects of the activity, including but not limited to the following, is
required:
a. Site plans for the proposed activity and the land which will be affected
thereby, which show existing and proposed conditions, wetland and
watercourse boundaries, land contours, boundaries of land ownership,
proposed alterations and uses of wetlands and watercourses, and other
pertinent features of the land and the proposed activity, prepared by a
professional engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed
by the state, or by such other qualified person;
18
b. Engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the
proposed activity, including any filling, excavation, drainage, or hydraulic
modifications to watercourses and the proposed erosion and sedimentation
control plan;
c. Mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the
National Cooperative Soil Survey of the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation
Service; the wetlands shall be delineated in the field by a soil scientist, and the
soil scientist's field delineation shall be depicted on the site plans;
d. A description of the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or
watercourses involved with the application and the effects of the proposed
activity on these communities and wetland functions;
e. A description of how the applicant will change, diminish, or enhance the
ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses
involved in the application and each alternative which would cause less or no
environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses, and a description of why
each alternative considered was deemed neither feasible nor prudent;
f. Analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material; and
g. Management practices and other measures designed to mitigate the impact of
the proposed activity.
7. 7 The applicant shall certify whether:
a. Any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is
located within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of an adjoining
municipality;
b. Traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within
the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. Sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and impact
the sewage or drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or,
d. Water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or
private property within the adjoining municipality.
7.8 Three copies of the application and six copies of the plans, noting wetlands and
topography, unless otherwise noted by the Commission, shall be submitted to
comprise a complete application, except that applications subject to a public
hearing shall include eight copies of all application materials to comprise a
complete application, or as otherwise directed in writing by the Agency.
19
7 .9 Any application to renew or amend an existing permit shall be filed with the
Agency in accordance with Section 8 of these regulations at least sixty-five (65)
days prior to the expiration date of the permit. Any application to renew or
amend such an existing permit shall contain the information required under
Section 7 of these Regulations provided:
a. The application may incorporate the documentation and record of the
prior application;
b. The application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of
filing and the schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit;
the application shall state the reason why the authorized activity was not
initiated or completed within the time specified in the permit;
d. The application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved
with or affecting wetlands or watercourses or use of the land for which the
permit was issued; and
e. The Agency may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept an untimely
application to renew such permit ifthe authorized activity is ongoing and
allow the continuation of work beyond the expiration date if, in its judgment,
the permit is likely to be renewed and the public interest or environment will
be best served by not interrupting the activity.
7 .10 Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon request of the permit
holder unless the Agency finds that there has been a substantial change in
circumstances which requires a new permit application, or an enforcement action
has been undertaken with regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was
issued, provided no permit shall be valid for more than ten years, and further
provided that any permit issued prior to July 1, 2011 that did not expire prior to
May 9, 2011 shall be valid for no more than fourteen years.
7 .11 For any permit application involving property subject to a conservation restriction
or preservation restriction, the following shall apply:
a. For purposes of this section, "conservation restriction" means a limitation,
whether or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant, or
condition, in any deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the
owner of the land described therein, including, but not limited to, the state or
any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking such land whose
purpose is to retain land or water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic
or open condition or in agricultural, farming, forest or open space use.
b. For purposes of this section, "preservation restriction" means a limitation,
whether or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or
condition, in any deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the
owner ofland, including, but not limited to, the state or any political
20
subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking of such lan.d whose purpose
is to preserve historically significant structures or sites.
c. No person: shall file a permit application, other than for interior work in an
existing building or for exterior work on an existing building that does not
expand or alter the footprint of such existing building, relating to property that
is subject to a conservation restriction or a preservation restriction, unless the
applicant provides proof that the applicant has provided written notice of such
application, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the party holding
such restriction, including, but not limited to, any state agency that holds such
restriction, not later than sixty (60) days prior to the filing of the permit
application.
d. In lieu of such notice pursuant to Subsection 7.11 c, the applicant may submit a
letter from the holder of such restriction or from the holder's authorized agent,
verifying that the application is in compliance with the terms of the restriction.
21
Section 8
Application Procedures
8.1 All petitions, applications, requests, or appeals shall be submitted to the
Conservation Commission of the Town of Easton, acting as the Easton Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Agency.
8.2 The Agency shall, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-
7d(f), notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality (Fairfield, Trumbull, Monroe,
Newtown, Redding, or Weston) of the pendency of any application, petition,
appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in which:
a. Any portion of the property affected by a decision of the agency is within five
hundred (500) feet of the boundary of any adjoining municipality;
b. A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use
streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project site will
flow through and significantly impact the sewage or drainage system within the
adjoining municipality; or,
d. Water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or
private property within the adjoining municipality.
Notice of the pendency of such application shall be made by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the date of receipt
of the application, petition, appeal, request, or plan.
8.3 When an application is filed to conduct, or cause to be conducted, a regulated
activity upon an inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within the
watershed of a water company as defined in Section 25-32a of the Connecticut
General Statutes, the applicant shall provide written notice of the application to
the water company and the Commissioner of Public Health in a format prescribed
by such commissioner, provided such water company or said commissioner has
filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershed on the land records of the
municipality in which the application is made and with the inland wetlands
agency of such municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and shall be mailed not later than seven days after the date of
the application. The water company and the Commissioner of Public Health,
through a representative, may appear and be heard at any hearing on the
application. Documentation of such notice shall be provided to the Agency.
22
8.4 The date of receipt of a petition, application, request or appeal shall bt;i the day of
the next regularly-scheduled meeting of the Agency, immediately following the
day of submission to the Agency or its agent of such petition, application, request,
or appeal or thirty-five (35) days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
8.5 At any time during the review period, the Agency may require the applicant to
provide additional information about the regulated area or regulated activity,
which is the subject of the application, or wetlands or watercourses affected by the
regulated activity. The Agency shall not exceed the required sixty-five (65) day
time limit in taking action on an application pending the receipt of additional
information as stated in Section 11.2 of these regulations.
8.6 All applications shall be open for public inspection.
8.7 Incomplete applications may be denied.
23
Section 9
Public Hearings
9.1 The inland wetlands agency shall not hold a public hearing on an application
unless (a) the inland wetlands agency determines that the proposed activity may
have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, (b) a petition signed by at
least twenty-five (25) persons who are eighteen years of age or older and who
reside in the municipality in which the regulated activity is proposed, requesting a
hearing is filed with the inland wetlands agency not later than fourteen (14) days
after the date of receipt of such application, or ( c) the inland wetlands agency
finds that a public hearing regarding such application would be in the public
interest. The inland wetlands agency may issue a permit without a public hearing
provided no petition provided for in this section is filed with the inland wetlands
agency on or before the fourteenth day after the date of receipt of the application.
Such hearing shall be held no later than sixty-five (65) days after the receipt of
such application. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall
be open for public inspection. At such hearing any person or persons may appear
and be heard.
9.2 Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not
less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days and not fewer than ten
days, and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing in a
newspaper having a general circulation in each town where the affected wetland
and watercourse is located.
9.3 Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the owner(s) ofrecord of abutting
land not less than fifteen days prior to the day of the hearing.
9.4 In the case of any application, which is subject to the notification provisions of
Section 8.2 of these Regulations, a public hearing shall not be conducted until the
clerk of the adjoining municipality(ies) has received notice of the pendency of the
application. Proof of such notification shall be entered into the hearing record.
24
Section 10
Considerations for Decision
I 0.1 The Agency may consider the following in making its decision on an application:
a. The application and its supporting documentation;
b. Reports from other agencies and commissions including but not limited to the
Town of Easton:
1. Planning and Zoning Commission
2. Building Official
3. Health Officer
4. Town Engineer
c. The Agency may also consider comments on any application from the
Fairfield County Soil and Water Conservation District, the Greater
Bridgeport Regional Planning Agency or other regional organizations (i.e.
Council of Elected Officials); agencies in adjacent municipalities which may
be affected by the proposed activity, or other technical agencies or
organizations which may be affected by the proposed activity, or other
technical agencies or organizations which may undertake additional studies
or investigations.
d. Non-receipt of comments from agencies and comm1ss10ns listed in I 0.1 b
above within the prescribed time shall neither delay nor prejudice the
decision of the Agency.
e. For an application for which a public hearing is held, public comments,
evidence, and testimony.
10.2 Standards and Criteria for Decision. In carrying out the purpose and policies of
Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes,
including, but not limited to, matters relating to regulating, licensing, and
enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Agency shall take into consideration all
relevant facts and circumstances, including and not limited to:
a. The environmental impact of the proposed action, including the effects on the
inland wetland's and watercourse's capacity to support fish and wildlife, to
prevent flooding, to supply and protect surface and ground water, to control
sediment, to facilitate drainage, to control pollution, to support recreational
activities, and to promote public health and safety;
b. The alternatives to the proposed action, including a consideration of
alternatives which might enhance environmental quality or have a less
detrimental effect, and which could feasibly attain the basic objectives of the
activity proposed in the application;
25
c. The relationship between the short-term uses of the environment and the
maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity, including
consideration of the extent to which the proposed activity involves trade-offs
between short-term environmental gains at the expense oflong-term losses, or
vice-versa, and consideration of the extent to which the proposed action
forecloses or predetermines future options;
d. Irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources
which would be caused by the proposed regulated activity, including the
extent to which such activity would foreclose a future ability to protect,
enhance, or restore such resources, and any mitigation measures which
may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for such activity
including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize
pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance
existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority:
restore, enhance, and create productive wetland or watercourse
resources;
e. The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health, or
the reasonable use of property, including abutting or downstream property,
which would be caused or threatened by the proposed activity, or the creation
of conditions which may do so. This includes recognition of potential damage
from erosion, turbidity, or siltation, loss of fish and wildlife and their habitat,
loss of unique habitat having demonstrable natural, scientific, or educational
value, loss, or diminution of beneficial aquatic organisms and wetland plants,
the dangers of flooding and pollution, and the destruction of the economic,
aesthetic, recreational, and other public and private uses and value of wetlands
and watercourses to the community;
f. Impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses
outside the area for which the activity is proposed and future activities
associated with, or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity
which may have an impact on wetlands and watercourses;
g. The suitability of the activity to the area for which it is proposed. This requires
a balancing of the need for the economic growth of the community and the use
of its land, with the need to protect its environment and ecology for the people
of the community and the use of its land, with the need to protect its
environment and ecology for the people of the community and the benefit of
generations yet unborn; and
h. Measures which would mitigate the impact of any aspect of the proposed
regulated activity. Such measures include, but are not limited to, actions
which would avoid adverse impacts or lessen impacts to wetlands and
watercourses and which could be feasibly carried out by the applicant and
26
would protect the wetland's or watercourse's natural capacity to support fish
and wildlife, prevent flooding, support water, control sedimentation, prevent
erosion, assimilate wastes, facilitate drainage, and to provide recreation and
open space.
10.3 In the case of any application, which received a public hearing pursuant to a
finding by the Agency that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on
wetlands or watercourses, a permit shall not be issued unless the Agency finds that
a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. In making this finding, the
Agency shall consider the facts and circumstances set forth in Section 10 of these
regulations. This finding and the reasons therefore shall be stated on the record in
the decision of the Agency.
10.4 In the case of an application which is denied on the basis of a finding that
there may be feasible and prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated
activity which have less adverse impact on wetlands or watercourses, the
Agency shall propose on the record in writing the types of alternatives
which the applicant may investigate provided this subsection shall not be
construed to shift the burden from the applicant to prove that he is entitled
to the permit or to present alternatives to the proposed regulated activity.
10.5 For purposes of this section, "wetlands and watercourses" includes aquatic, plant
or animal life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses.
10.6 The Agency shall not deny or condition an application for a regulated activity in
an area outside wetlands or watercourse on the basis of an impact or effect on
aquatic, plant, or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the
physical characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses.
10. 7 In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency
shall base its decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or
other material not in the hearing record shall not be considered by the Agency in
its decision.
10.8 In the case of an application where the applicant has provided written notice
pursuant to Subsection 7.1 lc of these regulations, the holder of the restriction
may provide proof to the inland wetlands agency that granting of the permit
application will violate the terms of the restriction. Upon a finding that the
requested land use violates the terms of such restriction, the inland wetlands
agency shall not grant the permit approval.
I 0.9 In the case of an application where the applicant fails to comply with the
provisions of Subsections 7.11 c or 7. I Id of these regulations, (I) the party
holding the conservation or preservation restriction, other than a state agency that
holds such restriction, may, not later than fifteen days after receipt of actual
notice of permit approval, file an appeal with the inland wetlands agency, subject
27
to the rules and regulations of such agency relating to appeals. The inland
wetlands agency shall reverse the permit approval upon a finding that the
requested land use violates the terms of such restriction; or (2) the state agency
that holds such restriction may, not later than thirty days after receipt of actual
notice of permit approval, file an appeal with the inland wetlands agency, subject
to the rules and regulations of such agency relating to appeals. The inland
wetlands agency shall immediately reverse such permit approval if the
commissioner of the state agency that holds such restriction certifies that the land
use authorized in such permit violates the terms of such conservation or
preservation restriction.
10.10 Nothing in Subsections 7.llc or 7.lld of these regulations shall be construed to
prohibit the filing of a permit application or to require such written notice when
the activity that is the subject of such permit application will occur on a portion
of property that is not restricted under the terms of such conservation or
preservation restriction.
28
Section 11
Decision Process and Permit
I I.I The Agency, or its duly authorized agent acting pursuant to Section 12 of these
regulations, may, in accordance with Section 10 of these regulations, grant the
application as filed or grant it upon other terms, conditions, limitations or
modifications of the regulated activity designed to carry out the purposes and
policies of the Act, or deny the application. Such terms may include any
reasonable measures which would mitigate the impacts of the regulated activity
and which would (a) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental
damage, (b) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (c) in the
following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or
watercourse resources. Such terms may include restrictions as to the time of year
in which a regulated activity may be conducted, provided the Agency, or its agent,
determines that such restrictions are necessary to carry out the policy of Sections
22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes.
11.2 No later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of an application, the Agency may
hold a public hearing on such application. At such hearing any person or persons
may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The
hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days of its commencement.
Action shall be taken on applications within thirty-five (35) days after completion
of a public hearing. In the absence of a public hearing, action shall be taken on
applications within sixty-five (65) days from the date of receipt of the application.
The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in
this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for
longer than sixty-five (65) days, or may withdraw the application. The failure of
the Agency to act within any time period specified in this subsection, or any
extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the application.
An application deemed incomplete by the Agency shall be withdrawn by the
applicant or denied by the Agency.
11.3 The Agency shall state upon its record the reasons and bases for its decision.
11.4 The Agency shall notify the applicant and any person entitled to such notice of its
decision within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and the Agency shall cause notice of its order in the
issuance or denial of the permit, to be published in a newspaper having general
circulation in the town wherein the inland wetland or watercourse lies. In any
case in which such notice is not published within such fifteen day period, the
applicant may provide for the publication of such notice within ten days
thereafter.
29
11.5 If an activity authorized by an inland wetland permit also involves an activity
which requires a zoning or subdivision approval, special zoning permit, or
variance or special exception, under sections 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the
Connecticut General Statues, the Agency shall file a copy of the decision and
report on the application with the Town of Easton Planning, Zoning, or Planning
and Zoning Commission within fifteen days of the date of the decision thereon.
11.6 Any permit issued by the Agency for the development of land for which an
approval is required under Chapter 124 (Zoning), 124b (Incentive Housing
Zones), 126 (Municipal Planning Commissions), or 126a (Affordable Housing
Land Use Appeals) of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be valid until the
approval granted under such chapter expires or for ten years, whichever is
earlier. Any permit issued by the Agency for any activity for which an
approval is not required under Chapter 124, l 24b, 126, or l 26a shall be valid
for not less than two years and not more than five years.
11.6. l Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 11.6 of these regulations, any
permit issued by the Agency prior to July I, 2011 that was in effect and
did not expire prior to May 9, 2011 shall be valid for a period not less
than nine years after the date of such approval.
11. 7 If a bond or insurance is required in accordance with section 13 of these
regulations, the Agency may withhold issuing the permit until such bond or
insurance is provided.
11.8 General provisions in the issuance of all permits:
a. The Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the
applicant and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive,
incomplete or inaccurate, the permit may be modified, suspended or revoked.
b. All permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any
present or future rights or powers of the Agency or the Town of Easton, and
convey no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and
are further subject to any and all public and private rights and to any federal,
state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the subject land or
activity.
c. If the activity authorized by the Agency's permit also involves an activity
which requires zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, variance or
special exception under sections 8.3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, no work pursuant to the wetland permit may begin until
such approval is obtained.
30
d. In constructing the authorized activities, the permittee shall implement such
management practices consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit
as needed to control storm water discharges and to prevent erosion and
sedimentation and to otherwise prevent pollution of wetlands and
watercourses.
e. Permits are not transferable without the prior written consent of the Agency.
31
Section 12
Action by Duly Authorized Agent
12 .1 The Agency may delegate to its duly authorized agent the authority to approve or
extend a license for an activity that is not located in a wetland or watercourse
when such agent finds that the conduct of such activity would result in no greater
than a minimal impact on any wetlands or watercourses provided such agent has
completed the comprehensive training program developed by the Commissioner
of Environmental Protection pursuant to section 22a-39 of the Connecticut
General Statutes. Requests for such approval shall be made on a form provided
by the Agency and shall contain the information listed under Section 7.5 of these
regulations and any other information the Agency may reasonably require.
Notwithstanding the provisions for receipt and processing·applications prescribed
in Sections 8, 9 and 11 of these regulations, such agent may approve or extend
such an activity at any time.
12.2 Any person receiving such approval from such agent shall, within ten days of the
date of such approval, publish, at the applicant's expense, notice of the approval
in a newspaper having a general circulation in the town wherein the activity is
located or will have an effect. Any person may appeal such decision of such
agent to the Agency within fifteen days after the publication date of the notice and
the Agency shall consider such appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting
provided such meeting is no earlier than three business days after receipt by such
Agency or its agent of such appeal. Any person may appear and be heard at the
meeting held by the Agency to consider the subject appeal. The Agency shall, at
its discretion, sustain, alter, or reject the decision of its agent or require an
application for a permit in accordance with Section 7 of these regulations.
32
Section 13
Bond and Insurance
13. l Upon approval of the application and prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant
may, at the discretion of the Agency, be required to file a bond with such surety in
such amount and in a form approved by the Board of Selectmen.
13.2 The bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of these
regulations and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit.
13.3 The Agency may require the applicant to certify that it has public liability
insurance against liability, which might result from the proposed operation or use
of the wetlands or watercourses covering any and all damage, which might occur
within two (2) years of completion of such operations, in an amount to be
determined by the Agency commensurate with the regulated activity.
33
Section 14
Enforcement
14.1 The Agency may appoint an agent or agents to act in its behalf with the authority
to issue notices of violation or cease and desist orders and carry out other actions
or investigations necessary for the enforcement of these regulations. In carrying
out the purposes of this section, the Agency or its duly authorized agent shall take
into consideration the criteria for decision under section I 0.2 of these regulations.
14.2 As a condition of a permit, the Agency or its agent may make regular inspections,
at reasonable hours, of all regulated activities for which permits have been issued
with the consent of the property owner or the authorized agent of the property
owner during the life of the permit.
14.3 In the case in which a permit has not been issued or a permit has expired, the
Agency or its agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours with the
consent of the property owner or the authorized agent of the property owner.
14.4 If the Agency or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or
maintaining any activity, facility or condition which is in violation of the Act or
these regulations, the Agency or its duly authorized agent may:
a. Issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person
conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to
immediately cease such activity or to correct such facility or condition.
Within ten (10) calendar days of the issuance of such order the Agency shall
hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show
cause why the order should not remain in effect. The Agency shall consider
the facts presented at the hearing and within ten (10) days of the completion of
the hearing notify the person by certified mail that the original order remains
in effect, that a revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn.
The Agency shall publish notice of its decision in a newspaper having general
circulation in the municipality. The original order shall be effective upon
issuance and shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises or
withdraws the order. The issuance of an order pursuant to this subsection
shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to section 22a-44(b) of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended;
34
b. Issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or
maintaining such facility or condition, stating the nature of the violation, the
jurisdiction of the Agency, and prescribing the necessary action and steps to
correct the violation including, without limitation, halting work in wetlands or
watercourses. The Agency may request that the individual appear at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized
activity, and/or provide a written reply to the notice or file an application for
the necessary permit. Failure to carry out the action( s) directed in a notice of
violation may result in issuance of the order provided in section 14.4.a or
other enforcement proceedings as provided by "Town of Easton Ordinance
Concerning the Enforcement of Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations"; and
c. The Agency may impose fines for violations of these regulations pursuant to
ordinances of the Town of Easton.
14.5 The Agency may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the permittee has not
complied with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has
exceeded the scope of the work as set forth in the application including
application plans. Prior to revoking or suspending any permit, the Agency shall
issue notice to the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, setting forth the facts or conduct which warrants the intended action.
The Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the permittee an opportunity to show
that it is in compliance with its permit and any and all requirements for retention
of the permit. The permittee shall be notified of the Agency's decision to
suspend, revoke, or maintain a permit by certified mail within fifteen (15) days of
the date of its decision. The Agency shall publish notice of the suspension or
revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality.
35
Section 15
Amendments
15.1 These regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map for the Town
of Easton may be amended, from time to time, by the Agency in accordance with
changes in the Connecticut General Statutes or regulations of the Connecticut
Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, or as new information
regarding soils and inland wetlands and watercourses becomes available.
15.2 An application filed with the Agency which is in conformance with the applicable
inland wetlands regulations as of the date of the receipt of such application shall
not be required thereafter to comply with any change in inland wetland
regulations, including changes to setbacks and buffers, taking effect on or after
the date of such receipt and any appeal from the decision of such Agency with
respect to such application shall not be dismissed by the Superior Court on the
grounds that such a change has taken effect on or after the date of such receipt.
The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply (I) to the
establishment, amendment or change of boundaries of inland wetlands or
watercourses or (2) to any change in regulations necessary to make such
regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act as of the date of such receipt.
15 .3 These regulations and the Town of Easton Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Map shall be amended in the manner specified in section 22a-42a of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The Agency shall provide the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection with a copy of any proposed
regulations and notice of the public hearing to consider any proposed regulations
or amendments thereto, except map amendments, at least thirty-five days before
the public hearing on their adoption.
15.4 Petitions requesting changes or amendments to the "Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Map'', Easton, Connecticut, shall contain at least the following
information:
a. The petitioner's name, mailing address and telephone number;
b. The address, or location, of the land affected by the petition;
c. The petitioner's interest in the land affected by the petition
d. Map(s) showing the geographic location of the land affected by the petition
and the existing and the proposed wetland(s) and watercourse(s) boundaries
on such land in accurate detail together with the documentation supporting
such proposed boundary locations; and
e. The reasons for the requested action.
36
15.5 Any person who submits a petition to amend the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Map, Easton, Connecticut, shall bear the burden of proof for all
requested map amendments. Such proof may include, but is not limited to,
professional interpretation of aerial photography and remote sensing imagery,
resource mapping, soils mapping, or other information acceptable to the Agency.
If such person is the owner, developer or contract purchaser of the land which is
the subject of the petition, or if such person is representing the interests of such an
owner, developer or purchaser, in addition to the information required in
subsection 15.4, the petition shall include:
a. The name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner(s) of such
land and owner( s) agent or other representative;
b. The names and mailing addresses of the owners of abutting land;
c. Documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on said
land. Such documentation shall at a minimum include the report of the soil
scientist documenting the location of wetland soils on the land and a map of
the said land indicating the flag locations set by the soil scientist and defining
the boundaries of wetland soil types; and
d. Map(s) showing any proposed development of the land in relation to existing
and proposed wetland and watercourse boundaries.
15.6 Watercourses shall be delineated by a soil scientist, geologist, ecologist or other
qualified individual.
15. 7 A public hearing shall be held on petitions to amend the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Map. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper
having a general circulation in the municipality where the land that is the subject
of the hearing is located at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the
first not more than fifteen days, nor less than ten days, and the last not less than
two days before the date set for the hearing. All materials including maps and
documents relating to the petition shall be open for public inspection.
37
15.8 The agency shall hold a public hearing on a petition to amend the regulations and
the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map within sixty-five ( 65) days after
receipt of such petition. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35)
days after commencement. The agency shall act upon the changes requested in
such petition within sixty-five days after completion of such hearing. At such
hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented
by agent or attorney. The petitioner may consent to one or more extensions of
any period specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such
periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days, or may withdraw such
petition. Failure of the agency to act within any time period specified in this
subsection or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of
the petition.
15.9 The Agency shall make its decision and state, in writing, the reasons why the
change in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map was made.
38
Section 16
Appeals
16. l Appeal on actions of the Agency shall be made in accordance with the provisions
of section 22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
16.2 Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Agency and the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection.
39
Section 17
Contlictand Severance
17. I If there is a conflict among the provisions of these regulations, the provision
which imposes the most stringent standards for the use of wetlands and
watercourses shall govern. The invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, section,
part, subsection, subdivision or provision of these regulations shall not affect the
validity of any other part which can be given effect without such invalid part or
parts.
17 .2 If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the provisions
of the Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern.
40
Section 18
Other Permits
18.1 Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirements for the applicant to
obtain any other assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the
Town of Easton, the State of Connecticut or the Government of the United States
including any approval required by the Connecticut Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Obtaining such
assents, permits, or licenses is the sole responsibility of the applicant.
41
Section 19
Fees
19.1 Method of Payment. All fees required by these regulations shall be submitted to
the Agency by certified check or money order payable to the Town of Easton at
the time the application is filed with the Agency.
19.2 No application shall be granted or approved by the Agency unless the correct
application fee is paid in full or unless a waiver has been granted by the Agency
pursuant to Subsection 19. 7 of these regulations.
19.3 The application fee is not refundable.
19 .4 Definitions. As used in this section:
"Residential Uses" means activities carried out on property developed for
permanent housing or being developed to be occupied by permanent housing.
"Commercial uses" means activities carried out on property developed for
industry, commerce, trade, recreation, or business or being developed to be
occupied for such purposes, for profit or nonprofit.
"Other uses" means activities other than residential uses or commercial uses.
19.5 Fee Schedule. Application fees shall be based on the current fee schedule.
19.6 Exemption. Boards, commissions, councils and departments of the Town of
Easton are exempt from all fee requirements.
19. 7 Waiver. The applicant may petition the Agency to waive, reduce or allow delayed
payment of the fee. Such petitions shall be in writing and shall state fully the facts
and circumstances the Agency should consider in its determination under this
subsection. The Agency may waive all or part of the application fee if the Agency
determines that:
a. The activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to
the environment or to the public health and safety and the applicant would
reasonably be deterred from initiating the activity solely or primarily as a
result of the amount of the application fee;
b. The amount of the application fee is clearly excessive in relation to the cost to
the Town for reviewing and processing the application; or
c. The applicant has shown good cause.
The Agency shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this subsection.
42
Section 20
Effective Date of Regulations
20.1 These regulations are effective upon filing in the Office of the Town Clerk and
publication of a notice of such filing in a newspaper having general circulation in
the Town of Easton.
43
APPENDIX A
Connecticut General Statute Section 1-l(q)
Except as otherwise specifically defined, the words "agriculture" and "fanning" shall
include cultivation of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising, or harvesting any agricultural or
horticultural commodity, including the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and
management of livestock, including horses, bees, poultry, fur-bearing animals and
wildlife, and the raising or harvesting of oysters, clams, mussels, other molluscan
shellfish or fish; the operation, management, conservation, improvement, or maintenance
of a fann and its buildings, tools and equipment, or salvaging timber or cleared land of
brush or other debris left by storm, as an incident to such fanning operations; the
production or harvesting of maple syrup or maple sugar, or any agricultural commodity,
including lumber, as an incident to ordinary farming operations or the harvesting of
mushrooms, the hatching of poultry, or the construction, operation or maintenance of
ditches, canals, reservoirs or waterways used exclusively for fanning purposes; handling,
planting, drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing, grading, storing or delivering
to storage or to market, or to a carrier for transportation to market, or for direct sale any
agricultural or horticultural commodity as an incident to ordinary fanning operations, or,
in the case of fruits and vegetables, as an incident to the preparation of such fruits or
vegetables for market or for direct sale. The term "farm" includes farm buildings, and
accessory buildings thereto, nurseries, orchards, ranges, greenhouses, hoophouses, and
other temporary structures or other structures used primarily for the raising and, as an
incident to ordinary farming operations, the sale of agricultural or horticultural
commodities. The term "aquaculture" means the fanning of the waters of the state and
tidal wetlands and the production of protein food, including fish, oysters, clams, mussels,
and other mulluscan shellfish, on leased, franchised, and public underwater farm lands.
Nothing herein shall restrict the power of a local zoning authority under Chapter 124.
44
APPENDIXB
Connecticut General Statute Section 8-7d
Hearings and decisions. Time limits. Day of receipt. Notice to adjoining
municipality.
(a) In all matters wherein a formal petition, application, request, or appeal must be
submitted to a zoning commission, planning and zoning commission, or zoning board of
appeals under this chapter, a planning commission under Chapter 126 or an inland
wetlands agency under Chapter 440 and a hearing is required or otherwise held on such
petition, application, request or appeal, such hearing shall commence within sixty-five
days (65) after receipt of such petition, application, request or appeal and shall be
completed within thirty-five (3 5) days after such hearing commences, unless a shorter
period of time is required under this Chapter, Chapter 126, or Chapter 440. Notice of the
hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in such
municipality where the land that is the subject of the hearing is located at least twice, at
intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days or less than ten
days and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing. In addition to
such notice, such commission, board, or agency may, by regulation, provide for
additional notice. Such regulation shall include provisions that the notice be mailed to
persons who own land that is adjacent to the land that is the subject of the hearing or be
provided by posting a sign on the land that is the subject of the hearing, or both. For
purposes of such additional notice, (I) proof of mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate
of mailing, and (2) the person who owns land shall be the owner indicated on the
property tax map or on the last completed grand list as of the date such notice is mailed.
All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public
inspection. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be
represented by agent or by attorney. All decisions on such matters shall be rendered
within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing, unless a shorter period of
time is required under this chapter, Chapter 126 or Chapter 440. The petitioner or
applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified in this
subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than
sixty-five (65) days, or may withdraw such petition, application, request or appeal.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (a) of this section, whenever the
approval of a site plan is the only requirement to be met or remaining to be met under the
zoning regulations for any building, use or structure, a decision on an application for
approval of such site plan shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of
such site plan. Whenever a decision is to be made on an application for subdivision
approval under Chapter 126 on which no hearing is held, such decision shall be rendered
within sixty-five days after receipt of such application. Whenever a decision is to be
made on an inland wetlands and watercourses application under chapter 440 on which no
hearing is held, such decision shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of
such application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such period,
provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed sixty-five
(65) days or may withdraw such plan or application.
45
(c) For purposes of Subsection (a) or (b) of this section and Seetion 7-246a, the date
of receipt of a petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next
regularly scheduled meeting of such commission, board or agency, immediately
following the day of submission to such commission, board or agency or its agent of such
petition, application, request or appeal or thirty-five (35) days after such submission,
whichever is sooner. If the commission, board or agency does not maintain an office with
regular office hours, the office of the clerk of the municipality shall act as the agent of
such commission, board or agency for the receipt of any petition, application, request or
appeal.
(d) The provisions of Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any action
initiated by any zoning or planning and zoning commission regarding adoption or change
of any zoning regulation or boundary or any subdivision regulation.
(e) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if an application involves an
activity regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, and the time for a
decision by a zoning commission or planning and zoning commission established
pursuant to this section would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth day after a decision by the
inland wetlands agency, the time period for a decision shall be extended to thirty-five
(35) days after the decision of such agency. The provisions of this subsection shall not be
construed to apply to any extension consented to by an applicant or petitioner.
(f) The zoning commission, planning commission, zoning and planning commission,
zoning board of appeals or inland wetlands agency shall notify the clerk of any adjoining
municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request or plan
concerning any project on any site in which: (1) Any portion of the property affected by a
decision of such commission, board or agency is within five hundred feet of the boundary
of the adjoining municipality; (2) A significant portion of the traffic to the completed
project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the
site; (3) A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site
will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the
adjoining municipality; or (4) Water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or
other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality. Such notice shall
be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days
of the date of receipt of the application, petition, request, or plan. Such adjoining
municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any
such application, petition, appeal, request or plan.
APPENDIX B Revised 4-22-08
46
APPENDIX C
Please see separate document entitled:
Guidelines, Upland Review Area Regulations
Connecticut's Inland Wetlands & Watercourses Act, June 1997
47